THE CODE OF THE CITY OF AMERICUS, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2007 by Order of the City Council 
____________ 

OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
AMERICUS, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS RECODIFICATION 
____________ 
Barry Blount, Mayor 
Walton Grant 
Eloise Paschal 
Eddie Rhea Walker 
Lou Chase 
Steve Jones 
Lorenzo Johnson 
City Council 
____________ 
Charlotte D. Cotton 
City Administrative Officer 
____________ 
Paula Martin 
City Clerk 
____________ 
James Skipper 
City Attorney 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Americus, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1986 Code and ordinances adopted by the city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the prior Code, and any ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This publication was under the direct supervision of Roger D. Merriam, Senior Code Attorney, and D. J. Heath, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Charlotte Cotton, Chief Administrative Officer, Ms. Paula Martin, City Clerk, and Mr. James Skipper, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. 
(c) ;hg;Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Americus, Georgia. 2007. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    By adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date
Adopted Include/
Omit Supp. No. O-10-01-02  1-21-2010 Include 4 O-10-02-04  2-19-2010 Include 4 O-10-04-07  4-22-2010 Include 4 O-10-04-09  4-22-2010 Include 4 O-10-04-10  4-22-2010 Include 4 O-10-04-11  4-22-2010 Include 4 O-10-04-12  4-22-2010 Include 4 O-10-04-13  4-22-2010 Include 4 O-10-05-15  5-20-2010 Include 4 O-10-05-16  5-20-2010 Include 4 O-10-05-17  5-20-2010 Include 4 O-10-05-18  5-20-2010 Include 4 O-10-05-19  5-20-2010 Include 4 O-10-06-20  6-24-2010 Include 4 O-10-06-21  6-24-2010 Include 4 O-10-07-23  7-22-2010 Include 4 O-10-08-24  8-19-2010 Include 4 O-10-08-25  8-19-2010 Include 4 O-10-08-26  8-19-2010 Include 4 O-10-08-27  8-19-2010 Include 4 O-10-09-31  9-20-2010 Include 4 O-10-11-40 11-18-2010 Include 4 O-10-11-42 11-18-2010 Include 4 O-10-12-43 12-16-2010 Include 4 O-11-05-04  5-19-2011 Include 5 O-11-08-14  8-18-2011 Include 5 O-11-08-15  8-18-2011 Include 5 O-11-09-18  9-22-2011 Include 5 O-11-11-24 11-17-2011 Include 5 O-11-11-25 11-17-2011 Include 5 O-11-12-31 12-15-2011 Include 5 O-11-12-34 12-15-2011 Include 5 O-12-01-01  1-19-2012 Include 6 O-12-02-02  2-23-2012 Include 6 O-12-02-03  2-23-2012 Include 6 O-12-03-06  3-22-2012 Include 6 O-12-03-08  3-22-2012 Include 6 O-12-04-08  4-19-2012 Include 6 O-12-04-09  4-19-2012 Include 6 O-12-04-11  4-19-2012 Include 6 O-2012-13  5-24-2012 Include 6 O-2012-14  5-24-2012 Include 6 O-2012-17  5-24-2012 Include 6 O-2012-18  5-24-2012 Include 6 O-2012-19  7-19-2012 Include 6 O-2012-21  7-19-2012 Include 6 O-2012-26 10-18-2012 Include 6 O-2012-29 12-20-2012 Include 6 O-2012-31 12-20-2012 Include 6 O-2013-3  2-21-2013 Include 7 O-2013-4  2-21-2013 Include 7 O-2013-6  1-17-2013 Include 7 O-2013-10  4-18-2013 Include 7 O-2013-19  7-18-2013 Include 7 O-2013-20  7-18-2013 Include 7 O-2013-21  7-18-2013 Include 7 O-2013-24  9-19-2013 Include 7 O-2013-25  8-22-2013 Include 7 O-2013-29 10-24-2013 Include 7 O-2013-31 11-21-2013 Include 7 O-2014-8  3-20-2014 Include 8 O-2014-16  9-18-2014 Include 8 O-2014-17 10-20-2014 Include 8 O-2014-20 10-20-2014 Include 8 O-2014-21 12-18-2014 Include 8 O-2014-26 11-20-2014 Include 8 O-2015-7  4-15-2015 Include 9 O-2015-8  3-19-2015 Include 9 O-2015-9  6-18-2015 Include 9 O-2015-10  6-18-2015 Include 9 O-2015-12  7-23-2015 Include 9 O-2015-14  7-23-2015 Include 9 O-2015-15  7-23-2015 Include 9 O-2015-17 10-22-2015 Include 9 O-2015-18 11-19-2015 Include 9 O-2015-19 12-17-2015 Include 9 O-2016-1  3-24-2016 Include 10 O-2016-4  7-21-2016 Include 10 O-2016-7 12-22-2016 Include 10 O-2017-3  3-23-2017 Include 11 O-2017-4  4-20-2017 Include 11 O-2017-5  6-22-2017 Include 11 O-2017-6  6-22-2017 Include 11 O-2017-8  7-20-2017 Include 11 O-2017-9  9-21-2017 Include 11 O-2017-11 10-19-2017 Include 11 O-2017-12 10-19-2017 Include 11 O-2017-14 12-21-2017 Include 11  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
AN ACT 
    To provide a new Charter for the City of Americus; to provide for incorporation, boundaries, and powers of the city; to provide for a governing authority of such city and the powers, duties, authority, election, terms, method of filling vacancies, compensation, qualifications, prohibitions, and removal from office relative to members of such governing authority; to provide for inquiries and investigations; to provide for organization and procedures; to provide for ordinances and codes; to provide for the office of mayor and certain duties and powers relative to the office of mayor; to provide for a city manager; to provide for the appointment, qualifications, duties, and responsibilities; to provide for boards, commissions, and authorities; to provide for a city attorney, a finance director, and other personnel; to provide for a system of personnel administration; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide for a municipal court and the judge or judges thereof; to provide for practices and procedures; to provide for taxation and fees; to provide for franchises, service charges, and assessments; to provide for bonded and other indebtedness; to provide for accounting and budgeting; to provide for purchases; to provide for the sale of property; to provide for bonds for officials; to provide for eminent domain; to provide for ordinances; to provide for penalties; to provide for definitions and construction; to provide for a public school system; to provide for a board and superintendent; to provide for election, qualifications, terms, method of filling vacancies, removal, powers, duties, authority, compensation, organization, and procedures of the board; to provide for other matters relative to the foregoing; to provide for severability; to repeal a specific act; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
BE IT ENACTED BY THE GENERAL ASSEMBLY OF GEORGIA: 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is the Charter of the City of Americus, being 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 914), page 5985. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives unchanged from the original Charter. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform and the same system of capitalization, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, POWERS, AND BOUNDARIES 

Sec. 1-101. - Incorporation; name. 
    The City of Americus and the inhabitants thereof shall continue to be a body politic and corporate under the name of the City of Americus, hereinafter at times referred to as the "city." The city shall be the legal continuation and successor to the mayor and city council of Americus as heretofore incorporated; shall continue to be vested with all of the property and rights of property which now belong to the city; and shall have perpetual succession. 
Sec. 1-102. - General powers and construction. 
(a)  The city shall have all the powers, duties, rights, privileges, and immunities vested in the city now or hereafter granted to municipal corporations by the Constitution, by the general laws of the State of Georgia, by this Charter, by special laws applicable to the city which are not prior Charter amendments and by general laws of local application through classification by population. The city shall exercise and enjoy all powers of self-government not specifically prohibited by the Constitution, the general laws, or this Charter, including all powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, and general welfare of the city and of its inhabitants, and all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted as fully and completely as if these powers were fully enumerated in this Charter. In addition, the city may sue and be sued; may contract and be contracted with; may acquire and hold any property, real and personal, as may be devised, bequeathed, sold, or in any manner conveyed or dedicated to or otherwise acquired by it and from time to time may hold or invest or sell or dispose of any of its property; and may have a common seal and alter it at will. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of the city. 
Sec. 1-103. - Examples of powers. 
    The powers of the city shall include, but shall not be solely limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city. 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl and to provide for the impoundment of same if in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this paragraph. 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city. 
(4)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures not inconsistent with general law; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air-conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades except as otherwise prohibited by general law. 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for the collection of license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions; to license and regulate the same; to levy and provide for additional license fees and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades, and professions which receive or may receive special benefits from authorized activities engaged in by the city; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees. 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations. 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health, or well-being of the citizens of the city. 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and from time to time extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations, not inconsistent with general law relating to both fire prevention and detection and to fire fighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business within the city and benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges. 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose. 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards. 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for the commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for the commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials. 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking, upon or across the streets, roads, alleys, and walkways of the city. 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same. 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city. 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribed penalties and punishment for violations thereof. 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers, and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric plants, transportation facilities, public airports, cable television, and any other public utility; and to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties therefor; and to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city; and to provide utility services to persons, firms, and corporations inside and outside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance. 
(21)  Nuisances. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement whether on public or private property. 
(22)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(23)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and esthetically pleasing community. 
(24)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a fire-fighting agency. 
(25)  Public hazards; removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public. 
(26)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks, playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under Title 22 of the O.C.G.A. or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted. 
(27)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances. 
(28)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial. 
(29)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and the standards and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission. 
(30)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view thereof, inside or abutting the corporate limits of the city and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances. 
(31)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city. 
(32)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands and to impose penalties for failure to do so. 
(33)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system; to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system. 
(34)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials and provide for the sale of such items. 
(35)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors, and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors. 
(36)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvement. 
(36.1)  Stormwater utility. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, and maintain stormwater facilities and systems; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties in connection with the installation, operation, and maintenance of stormwater management services, facilities and improvements; to authorize the extension of stormwater facilities and all necessary appurtenances in connection therewith, inside the corporate limits of the city; to provide stormwater utility and stormwater management services to parcels, persons, firms, and corporations inside the corporate limits of the city as provided by ordinance; to establish, amend, and revise from time to time stormwater utility customer classes; to provide for stormwater utility user fee charges, exemptions, and credits; to establish the stormwater utility enterprise fund; to define the stormwater utility scope of responsibility; to obtain loans, grants, donations as authorized by law in connection with acquisition, lease, construction, operation, and maintenance of a stormwater utility and its facilities; and to undertake any and all other necessary or appropriate actions and activities related to the establishment, operation, and maintenance of a stormwater utility within the corporate limits of the city. 
(37)  Taxes; ad valorem. To levy and provide for the assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation. 
(38)  Taxes; other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law. 
(39)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators thereof to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles. 
(40)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program. 
(41)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-07, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 1-104. - Exercise of powers. 
    All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia. 
Sec. 1-105. - Sovereign immunity. 
    Nothing in this Charter shall be construed or deemed to waive in any manner sovereign immunity under such terms and conditions as may be now or hereafter authorized by the Constitution of the State of Georgia and general state law. 
Sec. 1-106. - Corporate boundaries; official map. 
(a)  The boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of the city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description, or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the clerk of the city and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map (or Description) of the Corporate Limits of the City of Americus, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the clerk of the city shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The city council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede for all purposes the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace. 
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENTAL STRUCTURE AND ORGANIZATION 
CHAPTER 1. - CITY COUNCIL 

Sec. 2-101. - City council creation; number; election. 
    The legislative authority of the government of the city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a city council to be composed of a mayor and six councilmembers. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter. The use of the terms "mayor and city council," "mayor and council," or "city council" in this Charter, except as otherwise specifically indicated in this Charter, shall be deemed to include and refer to the legislative body of the city composed of the mayor and councilmembers then in office. 
Sec. 2-102. - City council terms and qualifications for office. 
(a)  The members of the city council, including the mayor, shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the mayor and councilmembers shall be elected to serve for terms of such length as are more specifically provided in article V, section 5-102, of this Charter. Terms of office for the mayor and members of the city council, as provided in this Charter, shall expire upon the adjournment of the last regular council meeting in December of each year or upon December 31 of each year, in the event that there is no December meeting; unless the respective successors in office have not been duly elected and qualified. 
(b)  To be eligible for election or appointment as mayor, a person at the time of election or appointment must have attained the age of 25 years, be a citizen of the United States of America, and shall have resided in the city not less than one year immediately preceding the date of election or appointment, shall be a qualified elector of the city, and shall meet any other requirements as may be established by general state law. 
(c)  To be eligible for election or appointment as a councilmember, a person at the time of election or appointment must have attained the age of 21 years, shall have resided in the city not less than one year immediately preceding the date of election or appointment, shall reside in the district such person seeks to represent at the time of qualifying, shall be a qualified elector of the city, and shall meet any other requirements as may be established by general state law. 
Sec. 2-103. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  Filling of vacancies. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
Sec. 2-104. - Compensation and expenses. 
    The mayor and councilmembers shall receive, as compensation for their services, an amount fixed by ordinance as provided by general law. In addition, the councilmembers shall receive their reasonable and necessary expenses incurred in the performance of their official duties in the manner provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-105. - Holding other office; voting when personally interested. 
(a)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction or have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his judgment or action in the performance of his official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he is engaged without proper legal authorization or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself or others; 
(4)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government; or 
(5)  Vote or otherwise participate in the negotiation or in the making of any contract with any business or entity in which he has a financial interest. 
(b)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the city council. The mayor and any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the city council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the city council, and he shall disqualify himself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit, except in connection with policies promulgated by the city council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the city council. 
(e)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency thereof during the term for which he was elected. No former mayor and no former councilmember shall hold any compensated appointive office in the city until one (1) year after the expiration of the term for which he was elected. 
(f)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be subject to removal in accordance with article V, chapter 2 of this Charter. 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall be removed from his office or position as described in paragraph (1) above shall be ineligible for appointment or election to or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter. 
Sec. 2-106. - Inquiries and investigations. 
    The city council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and the conduct of any department, office, or agency thereof and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order or subpoena issued in exercise of these powers by the city council may be held in contempt of council by a majority vote of all councilmembers and punished as provided in this Charter for contempt of the municipal court. Appeal to the Superior Court of Sumter County from a council contempt conviction is allowed under the same procedure as is allowed for the appeal of any conviction in the municipal court. 
Sec. 2-107. - General power and authority. 
    Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the city council shall be vested with all the powers of government of this city as provided by article I of this Charter as it now exists or as it may hereafter be amended. 
Sec. 2-108. - Eminent domain. 
    The city council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate, and maintain public ways, parks, parking facilities, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment plants, waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, cable television systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detentional, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities, and any other public improvements inside or outside of the city, and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under the procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future. 
Sec. 2-109. - Independent audit. 
    The city council shall provide for an independent annual audit of all city accounts and may provide for more frequent or continuing audits as it deems necessary. Audits shall be made by a certified public accountant or firm of certified public accountants who have no personal interest either directly or indirectly, in the fiscal affairs of the city government. The council may, with or without requiring competitive bids, designate the accountant or firm annually or for a period not exceeding five years, provided that the designation for any particular fiscal year shall be made no later than 30 days after the beginning of the fiscal year. The council may also provide for special independent audits of any office, department, board, commission, or other agency of the city where it deems such to be in the best interest of the city. 
CHAPTER 2. - COUNCIL ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 

Sec. 2-201. - Organizational meetings. 
(a)  The newly elected or reelected mayor and councilmembers shall take office and meet for organizational and swearing-in ceremonies immediately following the adjournment of the regular December council meeting following their elections. 
(b)  Such organizational meetings shall be called to order by the city clerk and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected or reelected members by the judge of the municipal court as follows: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor) (councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
(c)  At this meeting, the newly organized council shall make any appointments and selections as may be required by this Charter or by ordinance of the city. 
Sec. 2-202. - Rules of procedure; quorum; journal. 
(a)  The city council, at any regular or special meeting called for that purpose, by a majority vote, may adopt rules of procedure and order of business or amendments thereto that are consistent with this Charter. 
(b)  The mayor and three members of council or, in the absence of the mayor, four members of council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(c)  All questions should be put by the presiding officer. The members shall vote by show of hands with a majority of the members present and voting determining all questions unless otherwise provided. The city council may by ordinance prescribe procedures to govern the manner of introduction and passage of ordinances and resolutions. 
(d)  The mayor shall have the right to vote on all questions that come before the body, unless he is otherwise disqualified. 
(e)  A journal of minutes shall be maintained and every official action of the council shall be recorded therein. The journal shall be a public record. 
(f)  The city council may by ordinance adopt such other general rules of procedure for the conduct of its meetings, or any amendments thereto, which are consistent with this Charter. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-17, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 2-203. - Regular, special and emergency meetings. 
(a)  The city council may fix the date and time of regular meetings in the council rules of procedure, but there shall be at least one regular meeting each month. 
(b)  Special meetings of the city council may be held on call of the mayor or on call of a majority of all members of the city council. Notice of such special meeting shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to the mayor and council regarding a special meeting shall not be required if the mayor and all councilmembers are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by the mayor and a councilmember or members in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the special meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the city council shall be public to the extent required by law and notice to the public of special meetings shall be given as required by law. 
(d)  To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the city council may convene on call of the mayor or four councilmembers and may promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 30 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency continues to exist. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances. 
CHAPTER 3. - ADDITIONAL RULES OF PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-301. - Establishment of committees and appointment of members and chairmen thereof. 
(a)  The mayor and city council may provide for the appointment of such committees as they may deem necessary or desirable, including any standing committees or special committees. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairmen shall be appointed by the mayor and serve at his pleasure. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
Sec. 2-302. - The ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance shall be introduced in writing and be in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "BE IT ORDAINED, by the mayor and city council of Americus, and it is hereby ordained by authority of the same . . . " and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and be read at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and city council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the mayor and city council in accord with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced unless all councilmembers present give their unanimous consent thereto or unless such ordinance is an emergency ordinance provided for in this Charter. The mayor and city council shall also establish by rule such other procedures as it may deem necessary or expedient with respect to proposed ordinances, their consideration, and the procedure for reading such ordinances at the meeting at which it is introduced. 
(c)  Upon the introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as practicable distribute a copy to the mayor and to each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and such other public places as the city council may designate. 
Sec. 2-303. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
    Acts of the mayor and city council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Sec. 2-304. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The mayor and city council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally except that: 
(1)  The requirements of section 2-302(c) of this Charter for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to other provisions of this Charter. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price set by the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 2-305. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The mayor shall sign and the clerk shall authenticate and attest by his signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the council. 
(b)  The city council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the city council by ordinance and shall be published promptly together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the mayor and city council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Americus, Georgia." Copies of the code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and shall be made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the mayor and city council. 
(c)  The city council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the mayor and city council. Following publication of the first Code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code then in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation within the Code. The mayor and city council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable for reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code. 
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATION 
CHAPTER 1. - CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Formerly entitled "Chief Administrative Officer." Ord. No. O-2015-15, adopted July 23, 2015 amended the Code of Ordinances by changing all references within of "chief administrative officer" to "city manager", therefor art. III, ch. 1 title has been amended as such. 

Sec. 3-101. - Appointment; qualifications; compensation; removal. 
(a)  The city council shall have the right, power, and authority to employ and to appoint in their discretion an officer whose title shall be "city manager." 
(b)  (1)  The city manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of executive and administrative qualifications. The city manager shall hold at least a bachelor's degree from a four-year college or university and shall have such other qualifications as may be determined by the city council. Such person need not be a resident of the city or state at the time of appointment but shall reside in the city while in office. 
(2)  The city may enter into an employment contract with the city manager for a term not to exceed two years. No such contract shall be automatically renewable, but any such contract may be renewed by mutual agreement of the city council and city manager. Any such contract may provide for a severance payment of salary and benefits to the city manager for a term to be agreed upon between the city and the city manager at the time the contract is executed, but any such severance payments shall only be payable in the event that the city manager is removed by the city without cause. 
(c)  In the event that there is a permanent vacancy in the position of city manager due to resignation, termination, death, or incapacity, the city council shall be authorized to appoint a successor. In the event of a temporary vacancy, the city manager may, by letter filed with the city clerk, designate a qualified administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of city manager during such temporary vacancy. Such designation shall be subject to the approval of the city council and may be revoked at any time, in which case the city council shall appoint an alternative to serve as city manager during such temporary vacancy. 
(d)  The city council may remove the city manager at any time, with or without cause, by adopting a resolution to that effect. The city council shall have such authority whether or not there is an existing employment contract as provided in paragraph (2) of subsection (b) of this section, but such removal shall comply with the terms of any such contract which do not conflict with the provisions of this subsection. Within five days of adopting such resolution, the council shall provide written notice thereof to the city manager. The city manager, within ten calendar days after receipt of such notice, may in writing request a public hearing regarding the decision of the city council. Such hearing shall be held not earlier than 20 nor more than 30 calendar days after the submission of such hearing request. Any determination of the city council following any such hearing, however, shall be final. Upon the removal of the city manager, any severance required pursuant to such contract shall be paid in accordance with its terms. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 3-102. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city and shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge in accordance with this charter. 
(b)  The city manager shall have the additional power, duty, and responsibility to: 
(1)  Ensure that the laws of the state and all ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the city which are subject to the city manager's direction and supervision are faithfully executed and enforced; 
(2)  Prepare the agenda for meetings of the city council, subject to inclusion of matters requested by a member of the city council; 
(3)  Recommend for adoption any measures deemed expedient; 
(4)  Direct and supervise, subject to the general direction of the city council, the administration of all departments, boards, offices, agencies, commissions, authorities, properties, and operations of the city unless otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(5)  Serve as a liaison between the city council and the departments, boards, offices, agencies, commissions, and authorities of the city government; 
(6)  Attend all meetings of the city council, including subcommittee meetings, and take part in discussion; provided, however, that the city manager shall not be authorized to vote and shall not be authorized to attend those portions of public meetings held in executive session for the purpose of deliberating upon the appointment, discipline, compensation, or removal of the city manager unless requested by the city council to be present at such executive sessions; 
(7)  Make reports to the city council from time to time on the affairs of the city and keep the city council fully advised of the city's financial condition and future financial needs and requirements; 
(8)  Prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital improvements program to the city council; 
(9)  Investigate the affairs, records, accounts, and expenditures of the various departments, boards, offices, agencies, commissions, and authorities of the city and report thereon at least every six months to the city council regarding such matters; 
(10)  Appoint, suspend, remove, or terminate city employees, including department heads other than the municipal judge, city attorney, and city clerk, in accordance with the personnel rules, regulations, policies, and ordinances that the city council may adopt; provided, however, that the city manager may delegate such authority in whole or in part to any administrative officer or department head who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; and 
(11)  Exercise any other powers and perform any other duties as shall be required or authorized by the city council and which are not inconsistent with this charter. 
(c)  The city manager shall have the right to request the counsel, advice, and opinion of the city attorney concerning any matter affecting the interest of the city. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 3-103. - Council interference with supervision. 
    No member of the city council shall direct or request the city manager to appoint any person to or remove any person from office as a city employee or take part in any other manner in the appointment, discipline, or removal of employees of the city except as to offices which are subject to appointment by the city council and except to the extent that the city council is required to hear and determine appeals of disciplinary actions taken with respect to any employee of the city pursuant to the city's personnel policies. Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under the provisions of this charter or pursuant to ordinances enacted thereunder, or for other good cause shown, neither the mayor nor city council shall supervise or attempt to supervise city officers or employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
CHAPTER 2. - CITY CLERK AND FINANCE DIRECTOR 

Sec. 3-201. - Appointment and qualification. 
    The city manager shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be the custodian of the official city seal; shall maintain records of the city council required by this charter, ordinance, or law; and perform such other duties as may be required by the city council. The city clerk shall not be deemed a department head of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-04-08-16, 8-19-2004; H.B. 425, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 3-202. - City finance director. 
    The city manager shall appoint a city finance director who shall not be a councilmember. The city finance director shall collect all taxes, fees, and other monies owed to the city, subject to applicable provisions of this charter, ordinances, or state law. The city finance director shall also enforce all laws and city ordinances related to the collection of delinquent taxes and the sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes and other indebtedness to the city. The city finance director shall be responsible for carrying out the general duties of a fiscal officer of the city and shall perform such other duties as may be provided by the governing body or the city manager. The city finance director shall be the head of the city finance department. 
(Ord. No. O-04-08-16, 8-19-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015; H.B. 425, 5-12-2015) 
CHAPTER 3. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Sec. 3-301. - Appointment and qualifications. 
    The city council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys, as may be authorized by the mayor and city council, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party; the city attorney may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court; the city attorney shall attend all regular meetings of the mayor and city council and such other meetings of that body or any committees of that body as directed; the city attorney shall advise the city council, mayor, and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs; the city attorney shall perform such other duties as may be required of such person by virtue of the position as city attorney or by virtue of the ordinances and resolutions of the city council. 
CHAPTER 4. - CITY ORGANIZATION 

Sec. 3-401. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the city council by ordinance shall prescribe the functions or duties and establish, abolish, or alter all nonelective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointed officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by ordinance. 
(d)  There shall be a department head for each department of the city who shall be its principal officer. Each department head shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his or her department. 
(e)  All department heads shall be appointed by, and serve at the pleasure of, the city manager. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 3-402. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The city council shall create by ordinance such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial, or quasi-legislative function the city council deems necessary and shall by ordinance further establish the composition, period of existence, duties, and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the city council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms of office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The city council, by ordinance, may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for reasonable and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed in this Charter for appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by the ordinance establishing the board, commission, or authority. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he has executed and filed with the city clerk an oath obligating himself to perform faithfully and impartially the duties of his office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of two-thirds of the members of the city council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, by general law, or by ordinance creating each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairman and one member as vice-chairman, and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city. Each board, commission, or authority of the city may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations, not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinance of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city. 
(i)  Any boards, commissions, and authorities previously established prior to the effective date of this Charter shall continue to exist in the same manner, and under the same rules, regulations, and bylaws as they existed prior to the date of approval of this Charter, subject to the authority of the mayor and city council to amend, modify, or dissolve such existing boards, committees, and authorities as authorized in this Charter. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the Efficiency & Economy Commission (Ga. L. 1889, p. 961), the Bond Commission (Ga. L. 1923, p. 419), the Debt Commission (Ga. L. 1923, p. 419), and the City-County Planning Commission (Ga. L. 1956, p. 2658) shall cease to exist on the effective date of this Charter. The powers, duties, and obligations of any commissions dissolved by this Charter shall be assumed by the city as of said date, but nothing in this Charter shall prevent the city council from reestablishing such commissions under such terms and conditions as it may deem proper, in the same manner as boards, commissions, and authorities may otherwise be established under this Charter. The daily operations now required of such commissions may be transferred to a city department by ordinance as of the effective date of this Charter. 
CHAPTER 5. - PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 3-501. - Position classification and pay plans. 
    The city council shall be responsible for the preparation of a position classification and pay plan. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city, and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities where made applicable by the city council. When a pay plan has been adopted, the city council shall not increase or decrease the salary range applicable to any position except by amendment of such pay plan. For purpose of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees. Any such position classification and pay plan in existence on the effective date of this Charter shall continue in full force and effect until amended by the city council as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 3-502. - Personnel policies. 
    The city council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
Sec. 3-503. - Pensions, retirement, and Social Security. 
(a)  The provisions of any pension, retirement, and Social Security system, with any amendments thereto, as now or hereafter enacted, which benefit the present, former, or future employees of the city shall continue in full force and effect upon the effective date of this Charter. 
(b)  The adoption of this Charter shall not be construed to deny or repeal any rights or benefits which have accrued and vested under the provisions of any pension, retirement, or Social Security plan benefiting city employees. 
Sec. 3-504. - Prohibited activities. 
(a)  All city employees may exercise their constitutional right of freedom of association, including, but not limited to, civic and social organizations, except that no city employee shall become or remain a member of any organization which exercises the right to demand of any of its members obedience to an order to strike or engage in a work stoppage or slowdown for any cause. 
(b)  If any city employee participates in any strike, work stoppage, or slowdown, or otherwise violates the provisions of this section, such person may be subject to discharge from employment with the city. 
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
CHAPTER 1. - MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 4-101. - Municipal court creation; name. 
    There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Americus. 
Sec. 4-102. - Judge of municipal court. 
(a)  Municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judge or judges shall be provided by this Charter. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years, shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia, and shall have been engaged in the practice of law for at least two years prior to the date of appointment. All judges shall be appointed by the city council annually for a term beginning on January 1 of each year. Such judge or judges may be appointed to succeed themselves in the discretion of the mayor and city council. 
(c)  The compensation of the judge or judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Any judge or judges shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed by a majority vote of the members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 4-103. - Convening. 
    The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as may be established by order of the chief judge thereof. 
Sec. 4-104. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and the city shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
(j)  Wherever, upon the trial of any case in the municipal court, it is determined by the judge that any pistol, shotgun, rifle, or other firearm has been used by the owner thereof, or with the owner's consent, illegally, and that the firearm is not needed as evidence in any other court, the judge is authorized and empowered, in his or her sole discretion, either to order the firearm impounded for a definite or indefinite time, as he or she may prescribe, or to adjudge the firearm to be a nuisance and to condemn it as such, as being opposed to the peace, good order, and safety of the city and its citizens. All firearms which are ordered impounded by the judge shall be held in safekeeping by the city police department to await the further order of the judge. In all cases in which firearms are condemned by the judge, the judge is authorized to dispose of the firearms in any manner authorized by ordinance. 
(k)  Whenever, upon the trial of any case in the municipal court, it is determined by the judge that moneys or other things of value have been used, or were intended to be used, for illegal gambling purposes, then the judge of municipal court shall have the power and authority, and it shall be the judge's duty, to forfeit such moneys or things of value as being used contrary to the peace, order, and good morals of the city and shall order the same to be vested in the city, and such shall be paid to the finance director of the city by the chief of police to be placed in the general fund of the city. 
(l)  A judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to revoke or suspend any privileged license as provided in the license and tax ordinance of the city, whenever, upon the trial of any case in the municipal court, it is determined by the judge of the court that a violation of any regulation or ordinance of the city has occurred. 
(Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 4-105. - Certiorari. 
    The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Sumter County, under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 4-106. - Rules for court. 
    The judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings. 
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL 
CHAPTER 1. - CONDUCT OF ELECTIONS 

Sec. 5-101. - Application of general laws. 
    All municipal general or special elections or referendums and primaries shall be held and conducted in accordance with chapter 3 of title 21 of the OCGA, the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended [Repealed--See now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
Sec. 5-102. - Regular elections; time for holding; City Council districts. 
(a)  The Mayor and those members of the City Council who are serving as such on December 31, 2011, and any person elected to fill a vacancy in such office, shall continue to serve as such Mayor or members until the regular expiration of their respective terms of office and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. On and after January 1, 2012, the governing authority of the City of Americus shall consist of six (6) Councilmembers, all of whom shall be elected from Council districts described in subsection (b) of this section and the Mayor who is elected at large as provided in this Charter. 
(b)  For purposes of electing members of the City Council, the City of Americus is divided into six (6) Council districts. One (1) member of the City shall be elected from each such district. The six (6) Council districts shall be and correspond to those six (6) numbered districts described in, attached to, and made a part of this Ordinance as Exhibit "A" and further identified as Plan: AMERCCPROP1-2010 TIGER, Plan Type: Local, Administrator: Americus, User: Shantee. 
(c)  When used in such attachment, the terms "tract" and "BG" (Block Group) shall mean and describe the same geographic boundaries as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Separate numeric designations in a tract description which are underneath a "BG" heading shall mean and describe individual blocks within a Block Group as provided in the report of the Bureau of the Census for the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Americus which is not included in any such district described in that attachment shall be included within that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United Stated Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. Any part of the City of Americus which is described in that attachment as being in a particular district shall nevertheless not be included within such district if such part is not contiguous to such district. Such non-contiguous part shall instead be included in that district contiguous to such part which contains the least population according to the United States Decennial Census of 2010 for the State of Georgia. 
(d)  The Mayor and members of the City Council shall be elected as provided in this subsection. The Mayor and the members from Council Districts 3, 4, and 5 shall be elected at the general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2013. The Mayor and those first Councilmembers elected thereto from Council Districts 3, 4, and 5 in 2013 shall take office the first day of January immediately following the election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2017, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. The first members from Council Districts 1, 2, and 6 shall be elected at the general election on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 2015. Those Councilmembers elected thereto from Council Districts 1, 2, and 6 in 2015 shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election and shall serve for initial terms of office which expire December 31, 2019, and upon the election and qualification of their respective successors. Those and all future successors to the Mayor and members of the City Council whose terms of office are to expire shall be elected at the time of the municipal general election immediately preceding the expiration of such terms, shall take office the first day of January immediately following that election, and shall serve for terms of office of four (4) years each. The Mayor and members of the City Council shall serve for the terms of office specified therefor in this subsection and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. 
(e)  Council Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, as exist on December 31, 2011, shall continue to be designated as Council Districts 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, respectively, but as newly described under this Ordinance, and on or after January 1, 2012, such members of the City Council serving from those former Council Districts shall be deemed to be serving from and representing their respective districts as newly described under this Ordinance. 
(1993 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 48), page 3839, § 1; 2002 Ga. Laws (Act No. 471), page 3992, § 1; Ord. No. O-11-08-14, 8-18-2011) 
Sec. 5-103. - First elections under this Charter. 
(a)  The first municipal election under this Charter shall be as provided in section 5-102(1) above, at which the mayor and councilmembers from council posts 3, 4, and 5 will be elected as provided in this Charter. Those offices are currently held as follows: 
Mayor: Tom Gailey 
Post 3: Paul Mercer 
Post 4: Leonard Waitsman 
Post 5: Tim Lawson 
(b)  The next municipal election shall be as provided in section 5-102(2) above, at which councilmembers from council posts 1, 2, and 6 will be elected. The city councilmembers presently holding such posts are listed as follows: 
Post 1: Albert Cooper 
Post 2: Lewis Lowe 
Post 6: Rusty Reddish 
Sec. 5-104. - Special elections; vacancies. 
    In the event that the office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the city council or those remaining shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of such official; provided, however, if such vacancy occurs within six months of the expiration of the term of that office, said office shall remain vacant for the remainder of the term. In all other respects, a special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with chapter 3 of title 21 of the OCGA, the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended [Repealed-See now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.]. 
Sec. 5-105. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designation. 
Sec. 5-106. - Election by a majority. 
    The person receiving a majority of the votes cast for any city office shall be elected. 
Sec. 5-107. - Filing of notice of candidacy. 
    Each candidate for the office of mayor or councilmember shall file notice of his or her candidacy in the office of the municipal superintendent at least 42 but not more than 52 days prior to the election. Each candidate for city council shall specify the council district for which he or she is running. (1993 Ga. Laws (Act. No. 48), page 3839, § 2, 2-25-93) 
Sec. 5-108. - Designation of post by candidate. 
    All persons giving notice of candidacy for a city council seat shall designate the post being sought. 
Sec. 5-109. - Other provisions. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the city council shall, by ordinance, prescribe such ordinance, rules, and regulations as it deems appropriate to fulfill any options, duties, or responsibilities under chapter 3 of title 21 of the OCGA, the "Georgia Municipal Election Code." [Repealed-See now O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.] 
CHAPTER 2. - REMOVAL FROM OFFICE 

Sec. 5-201. - Occurrence of vacancies. 
    A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember occurs when a duly elected person fails to qualify, or when a person who has been duly elected and qualified either dies, resigns, becomes permanently disabled, or is removed from office as provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 5-202. - Removal of mayor and councilmembers for cause. 
(a)  The mayor or any councilmember shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction in a court of competent jurisdiction or the entering of a plea of guilty or a plea of nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or a felony; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess all of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Abandonment of office or neglect to perform the duties thereof; or 
(5)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of a mayor or any councilmember pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by the vote of five councilmembers, or four councilmembers plus the mayor, after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected official is sought to be removed by the action of the city council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected official sought to be removed from such office as provided in this section shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the city council to the Superior Court of Sumter County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
CHAPTER 1. - PROPERTY TAXES 

Sec. 6-101. - Property tax. 
    The city council may assess by ordinance, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the city council in its discretion. 
Sec. 6-102. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
    The city council by ordinance shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The city council by ordinance may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize the voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due. 
CHAPTER 2. - OCCUPATION TAXES AND BUSINESS LICENSE FEES 

Sec. 6-201. - Occupation and business taxes. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on both individuals and corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to the extent such persons have a constitutionally sufficient nexus to this city to be so taxed. The city council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as otherwise provided in this Charter. The city council may by ordinance also levy and provide for additional occupation and business taxes to be levied upon such individuals and corporations which receive or may receive special benefits from authorized activities engaged in by the city. 
Sec. 6-202. - License or permit fees. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling within the city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulation. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity or such other elements as the city may deem proper and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in this Charter. The city council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate. 
Sec. 6-203. - Franchises. 
    The city council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable television companies, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The city council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 20 years and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The city council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by him. The city council may provide by ordinance for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted. 
Sec. 6-204. - Service charges. 
    The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available inside or outside the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as otherwise provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 6-205. - Special assessments; impact fees. 
(a)  The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect the costs of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, parking lot or facility, curbing, gutter, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected in accord with the other provisions of this Charter. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall have the power to assess and collect development fees or impact fees upon such improvements in such manner and amount as the city council may deem necessary or proper in the exercise of its powers. 
Sec. 6-206. - Construction; other taxes. 
    The city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs. 
CHAPTER 3. - COLLECTION OF DELINQUENT TAXES AND FEES 

Sec. 6-301. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
    The city council by ordinance may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under the terms of this Charter by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due, late penalties or interest, issuance and execution of fi. fas., creation and priority of liens, making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed, revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees, and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions. 
CHAPTER 4. - CITY INDEBTEDNESS 

Sec. 6-401. - General obligation bonds. 
    The city council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken. 
Sec. 6-402. - Revenue bonds. 
    Revenue bonds may be issued by the city council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued. 
Sec. 6-403. - Short-term notes. 
    The city may issue short-term notes as now or hereafter provided by state law. 
Sec. 6-404. - Improvement bonds. 
(a)  In order to facilitate the financing of any municipal improvements authorized by law, the city may issue bonds of the city in the aggregate amount of assessments for the improvement then unpaid, which bond or bonds and the interest thereon shall in no event become a liability of the city or the mayor and council issuing them. 
(b)  These bonds shall mature at a date and bear an interest rate as the council may determine by ordinance, but in no event shall the rate of interest exceed that which the assessments are to bear. 
(c)  These bonds shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk and shall have the impression of the corporate seal of the city thereon and shall be payable at a place designated by ordinance. 
(d)  These bonds shall be designated as "improvement bonds," and shall, on the face thereof, recite the nature and location of the improvement for which they have been issued and shall recite that they are payable solely from assessments which have been levied upon the lots and tracts of land abutting upon or being the situs of the improvements. 
(e)  These bonds shall be sold at not less than par, and the proceeds thereof applied to the payment of the costs and expense of the improvement for which the bonds were issued, or the bonds, in the amount that shall be necessary for that purpose, may be turned over and delivered to the contractor, in respect to the improvement at par value, in payment of the amount due on the contract, and the portion thereof which shall be necessary to pay other expenses incident to and incurred in providing for the improvements shall be sold or otherwise disposed of as the council by ordinance shall direct. 
CHAPTER 5. - FISCAL CONTROL 

Sec. 6-501. - Fiscal year. 
    The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 6-502. - Preparation of budgets. 
    The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual budget, which shall include an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget and may also include requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs of the city. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 6-503. - Submission of operating budget to city council. 
    On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year, which budget shall include both an operating budget and a capital budget. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The proposed budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 6-504. - Action by city council on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and for all capital improvements required for the ensuing fiscal year and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt a final budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the last day of the current fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6-502 of this charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. The city council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in this charter, or where the funds required for such improvement are otherwise provided for in accord with this charter or applicable state laws. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 6-505. - Tax levies. 
    The city council shall annually levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary to fund the budget. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other budgeted revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of this city. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015) 
Sec. 6-506. - Changes in appropriations. 
    The city manager may submit amendments to the budget to the city council at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his or her recommendations. The city council by ordinance may make changes or amendments in the appropriations contained in the current budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. Any such amendments to the budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 6-507. - Independent audit. 
    There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015) 
CHAPTER 6. - PURCHASING AND CONTRACTING AND DISPOSITION OF PROPERTY 

Sec. 6-601. - Contracting procedures. 
    The city council shall prescribe by ordinance the procedures to be followed in the making of contracts which shall bind the city. All contracts, ordinances, and resolutions which shall make or authorize contracts shall be approved as to form by the city attorney. The mayor shall sign all contracts; provided, however, that the city council may authorize the mayor by ordinance to designate another appropriate official to sign any type of contract. The city clerk shall authenticate all contracts. The original of all contracts shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 6-602. - Contracts binding upon city. 
    In addition to the other provisions of this Charter, no contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless: 
(1)  It is in writing; 
(2)  It is drawn by or submitted to and reviewed by the city attorney where practical; and 
(3)  It is made or authorized by the city council and such approval is entered in the journal of minutes of city council proceedings. 
Sec. 6-603. - Centralized purchasing. 
    The city council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for all purchases of real and personal property by the city. 
Sec. 6-604. - Sale and disposition of property. 
(a)  The city council may sell, lease, transfer, and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The city council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the city council may authorize the mayor to execute and deliver in the name of the city a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights of way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such exchange is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made. 
(H.B. 425, 5-12-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
ARTICLE VIII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 8-101. - Ordinances and regulations. 
    Existing ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations of the city and its agencies now in effect not inconsistent with the provisions of this Charter shall remain effective until they have been repealed, modified, or amended. 
Sec. 8-102. - Contracts and obligations; proceedings and compensation. 
(a)  All contracts, orders, leases, bonds, and other obligations or instruments entered into by the mayor and city council of Americus or for its benefit prior to the effective date of this Charter shall continue in effect according to the terms thereof as obligations and rights of the city. 
(b)  No action or proceeding of any nature, whether civil or criminal, judicial or administrative, or otherwise, pending at the effective date of this Charter by or against the city or its departments and agencies shall be abated or otherwise affected by the adoption of this Charter. 
(c)  The departmental organization of the city existing immediately prior to adoption of this Charter shall continue in effect upon the effective date of this Charter until such organization is changed or reorganized as provided by ordinance and is authorized by this Charter. 
Sec. 8-103. - Bonds for officials. 
    The officers and employees of this city, both elected and appointed, shall execute such security or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the city council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may otherwise be provided by law. 
Sec. 8-104. - Action of governing body. 
    For the purpose of all laws requiring action by the governing body of the City of Americus, such action shall be accomplished by ordinance or resolution unless specifically provided otherwise by the particular law involved. 
Sec. 8-105. - Captions. 
(a)  The captions of the several sections of this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part of this Charter. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa. 
Sec. 8-106. - Severability. 
    If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part be enacted separately and independently of each other. 
Sec. 8-107. - Effective date. 
    This Charter shall become effective on July 1, 1992. 
Sec. 8-108. - Specific repealer. 
    An Act incorporating the City of Americus in the County of Sumter approved November 11, 1889 (Ga. L. 1889, p. 961), as amended, is repealed in its entirety and all amendatory Acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are repealed unless specifically provided in this Charter. 
Sec. 8-109. - General repealer. 
    All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are repealed. 
Plan Name: amercc2 Plan Type: Local User: Gina Administrator: Americus 
Redistricting Plan Components Report 
District 001 
Sumter County 
Tract: 9502 
BG: 1 
1013 1014 1015 1016 1020 1021 1023 1024 1026 1027 1028 1029 1030 1033 1034 1036 1037 1038 1039 1044 1045 1057 1058 1059 1060 1061 
BG: 2 
2000 2004 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2028 
BG: 3 
3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 3020 3023 
Tract: 9503 
BG: 1 
1044 1045 1047 1048 
Tract: 9506 
BG: 1 
1001 1002 1003 1004 1005 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 
District 002 
Sumter County 
Tract: 9503 
BG: 1 
1017 1018 1020 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1028 1029 1031 1033 
BG: 2 
2008 2010 2011 2013 2014 2016 2017 2021 2022 2023 2027 2028 2029 2030 2031 2032 2033 2036 2037 2038 2039 2041 2042 2044 2045 2046 2047 2049 2050 2051 2052 2053 2054 2055 2056 2998 
BG: 3 
3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 
BG: 4 
4005 4006 4007 4008 4009 4010 4011 4026 4027 4028 4029 4030 4031 4032 4033 4034 4035 4036 
BG: 5 
5000 5001 5002 5005 5014 5018 5019 5020 
District 003 
Sumter County 
Tract: 9505 
BG: 2 
2001 
Tract: 9506 
BG: 2 
2011 2012 2015 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 
Tract: 9507 
BG: 1 
1005 
BG: 2 
2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023 2024 2025 2026 2027 2031 2032 2033 2034 2035 2036 2037 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 2045 2046 2047 2048 2049 2050 2051 2052 2053 2054 
BG: 3 
3017 3018 3019 3020 3021 3022 3023 
BG: 4 
4003 4004 4005 4007 4008 4009 4010 4011 4012 4013 4014 4015 4016 4019 4020 4021 4022 4023 4025 4026 4029 4030 4032 4048 4996 4998 
District 004 
Sumter County 
Tract: 9505 
BG: 1 
1004 1005 1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1018 1019 1020 1021 1022 1023 1024 1025 1026 1028 
BG: 2 
2002 2003 2004 2006 2007 2019 2020 2031 2035 2036 2037 2038 2039 2040 2041 2042 2043 2044 
Tract: 9506 
BG: 3 
3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 3020 3021 3022 3023 3024 3025 3026 3027 
District 005 
Sumter County 
Tract: 9502 
BG: 2 
2029 2030 
Tract: 9503 
BG: 1 
1032 1034 1035 1038 1043 
BG: 3 
3000 3001 3002 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 3017 3018 3019 3020 
BG: 4 
4000 4001 4002 4003 4004 4012 4013 4014 4015 4016 4017 4018 4019 4020 4021 4022 4023 4024 4025 4037 4038 4039 4040 4041 4042 4043 4044 4045 4046 4047 4048 4049 4050 4051 4052 4053 4054 4055 4056 4057 4058 4059 
BG: 5 
5017 5021 5028 5029 5031 5032 
Tract: 9505 
BG: 1 
1000 1001 1002 1003 
BG: 2 
2021 2022 
Tract: 9506 
BG: 1 
1006 1007 1008 1009 1010 1011 1012 1013 1014 1015 1016 1017 1028 1029 1030 1031 1032 1033 1034 1035 1036 1037 1038 1039 1040 
BG: 2 
2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2014 
BG: 3 
3000 3001 3002 3003 
District 006 
Sumter County 
Tract: 9502 
BG: 1 
1008 1009 1010 1999 
BG: 3 
3001 3002 3004 3005 3006 3007 3021 3022 3024 3025 3998 
BG: 4 
4006 4007 4008 4009 4010 4011 4012 4013 4014 4015 4016 4017 4018 4019 4020 4021 4022 4023 4028 4032 4033 4039 4040 4041 4042 
Tract: 9506 
BG: 1 
1000 1023 1024 1025 1026 1027 1041 1042 1043 
BG: 2 
2009 2010 2013 2016 2017 
Tract: 9507 
BG: 1 
1011 1013 
BG: 2 
2001 2002 2003 2004 
BG: 3 
3000 3001 3002 3003 3004 3005 3006 3007 3008 3009 3010 3011 3012 3013 3014 3015 3016 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ACTS 
This table shows the location of amendments to the Charter. The charter is derived from 1992 Ga. Laws (Act No. 914), page 5985. 
Ga. Acts 
Year Act No. Page Section  Section 
in Charter 1993 48 3839 1 5-102 2 5-107 2002 471 3992 1 5-102 2015 215 3839 3-101-3-103 3-201, 3-202 3-401 6-501-6-507 6-604  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Charter of ordinances amendatory thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number  Date  Section 
in Charter O-04-08-16  8-19-2004 3-201, 3-202 
4-104 O-10-04-07  4-22-2010 art. I, § 1-103 O-11-08-14  8-18-2011 art. V, § 102 O-2012-17  5-24-2012 2-202(c) O-2015-15  7-23-2015 Preamble 3-101-3-103 3-201 3-401(d) 6-503 6-504(a) 6-506 6-604(b)  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in this and the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Americus, Georgia" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1986, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall be observed. The rules of construction and definitions set out in this section shall not be applied to any section of this Code which shall contain any express provisions excluding such construction or where the subject matter or context of such section may be repugnant thereto. 
    As soon as possible. The term "as soon as possible" means within a reasonable time, having due regard to all the circumstances. 
    City. The term "city" means the City of Americus, Georgia. 
    City council. The term "city council" "or council" means the city council of the city. 
    Code. The term "Code" means The Code of the City of Americus, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. When a number of days are prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted. If the last day shall fall on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action shall fall on a public or legal holiday as set forth in state law, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following business day to exercise such privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, an intermediate Saturday, Sunday and legal holiday shall be excluded in the computation. 
    Conjunctions. Where a provision involves two or more items, conditions, provisions or events connected by the conjunction "and," "or" or "either . . . or," the conjunction shall be interpreted as follows, provided in appropriate cases the terms "and" and "or" are interchangeable: 
(1)  The term "and" indicates that all the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply. 
(2)  The term "or" indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events may apply singly or in any combination. 
(3)  The term "either . . . or indicates that the connected items, conditions, provisions or events shall apply singly, but not in combination. 
    County. The term "county" means Sumter County, Georgia. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring a city officer or city employee to do some act, it is to be construed to authorize the officer or employee to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act. 
    Following. The term "following" means next after. 
    Gender. Words of one gender include all other genders. 
    Generally. The ordinary signification shall be applied to all words, except words of art or words connected with a particular trade or subject matter when they shall have the signification attached to them by experts in such trade or with reference to such subject matter. In all interpretations the courts shall look diligently for the intention of the city council, keeping in view, at all times, the old law, the evil and the remedy. Grammatical errors shall not vitiate, and a transposition of words and clauses may be resorted to when the sentence or clause is without meaning as it stands. 
    Joint authority. A joint authority given to any number of persons or officers may be executed by a majority of them, unless it is otherwise declared. 
    Liberal construction; minimum requirements; overlapping provisions. All general provisions, terms, phrases and expressions contained in this Code shall be liberally construed in order that the true intent and meaning of the city council may be fully carried out. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, they shall be held to be the minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than the other provisions of this Code, the provision imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be deemed to be controlling. The specific controls over the general. 
    May. The term "may" is to be construed as being permissive. 
    Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
    Must. The term "must" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Number. Words used in the singular include the plural. Words used in the plural include the singular. 
    Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Officials, officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies by title only, the reference refers to the officials, employees, boards, commissions or other agencies of the city. 
    Owner. The term "owner," as applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of the building or land. 
    Person. The term "person" includes any association, club, society, firm, corporation, any limited liability company, partnership or body politic and corporate, as well as an individual. 
    Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
    Preceding. The term "preceding" means next before. 
    Property. The term "property" includes real and personal property. 
    Public place. The term "public place" includes any place that the public is invited or permitted to go or congregate. 
    Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Shall. The term "shall" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The term the "state" means the State of Georgia. 
    Statutory references. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the "Official Code of Geogia Annotated" as now or hereafter amended. Any reference to a state act, whether by short title or year, page number and/or act number, is a reference to such act, as amended. 
    Street. The term "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, courts, alleys, lanes, circles, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
    Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person holding a written or oral lease of or who occupies the whole or a part of a building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future, as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The term "week" means seven days. 
    Will. The term "will" is to be construed as being mandatory. 
    Writing. The term "writing" includes printing and all numerals. 
    Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1986, § 1-2; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
State Law reference- Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections, effect of history notes, references in Code. 
(a)  The catchlines of sections of this Code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise, are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section or subsection, and shall not be deemed or taken to be the titles thereof, or as any part thereof, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history or source notes appearing in parentheses after sections in this Code are not intended to have any legal effect but are merely intended to indicate the source of matter contained in the section. Editor's notes and state law references which appear after sections or subsections of this Code or which otherwise appear in footnote form are provided for the convenience of the user of this Code and have no legal effect. 
(c)  All references to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections are to chapters, articles, divisions, subdivisions or sections of this Code, unless otherwise specified. 
(Code 1986, § 1-3) 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1962, § 1-4; Code 1986, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  Supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances adopted during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code that have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the person authorized to prepare the supplement may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances or resolutions and parts of ordinances or resolutions included in the supplemental, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the person may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ " (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code that embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinances inserted into the Code. 
(d)  In no case shall the person make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1986, § 1-5) 
Sec. 1-6. - Amendment to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances adopted subsequent to this Code that amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion in this Code. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of these subsequent ordinances or resolutions until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending those provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "section ____________ of The Code of the City of Americus, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows:...." The new provisions may then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "The Code of the City of Americus, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or chapter, article, division or subdivision, as appropriate) to be numbered ____________ , that reads as follows:...." The new material may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, subdivisions, divisions, articles or chapters desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, subdivision, division, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1986, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-7. - Code does not affect prior offenses, rights, etc. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any offense or act committed or done, or any penalty or forfeiture incurred, or any contract or right established or accruing, or any prosecution, suit or proceeding pending or any judgment rendered, on or before the effective date of this Code. The adoption of this Code shall not be interpreted as authorizing or permitting any use or the continuance of any use of a structure or premises in violation of any ordinance or resolution in effect on the date of adoption of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 1-7) 
Sec. 1-8. - General penalty. 
(a)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" means: 
(1)  Doing an act that is prohibited or made or declared unlawful, an offense or a misdemeanor by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; 
(2)  Failure to perform an act that is required to be performed by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance; or 
(3)  Failure to perform an act if the failure is declared a misdemeanor or an offense or unlawful by ordinance or by rule or regulation authorized by ordinance. 
(b)  In this section, the term "violation of this Code" does not include the failure of a city officer or city employee to perform an official duty, unless it is provided that failure to perform the duty is to be punished as provided in this section or it is clear from the context that it is the intent to impose the penalty provided for in this section upon the officer or employee. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided: 
(1)  A person convicted of a violation of this Code shall be punished by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding six months, or compulsory labor for the city on the streets, sidewalks, squares, or other public places for a period not exceeding 30 days, or any combination thereof. 
(2)  With respect to violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(3)  With respect to violations of this Code that are not continuous with respect to time, each day the violation continues is a separate offense. 
(d)  The imposition of a penalty does not prevent revocation or suspension of a license, permit or franchise or other administrative sanctions. 
(e)  Violations of this Code that are continuous with respect to time are a public nuisance and may be abated by injunctive or other equitable relief and by such other means as are provided by law. The imposition of a penalty does not prevent equitable relief. 
(Code 1986, § 1-8) 
State Law reference- Limitations on penalties, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2); authority to punish ordinance violations by requiring labor, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-8. 
Sec. 1-9. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 hereof. 
(Code 1986, § 1-9) 
Sec. 1-10. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. The sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or otherwise unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, that unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs or sections of this Code, since they would have been enacted without the incorporation in this Code of the unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1986, § 1-10) 
Sec. 1-11. - Provisions considered as continuations of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, insofar as they are the same as those of ordinances and resolutions existing at the time of adoption of this Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-12. - Miscellaneous ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall affect any ordinance: 
(1)  Promising or guaranteeing the payment of money or authorizing the issuance of bonds or other instruments of indebtedness. 
(2)  Authorizing or approving any contract, deed, or agreement. 
(3)  Granting any right or franchise. 
(4)  Making or approving any appropriation or budget. 
(5)  Providing for salaries or other employee benefits not codified in this Code. 
(6)  Adopting or amending the comprehensive plan. 
(7)  Levying or imposing any special assessment. 
(8)  Dedicating, establishing naming, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, repairing or vacating any street, sidewalk or alley. 
(9)  Dedicating, accepting or approving any plat or subdivision. 
(10)  Providing traffic regulations for specific areas, such as no parking zones, stop intersections, etc., not in conflict with this Code. 
(11)  Levying taxes that are not codified in this Code. 
(12)  Rezoning specific property or amending the zoning map. 
(13)  Adopted for purposes which have been consummated. 
(14)  That is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect. 
(Code 1986, § 1-11) 
Sec. 1-13. - Statute of limitations. 
    All prosecutions for violations of any city ordinance shall be commenced within two years after such violation, and any offense against said ordinance for which no prosecution is begun within two years after its commission shall be barred, unless the party so offending shall have been beyond the limits of the city, in which case the time of absence from the city shall not be embraced and computed as within said two years. 
(Code 1962, § 19-1; Code 1986, § 8-2) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Regulatory fees. 
    All regulatory fees charged by the city are hereby determined to be reasonable and reflective of the cost of regulation. 
Secs. 2-2-2-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COUNCIL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-21. - Mayor. 
    The mayor shall have the general superintendence of the affairs of the city; shall preside at all meetings of the city council, and it shall be the mayor's duty to see that all laws, ordinances, resolutions and rules of the city council are observed and enforced, and that all officers of the city shall faithfully discharge the duties required of them. 
(Code 1962, § 2-28; Code 1986, § 2-21) 
Sec. 2-22. - Mayor pro tem election. 
    The city council shall elect from its body a mayor pro tem, who shall, during the illness, absence or disqualification of the mayor, act in the mayor's stead, and be clothed with all rights, privileges and duties of the mayor. 
(Code 1962, § 2-29; Code 1986, § 2-22) 
Secs. 2-23-2-47. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RULES OF ORDER AND PROCEDURE 

Sec. 2-48. - Meetings, when held. 
    The city council shall meet regularly at least once each month, at such place and time as it may fix and prescribe. Special meetings may be called by the mayor at any time for the consideration and determination of any questions or matters requiring immediate attention, of which special meeting the city clerk shall give the members notice. 
(Code 1962, § 2-10; Code 1986, § 2-24) 
Sec. 2-49. - Speaking at meetings; decorum at meetings; notices to city council from members of the public; disturbing or interrupting meetings; violations. 
(a)  Monthly public meetings of city council and city council committees. Unless otherwise provided by a majority vote of the city council, the mayor and city council shall meet at least two times each calendar month. The first meeting shall be an agenda setting meeting and the second meeting shall be the regular monthly meeting. Such meetings shall be at such times and dates as established by the city council from time to time. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to prohibit called meetings otherwise allowed by law; nor shall any provision of this subsection be construed to require that both meetings be held each calendar month if a majority of the city council agrees to dispense with one of such meetings; provided, however, that, unless prevented by circumstances or events beyond the control of the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council shall have at least a regular monthly meeting each calendar month. All meetings of the mayor and city council shall be held and conducted under the provisions of the Georgia Open Meetings Act. 
(b)  Meeting agenda. At least 48 hours prior to each meeting of the mayor and city council, or any committee thereof, the city clerk, or the designee thereof, shall publish an agenda of the matters anticipated to be considered or discussed at the meeting. The fact that a particular matter is not included on the published agenda shall not prevent the matter from being considered, provided that a majority of the city council or the council committee, as the case may be, adopts a motion approving the addition of the matter to the agenda at any time during the meeting. 
(c)  Public hearings. At each meeting of the mayor and city council, or any committee thereof, when the mayor and city council or a committee of the city council is conducting a public hearing in accord with the requirements of federal, state or local laws, regulations, or ordinances, any person desiring to address the mayor and city council or a committee of city council during such public hearing regarding the subject matter of the public hearing shall be authorized to do so. Such person must be recognized by the presiding officer prior to speaking at the public hearing. Comments by persons speaking during the public hearing shall be directed to the presiding officer, and not to individual members of the city council, and unless otherwise provided by state law or local ordinance, the comments of such person addressing a public hearing shall be limited to five minutes per person. Any person speaking during a public hearing shall limit his or her comments to the subject matter of the public hearing, and any statements or comments made by such person not related to the subject matter of the public hearing shall be immediately ruled out of order by the presiding officer. At the conclusion of the time to speak at such public hearing, each speaker shall terminate his or her remarks. 
(d)  Agenda items. At any regular monthly meeting of the city council, members of the public desiring to address the mayor and city council regarding items that appear on the published city council agenda shall personally sign up to do so at the meeting location on the day of the meeting as long as such person signs up to speak prior to the time that the meeting is called to order by the presiding officer. A person signing up to speak on an agenda item must indicate the item on which such person desires to address the mayor and city council by reference to the meeting agenda at the time such person signs up to speak. The city clerk, or his or her designee, shall provide a sign-up sheet for such purposes at least 30 minutes prior to the scheduled starting time of the meeting. Such sign-up sheet shall be located on the lectern provided for speakers at the meeting. No more than a total of five speakers can sign up to speak at any one meeting, and each speaker shall be provided three minutes to address the mayor and city council regarding the agenda item or items to be addressed by such speaker. A speaker can sign up to address more than one agenda item, but the number of agenda items to be addressed by a speaker shall not affect the total amount of time allotted for each individual speaker. If more than a total of five speakers sign up to speak at any one meeting, the presiding officer shall only be authorized to recognize the first five persons who signed up to speak. No person shall be authorized to sign up for another person to speak and no speaker shall be authorized to yield any portion of his or her unused time to another person. In the event that there are a large number of persons who desire to speak on a particular agenda item, the presiding officer may request that the persons wishing to speak on the agenda item select a spokesperson to address the mayor and city council on behalf of such persons. A person speaking to the mayor and city council on an agenda item shall only be authorized to speak on such agenda item and any statements or comments made by such person not related to the agenda item upon which such person is authorized to speak shall be immediately ruled out of order by the presiding officer, and if a speaker continues to speak on matters not related to the agenda item upon which such person is authorized to speak after being ruled out of order by the presiding officer, then such person may be removed from the meeting and charged with violation of this section. Comments by persons speaking on an agenda item shall be directed to the presiding officer, and not to individual members of the city council. Any speaker addressing individual member of the city council shall be ruled out of order by the presiding officer, and if such speaker continues to address individual members of the city council after being ruled out of order for doing so by the presiding officer, then such person may be removed from the meeting and charged with violation of this section. At the conclusion of the time to speak on such agenda item, each speaker shall terminate his or her remarks. Nothing in this subsection shall be construed to require a person to sign up to speak in connection with a public hearing to be conducted by the mayor and city council under subsection (c) of this section. 
(e)  Non-agenda items. Members of the public desiring to bring any matter concerning the city to the attention of the city council which does not appear on a meeting agenda of the mayor and city council may submit such person's comments in writing to the city manager of the city at any time during which the city council or a council committee is not in an administrative briefing, an agenda setting meeting, or in a regular monthly meeting. Copies of such written comments from a member of the public shall be submitted to the mayor and city council within ten calendar days of the date such comments are submitted to the city manager. In the event that at least three members of the city council deem it appropriate to include issues or comments submitted to the city manager under this section on the agenda of a subsequent meeting of the mayor and city council, then, at least three calendar days prior to the meeting of the city council at which such members desire that such item be placed upon the agenda, such three members shall submit a notice to the city manager, either jointly or severally, to place such item on such city council meeting agenda for consideration by the mayor and city council; provided, however, that unless such matter is tabled or otherwise postponed by action of the governing body, no such item shall be placed on an agenda of the city council more than one time every six months. 
(f)  Meeting decorum. In order to ensure proper decorum and a businesslike atmosphere at all meetings of the city council or any committee thereof, no signs, placards, or similar displays that are larger than 17 inches by 24 inches, or that are attached to sticks, rods or poles or that are constructed of metal or wood shall be allowed within the city council chambers or in a city council meeting room during a city council or committee meeting unless the sign specifically illustrates, depicts or describes in the form of a map, plat, schematic drawing, picture, or similar depiction, a particular item that appears on the meeting agenda as an item for consideration by the city council or a committee thereof. In addition to the foregoing, any such sign, placard, or similar display that is otherwise authorized hereunder shall not be placed or displayed in a location or in a manner which blocks the view of any member of the audience, city staff, or the council. Any signs, placards, or similar displays that are prohibited hereunder, or any sign that is otherwise authorized hereunder which blocks a person's view as prohibited herein during the course of a meeting, shall be removed by the person carrying the sign upon request of the presiding officer or by an appropriate officer of the police department upon direction of the presiding officer. 
(g)  Violations of ordinance. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the provisions of this section or for any person to disturb or interrupt any meeting of the city council or a committee thereof. The use of obscene or profane language, physical violence, or the threat thereof, or loud and boisterous behavior which the presiding officer shall determine is intended as a disruption of the meeting, or any failure to comply with any lawful decision or order of the presiding officer in connection with or during the course of a meeting, shall constitute a disturbance hereunder, and shall be considered to be a violation of this section. Any person violating the provisions of this section, including a person violating this section by creating a disturbance as defined herein, or by failing or refusing to comply with a lawful order of the presiding officer during a meeting of the mayor and city council or a committee thereof, may be ordered removed or ejected from the city council chambers or other meeting room by the presiding officer for the duration of the meeting or for such lesser period as the presiding officer shall determine. In addition, any person violating the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 2-24.1; Ord. No. O-04-11-23, 11-18-2004; Ord. No. O-12-03-08, 3-22-2012; Ord. No. O-2014-8, 3-20-2014; Ord. No. O-2014-17, 10-20-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-10, 6-18-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
State Law reference- Preventing or disrupting lawful meetings, gatherings, or processions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34. 
Sec. 2-50. - Presiding officer. 
(a)  The mayor shall preside at all meetings, preserve order and decorum, and shall appoint all committees, unless the council shall otherwise direct. 
(b)  In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall preside; and in the absence of both, a chairman shall be appointed by the council, vested with all the powers of the mayor during such absence. 
(Code 1962, §§ 2-12, 2-13; Code 1986, § 2-26) 
Sec. 2-51. - Voting on questions, generally; show of hand votes; mayor's role; obligation of council members to vote on questions. 
(a)  All questions shall be put by the presiding officer. The members shall vote by a show of hands, with a majority of the members present and voting determining all questions unless otherwise provided. The mayor, at such officer's discretion, may call upon the mayor pro tem to take the chair, to allow the mayor to address the council or make a motion. The mayor may vote on any issue before the city council, unless he is otherwise disqualified. 
(b)  At any meeting of the governing body of the city, or any committee thereof, each council member present shall vote on each question that comes before the meeting unless a city council member is immediately and particularly interested in the question to the extent that such council member has a conflict of interest, or the appearance of a conflict of interest, with respect to such question, or unless a council member is excused from voting by a majority vote of the governing body. A motion to excuse a member from voting may be made by the council member seeking to be excused, must be made before the question is put to a vote, and shall be decided without debate, except that the council member making the motion may state briefly the reasons that the motion was made. 
(Code 1962, § 2-14; Code 1986, § 2-27; Ord. No. O-2012-18, 5-24-2012) 
Sec. 2-52. - Record of votes. 
    Whenever it shall be required by any one or more members, the yeas and nays shall be recorded. 
(Code 1962, § 2-15; Code 1986, § 2-28) 
Sec. 2-53. - Applications, etc., to be written. 
    Applications, petitions or other communications to the city council must be in writing; and in all cases the same must be referred to a committee before any action is taken thereon, unless the city council shall otherwise direct. 
(Code 1962, § 2-17; Code 1986, § 2-30) 
Sec. 2-54. - Reconsideration of previous business. 
    Before the minutes of any preceding meeting of the city council are confirmed, any member may move to reconsider any question, motion, resolution, or other matter or thing in the minutes of such previous meeting contained; and if such reconsideration be voted by a majority of the members present, the subject matter of such reconsideration shall be first business in order to be disposed of. 
(Code 1962, § 2-19; Code 1986, § 2-32) 
Sec. 2-55. - Robert's Rules of Order adopted. 
    The meetings of the city council shall be guided and governed by those parliamentary rules and regulations popularly known as "Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised," the same being adopted and made a part hereof as though set out fully herein, except as otherwise provided in the Charter or this Code. 
(Code 1962, § 2-9; Code 1986, § 2-33) 
Sec. 2-56. - Council committees. 
    The mayor and city council may provide for the appointment of such committees as they deem necessary or desirable, including any standing committees or special committees. All committees and committee chairmen shall be appointed by the mayor and serve at his pleasure. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time. 
(Code 1962, § 2-39; Code 1986, § 2-35; Ord. No. O-94-12-46, 12-22-1994; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-14, 7-23-2015) 
Editor's note- Formerly entitled "Standing council committees-Enumerated", which was amended by Ord. No. O-2015-14. 
Sec. 2-57. - Same-Duties. 
    It shall be the duty of the standing committees to prepare business for the action of the city council and to report upon such matters as may be referred to them. 
(Code 1962, § 2-40; Code 1986, § 2-36) 
Secs. 2-58-2-87. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Public officers and employees generally, O.C.G.A. § 45-1-1 et seq.; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of all municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2(2). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-88. - Personnel manual adopted. 
    The personnel ordinance adopted November 18, 1975, and amended September 19, 1977, September 24, 1979, October 8, 1979, April 27, 1981, May 25, 1981, November 23, 1981, October 25, 1982, and December 27, 1984, is hereby further amended by adopting the personnel policies, classification plan and pay plan for the city as set out in the personnel manual, dated January 1, 1987, consisting of section A, personnel policies, sections I through XVIII; section B, classification plan, sections I through III; section C, pay plan, sections I through III and section D, definitions and as subsequently amended, at least one copy of which is filed in the office of the city clerk, and the same is hereby adopted and incorporated as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions thereof shall be controlling. 
(Code 1986, § 17-8; Ord. of 12-27-1984; Ord. of 11-24-1986) 
Sec. 2-89. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2015-15, adopted July 23, 2015, repealed § 2-89, entitled "Appointive officers, specified; voice vote, etc." which derived from: Code 1962, § 2-43; Code 1986, § 2-1; Ord. No. O-87-03-05, adopted Mar. 23, 1987; Ord. No. O-87-04-08, adopted Apr. 27, 1987; Ord. No. O-89-12-42, adopted Dec. 18, 1989; Ord. No. O-91-03-07, adopted Mar. 25, 1991; Ord. No. O-95-02-05, adopted Feb. 27, 1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-44, adopted Dec. 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, adopted Dec. 16, 2004; Ord. No. O-2013-25, adopted Aug. 22, 2013; and Ord. No. O-2013-29, adopted Oct. 24, 2013. 
Sec. 2-89.1. - Appointment of city manager. 
(a)  The city council shall appoint the city manager who shall be in charge of running the day-to-day business and operations of the city. Such city manager shall be appointed and shall meet the qualifications as provided in section 3-101 of the City Charter. Such city manager shall be entitled to such compensation as may be established pursuant to section 3-101 of the City Charter. The city manager may be removed by the city council as provided in section 3-101 of the City Charter. 
(b)  With respect to the duties and responsibilities of the city manager, those shall be as established pursuant to section 3-102 of the City Charter and by such ordinances supplemental to the City Charter as may be adopted by the city council from time to time. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-89.2. - City departments. 
(a)  The city council hereby establishes the following departments within the city: 
(1)  Finance director; 
(2)  Police department; 
(3)  Fire and emergency services department; 
(4)  Community and economic development department; 
(5)  Planning and inspections department; 
(6)  Public works department; and 
(7)  Natural gas department. 
(8)  Human resources department. 
(b)  A job description, including the duties and responsibilities of such department heads, shall be provided in the city's personnel ordinance. 
(c)  The city manager shall be authorized to appoint, suspend, remove, or terminate such department heads in accordance with the personnel rules, regulations, policies and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-01, 3-24-2016) 
Sec. 2-89.3. - City clerk. 
(a)  In accord with the provisions of section 3-201 of the City Charter, the city manager shall appoint a city clerk, who shall not be a council member. 
(b)  The duties and responsibilities of the city clerk shall be established by the City Charter and by such other ordinances of the city council supplemental to such Charter as may be adopted from time to time by the city council. 
(c)  A job description, including the duties and responsibilities of the city clerk, which is consistent with the provisions of the City Charter, shall be provided in the city's personnel ordinance. 
(d)  The city manager shall be authorized to appoint, suspend, remove, or terminate the city clerk in accordance with the personnel rules, regulations, policies and ordinances of the city. The city clerk shall not be considered to be a department head of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-89.4. - Municipal court judge. 
    The city council shall appoint a municipal court judge from time to time to carry out such duties as Municipal Court Judge of the City of Americus as are provided in article IV, chapter 1 of the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-90. - Salaries of appointed officers. 
    No salary of any appointed officer shall be increased or diminished during his term of office, unless by unanimous consent of the city council. 
(Code 1962, § 2-44; Code 1986, § 2-2) 
Sec. 2-91. - Code enforcement officer; authority to issue tickets, citations or summons; exception. 
    The code enforcement officer, during the term of his employment, shall be authorized to write tickets or citations on forms provided for such purpose preferring charges against individuals and other entities for alleged violations of this Code. The code enforcement officer shall also be authorized to issue summons to appear before the municipal court of the city to answer charges relating to alleged violations of this Code by person or other legal entities. The authority granted to the enforcement officer hereunder shall not include the authority to issue tickets or summons for violations of the traffic laws of this city unless the enforcement officer is otherwise authorized to do so by other state statute or city ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 2-10.1; Ord. No. O-96-09-41, 9-19-1996; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 2-92. - City attorney. 
    The city council shall appoint a city attorney from time to time as provided in article III, section 3-301 of the City Charter. The city attorney shall meet with the city council at all regular meetings and all called meetings as such attorney may be requested. The city attorney shall render legal opinions to the city council and/or any city officer or employee on matters concerning city business. The city attorney shall be the attorney for all commissions and agencies of the city, unless otherwise provided by proper ordinance, and shall render legal opinions and services to those agencies. The city attorney shall render such other services and perform such other acts as may be desired by the city council for the best interest, welfare, and benefit of the city. 
(Code 1962, § 2-38; Code 1986, § 2-12; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 2-93-2-112. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY CLERK AND FINANCE DIRECTOR 

Sec. 2-113. - Duties of city clerk. 
    The city clerk shall: 
(1)  Attend all meetings of the city council; to record regularly and fairly all proceedings of the same in a book to be kept by such officer for that purpose, and to keep the same properly indexed. The city clerk shall also keep a book to be called the "ordinance book," in which such officer shall record all the city ordinances, and all the alterations of, and amendments to, the same hereafter enacted, and shall keep said ordinance book properly indexed. 
(2)  Issue all executions, summonses, notices, subpoenas, and processes of any kind that may be necessary in the enforcement of the rules, regulations, and ordinances of the city council. 
(3)  Be the keeper of the public seal of the city, and the custodian of all the records and other papers belonging to the city; shall be responsible for their safe keeping; and shall turn over all books, papers or other property of the city in such officer's hands to such officer's successor in office. 
(4)  Affix the seal of the city to any document. 
(5)  Furnish certified copies of records of such officer's office except such as are needed or requested by the city council per 100 words. 
(Code 1962, §§ 2-32, 2-33; Code 1986, §§ 2-6, 2-7; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 2-114. - Duties and fees of finance director. 
(a)  The finance director shall: 
(1)  Issue all licenses, badges and permits authorized or granted by the city council, and keep a record of the same. 
(2)  Keep an execution docket, in which such officer shall enter all executions issued by such officer. 
(3)  Receive, safely keep, and pay out all money belonging to the city, and keep regular books, showing such officer's receipts and payments of the same, and keep separate accounts of all funds arising for any general or special purposes. 
(4)  Not pay any money to any person who is indebted to the city council, but in all such cases the amount of the claim against the city council, when properly audited, must be placed as a credit on the indebtedness or claim due by such person to the city council. 
(5)  It shall be the duty of the finance director to make daily deposits of all revenue received by such officer each day. The finance director shall make no cash disbursements of any funds for the account of the city council, except as hereinafter provided; all disbursements, except as hereinafter provided, shall be paid by checks drawn by the finance director. The finance director shall maintain at all times and keep in such officer's vault a nominal cash balance of $500.00 to cover incidental expenses not practical to pay by check; and from this fund the finance director shall pay such small items not exceeding $50.00 of incidental expense as may be necessary from time to time, and said fund shall be replenished for any such expenditures so made from same, on presentation of voucher with supporting documents, to the city council which shall authorize the finance director to draw such officer's check against the general fund for the amount so properly expended. It shall also be the duty of the finance director to enter all cash receipts and disbursements daily in the cash records kept by such officer. All officers and employees of the city handling the revenue or funds thereof, shall turn over and deliver to the finance director each day all moneys, or funds received, taking such officer's receipt therefor. 
(b)  The books, accounts and vouchers shall, at all times, be open to the city council for inspection, and shall make out and submit to the city council monthly reports of such officer's receipts and disbursements. 
(c)  Fees for the following services performed by the finance director shall be as established by ordinance and shall be collected by the finance director: 
(1)  For issuing execution in any case. 
(2)  For filing and docketing executions in any case. 
(3)  For canceling fi. fas. of record. 
(4)  For drawing recognizance. 
(d)  The finance director is hereby authorized and directed to have entered of record on the general execution docket in the office of the clerk of the superior court, all executions authorized to be issued under the charter and to pay the costs thereof. 
(Code 1962, § 2-33; Code 1986, § 2-7; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 2-115-2-141. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-142. - Adjustments, settlements of claims against city, agents, employees. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a claim from a person, business or other entity seeking damages for personal injury or property damage resulting from the alleged intentional or negligent misconduct of the city or its agents and employees, which is filed or submitted to the city in accord with O.C.G.A. § 36-33-5, such claim shall be immediately transmitted to the city manager of the city for investigation and consideration. Upon the completion of such investigation, in the event that the city manager determines that administrative adjustment or settlement of such claim is in the best interest of the city, he shall be authorized to administratively adjust or settle such claim with the claimant on behalf of the city, upon the following terms and conditions: 
(1)  Neither the claim itself, nor the administrative adjustment or settlement thereof, shall exceed the sum of $1,000.00; 
(2)  Only claims for personal injury or property damage resulting from the alleged intentional or negligent misconduct by the city or its agents or employees, while acting in the course of their employment with the city, shall be subject to settlement pursuant to this section; 
(3)  Prior to entering into the settlement of such claim in accord with the provisions hereof, the city manager shall determine that administrative adjustment or settlement of such claim is in the best interest of the city, will not work an economic or other hardship to the city, that the claim is meritorious, and that further unnecessary delay in settling such claim would be detrimental to the city; 
(4)  Prior to settlement, the amount claimed by the claimant shall be documented to the satisfaction of the city manager in writing, and the city manager shall not be authorized to settle such claim without such documentation in an amount at least equal to the amount of the final settlement; 
(5)  The payment of all settlement proceeds shall be paid from funds previously appropriated by the city council of the town in the city's budget for the current fiscal year for the payment of such claims; 
(6)  Prior to actual payment of the claim, the city manager shall require the claimant to execute a full and final release in favor of the city, its agents, employees, insurance carriers and any other person or entity who might potentially be liable to the claimant as a result of such claim. Such release shall also provide specifically that such release shall not be considered as an admission of any liability to the claimant by any of the releases named or referred to in the release documents; 
(7)  Any and all documents required to be executed effecting such settlement shall be prepared and approved by the city attorney prior to the execution thereof and the payment of any funds pursuant thereto; 
(8)  All such settlements shall be made within 30 days of receipt of the claim by the city, unless circumstances beyond the control of the city manager require a longer period of time, in which case, such shall be reported to the city council. 
(b)  The city manager shall notify the city council as soon as possible, but not to exceed 15 days within the date of the completion of such administrative adjustment or settlement, of the fact of adjustment or settlement and shall further maintain complete and accurate records in his office of all such matters. 
(c)  Nothing herein shall serve to extend or shorten any statutes of limitation which may be now or hereafter applicable to any claims or claimant herein described. In addition thereto, nothing herein shall be construed as an attempt to alter, amend, change or abrogate the general provisions of state law requiring the filing of ante litum notice (O.C.G.A. § 36-33-6) with the city prior to the filing of suit against the city. Further, the provisions hereof shall not be construed as in any manner changing the official or officials of the city upon whom such ante litum notice or any civil action wherein the city is a named defendant is to be served in accord with state law. 
(d)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to prohibit or otherwise limit the authority of the city council from settling or otherwise resolving claims filed against the city in any other manner not provided for in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 2-13; Ord. No. O-87-08-17, §§ 1-4, 8-24-1987; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-143. - Procedures for sale of personal property owned by city. 
(a)  When the city deems it appropriate to sell personal property owned by the city, the finance officer, or his or her designee, shall proceed to sell such property using either of the following procedures: 
(1)  The finance officer, or his or her designee, shall submit photos, asset descriptions and minimum acceptable selling price to gov.deals.com, or any similar or successor corporation that offers items for sale for government entities utilizing an internet-based auction system; where such items will be auctioned over the internet for a fee to be paid by the city, and in connection with the sale of property under this optional provision, the governing body of the city shall be authorized to enter into a contract or contracts between the city and GovDeals, Inc., or any similar or successor corporation that offers items for sale for government entities utilizing an internet-based auction system regarding such sales; or 
(2)  The finance officer, or his or designee, shall advertise the sale of the property for public sale in the newspaper that is the official legal organ of the city not less than three times within 15 calendar days prior to the date of such public sale of such personal property. Said advertisement shall give a description of the property to be sold, the date, time and place of such public sale, that the property will be sold to the highest bidder, with the city reserving the right to reject any or all bids, that prospective purchasers may submit a written bid prior to the date and hour of sale or bid orally at the time the public sale is held, and that the sale will continue from day to day until said property is sold. 
(b)  All sales of personal property by the city under this section shall be for cash or credit card or certified funds and shall be final. The prospective purchaser is obligated to undertake all due diligence regarding the property to be sold so as to determine the condition of such property prior to the sale. All such property shall be sold in its "as is, where is" condition, and the city shall have no liability for defects or deficiencies in the property. 
(c)  No provision of this section shall prohibit the finance officer, or his or designee, from trading in surplus property on the purchase of new property in accord with the purchasing procedures established by the City of Americus Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1962, § 2-5; Code 1986, § 10-5; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005; Ord. No. O-08-12-40, 12-18-2008) 
Sec. 2-144. - Policy for an economic development loan fund. 
    There is hereby established a policy for the administration of the economic development revolving loan fund of the city, to be applicable to the downtown area or coextensive with the boundary of the downtown development authority area of the city. 
(1)  Source of funds. The economic development loan fund shall consist of federal grants from the Department of Housing and Urban Development of the United States of America, program or miscellaneous income, and such other funds as may be available therefor. 
(2)  Object of benefit. Loan funds shall be used primarily to benefit the city's low-income and moderate-income population through economic development of the central business district within the downtown development authority boundaries. 
(3)  Security. Security for the repayment of all loan funds shall consist of a first or second security interest in the borrower's assets (whether real or personal property) being financed by such loan proceeds, or a security interest in whatever assets of the borrower that the city council may require in order to fully secure the economic development loan. Loans to a corporation shall be personally guaranteed by the shareholders of the corporation. If the borrower is not the owner of the real property to be improved with said loan funds, then, unless otherwise authorized by the city council, the owner of said real property shall guarantee repayment of said loan to the city and shall secure such guarantee by execution and delivery of a deed to secure debt with respect to such real property to the city. 
(4)  Annual interest rate. The interest rate shall be four percent per annum or such other interest rates that may be adopted in the future. 
(5)  Maximum loan amount. The maximum loan amount shall be $25,000.00; provided, however, under special circumstances whereby the city council in its sole discretion deems a larger loan is necessary to expedite the downtown development authority program in a timely manner or to bring an individual loan proposal package to completion, said maximum loan amount may be exceeded by the city council. The maximum loan amount shall not exceed 80 percent of the cost of the improvements financed by the loan. 
(6)  Use of loan funds. The use of loan funds shall be limited to: 
a.  Facade improvements, including signage. Historic preservation commission approval shall be obtained where required by ordinance. 
b.  Interior or exterior structural improvements, including roof, heating/air, plumbing and electrical systems or improvements thereto. Such systems and improvements shall become fixtures and remain with the property. 
c.  Provision of financial assistance by way of a loan for start-up operating costs and working capital. Start-up operating costs and working capital shall be limited to $10,000.00. The applicant shall provide all documentary information regarding the ownership of collateral and the market value of the collateral to be used as collateral in connection with the loan for start-up operating costs and working capital. The city shall be authorized to require an appraisal of such proposed collateral at the expense of the applicant, and the city shall be authorized to reject such loan application should such appraisal, if conducted, show that the proposed collateral is of insufficient value, as determined in the sole discretion of the city council, to properly collateralize the proposed loan. 
(7)  Length of loan. No loan may be amortized or repaid over more than ten years. 
(8)  Availability of loans. Loans shall only be made as funds are available to the city council from the economic development loan fund for such loans. 
(9)  Priority. 
a.  The priority for loan funds is the financing of projects that show job creation or job retention, especially jobs which employ low-income and moderate-income persons. In addition, for economic redevelopment activities, a commitment must be made by the recipient of the loan that 51 percent of the jobs created or retained by the economic development activities financed by the loan shall be reserved for low-income and moderate-income persons. 
b.  An equal priority for loan funds is the financing of projects that will benefit low-income and moderate-income persons. Such benefits shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the financing of a project to construct or renovate a structure to be used for job training for low-income and moderate-income persons. Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be sufficient if the recipient of the loan makes a written commitment to the city, where such written commitment is not prohibited by law, that of the persons benefited by the project, at least 51 percent of them will be low-income and moderate-income persons. 
c.  For the purposes of this section, the terms "low-income persons" and "moderate-income persons" shall be defined the same as they are periodically defined by the United States Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
(10)  Selection of projects. The loan review committee shall act as agent for the city in determining the selection of projects to be financed. The city council shall have final approval of all such loans and all agreements made in connection therewith. 
(11)  Responsibility and authority over final selection. None of the policies stated herein shall be construed to restrict the city council from having full responsibility and authority over the final project selection to be financed by the downtown development authority revolving loan fund. 
(12)  Repayment. Each loan made shall provide for the repayment of all principal and interest according to the amortization schedule approved by the city council, as well as for the payment of collection costs, attorney's fees, court costs and penalties for late payment in such amounts as may be agreed upon by the parties. 
(13)  Nonrefundable handling fee. Each completed loan application that is submitted for consideration must be accompanied by a nonrefundable handling fee in the amount established by ordinance that will cover the cost of credit checks, copies, postage, and other such costs that are incurred during the application process. 
(Code 1986, § 10-6; Ord. No. O-89-04-10, 4-24-1989; Ord. No. O-89-07-19, 7-24-1989; Ord. No. O-93-02-05, 2-22-1993; Ord. No. O-99-06-25, 6-24-1999; Ord. No. O-02-03-12, 3-21-2002; Ord. No. O-02-09-25, 9-19-2002; Ord. No. O-03-09-27, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 2-145. - Establishment of economic development revolving loan fund. 
(a)  There is hereby established an economic development revolving loan fund for the city. The purpose of this fund is to assist in the creation and the retention of jobs, primarily for low-income and moderate-income persons, employed or to be employed by existing or start up businesses located in the city where involvement by the city through financial assistance to the existing or start up business is deemed necessary for the project's viability. 
(b)  The loan fund shall be funded with the proceeds of federal grants from the Department of Housing and Urban Development of the United States, community development block grants from the state, program or miscellaneous income, and such other funds as may be made available by the city for such loan fund. 
(c)  The loan fund shall provide financial assistance for eligible activities, which shall include the following: 
(1)  Provision of assistance to public or private nonprofit entities in order to finance activities that will result in the direct creation or employment for low-income or moderate-income persons. 
(2)  Provision of assistance to public or private nonprofit entities in order to finance activities that will benefit low-income and moderate-income persons. Such benefits shall include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, the financing of a project to construct or renovate a structure to be used for job training for low-income and moderate-income persons. 
(3)  Such assistance may not be in the form of outright grants, although it may consist of loans, interest subsidies, guarantees, and the financing of such activities as the: 
a.  Acquisition of real property; or 
b.  Acquisition, construction, reconstruction, rehabilitation, or installation of buildings, except for buildings for the general conduct of government, such as: 
1.  Public facilities, site improvements, and utilities; and 
2.  Commercial, educational, or industrial buildings or structures or other commercial, educational, or industrial real property improvements. 
(4)  Provision of assistance to private, for-profit entities, when the assistance is necessary or appropriate to carry out an economic development project. Such assistance may not be in the form of outright grants, although it may also consist of loans, interest subsidies, guarantees, or technical assistance, or a combination thereof. In addition, financial assistance to private, for-profit entities shall be contingent upon firm commitments of financial participation from other sources such as private financial institutions, or the private entities themselves; and must create or retain permanent jobs. 
(d)  Passive income or real estate companies, lending and investment institutions, unregulated media such as newspapers and magazines, speculative ventures and charitable organizations shall not be eligible to receive loan funds. 
(e)  Regulations regarding the terms and conditions of such loans from the revolving loan fund, the selection process for such loans, nonrefundable handling fees, repayment terms, interest rate terms, maximum loan amounts, and other such requirements shall be established by the city council pursuant to a resolution approved by the city council for that purpose. 
(f)  All loans from the revolving loan fund shall be approved by the city council, and no proposed loan shall be presented to the city council for such approval unless such proposal has been reviewed and approved by the staff of the city department of community and economic development under procedures authorized in the resolution establishing the policies, terms, and conditions pursuant to which such loans may be granted. 
(Code 1986, § 10-7; Ord. No. O-93-12-41, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-08, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-94-02-09, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-99-06-26, 6-24-1999; Ord. No. O-02-09-25, 9-19-2002; Ord. No. O-03-09-27, 9-18-2003) 
Secs. 2-146-2-173. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ANNUAL BUDGET[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2015-12, adopted July 23, 2015, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 2-174-2-180, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 10-50-10-56; and Ord. No. O-92-11-107, adopted Oct 26, 1992. 
State Law reference- Budgets, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-174. - Budgets. 
    The city council shall review and adopt an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program budget, and a capital budget in such form or forms as the city council may from time to time require. such budgets shall be adopted by ordinance, and any amendments thereto shall be adopted by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-175. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall be from January 1 to December 31 of each year. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-176. - Preparation of proposed budget. 
    On or before a date fixed by the city council, but not later than 45 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed budget for the ensuing fiscal year, which budget shall include both an operating budget and a capital budget. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as he or she may deem pertinent. The proposed budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-177. - City council action on budget. 
(a)  The city council may amend the budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of the City Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year and for all capital improvements required for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves and revenues. 
(b)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt a final budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the last day of the current fiscal year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly, until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to the City Charter. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotments thereof to which it is chargeable. The City Council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in the City Charter, or where the funds required for such improvement are otherwise provided for in accord with the City Charter or applicable state laws. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-178. - Reserved. 
Sec. 2-179. - Required hearings. 
    The city council shall conduct such hearings prior to the adoption of the budget as it may deem appropriate; provided, however, that the hearings required by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5 and O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6, and notice of such hearings as provided in such statutes, shall be the minimum requirements for hearings and notice thereof in connection with the adoption of such budget. Unless otherwise provided by law, nothing herein shall be construed to require the city council to provide a special public notice, other than that required of all meetings under O.C.G.A. Title 50, Chapter 14 (O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1 et seq.), with respect to any budget amendments which are considered or to be considered by the city council during any fiscal year. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-180. - Tax levies. 
    The city council shall annually levy by ordinance such taxes as are necessary to fund the budget. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other budgeted revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-181. - Changes in appropriations. 
    The city manager may submit amendments to the budget of the city council at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by his or her recommendations. The city council by ordinance may make changes or amendments in the appropriations contained in the current budget at any regular meeting or special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. Any such amendments to the budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-182. - Independent annual audit. 
    There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accounted selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit or any funds by the state of federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of the City Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-183. - Budget officer; appointment. 
    The city manager of the city shall be, and is hereby, appointed budget officer of the city as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-12, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 2-184-2-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PURCHASING 

Sec. 2-199. - Agent authorized. 
    The city manager of the city shall be designated as the purchasing agent for the city and, within the guidelines of this article, shall prepare and promulgate administrative regulations to effect the purchasing policies of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 10-1; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-200. - Policy. 
    With regard to purchasing supplies, goods, services and equipment to be utilized or undertaken by or on behalf of the city, it shall be the policy of the city: 
(1)  To secure the best reasonable price for all supplies, goods, services and equipment consistent with the fiduciary role of the city; 
(2)  To secure competitive bids whenever such competitive bidding would be in the best interest of the city or whenever it is anticipated that the goods and service to be purchased will exceed $10,000.00 in costs to the city; however, competitive bidding shall not be required either where the goods and services to be purchased are provided only by a sole source otherwise meeting the other requirements of this section, or where goods and service previously purchased can be serviced, updated, upgraded, or repaired only by a sole source otherwise meeting the requirements of this section; 
(3)  To purchase from vendors located within the city, whenever the price is the lowest reasonable price, or whenever the price differential is no more than five percent of the total or $300.00, whichever is less; provided, however, in the event that there are no vendors located within the city which meet such price differential, then to purchase from vendors located within the county whenever the price is the lowest reasonable price or whenever the price differential is no more than five percent of the total or $300.00, whichever is less; 
(4)  To use the purchasing division of the department of administrative services of the state whenever it would be in the best interest of the city to do so; 
(5)  To award a contract for supplies, goods, services or equipment to the lowest responsible bidder whose bid is consistent with the quality, specifications and requirements of the city with respect to the particular supplies, goods, services or equipment bid upon. 
(Code 1986, § 10-2; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988; Ord. No. O-00-04-21, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-04-12-32, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 2-201. - Purchase orders resulting from competitive bids. 
    In the event that competitive bidding is required, whether by the city council or by the terms of this article, such bids shall be advertised for and obtained as provided by law or by city ordinance. Acceptance of a particular bid shall be by the execution of a purchase order in accord with the provisions of this article. In the event that a written contract in addition to such purchase order is required, such written contract shall be approved by the city council, as otherwise provided. 
(Code 1986, § 10-3; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-202. - Authorized purchases. 
    All purchases of supplies, goods, services and equipment by the city shall be accomplished with official purchase orders in the following manner: 
(1)  Regardless of whether or not a purchase of supplies, goods, services or equipment has been previously approved by its inclusion in the city budget for the relevant fiscal year, all purchase orders for such supplies, goods, services and equipment, which authorize a purchase in excess of $10,000.00, shall be approved by the city council at a regular or called meeting thereof. No such purchase order or contract executed in connection therewith shall be binding upon the city or enforceable against the city, unless and until the same is approved by the council as above provided. 
(2)  Except as otherwise provided herein, with respect to all purchase orders for the purchase of supplies, goods, services and equipment where such purchase order totals up to $10,000.00, the city manager shall be authorized to approve such purchase orders and the city shall be bound thereby. 
(3)  At his discretion, the city manager shall have the authority to delegate to the department heads of the city the authority to issue purchase orders in amounts of up to $1,000.00; provided, however, that such authority may be revoked at any time by the city council or by direction of the city council. 
(4)  Neither the city manager nor any department head may approve a purchase order for a purchase or a service which was not provided for in the city budget for the relevant fiscal year, unless such budget is amended by appropriate action of the city council to provide therefor; nor by such persons approve a purchase order which shall exceed in whole or in part the amount of funds then available in the city budget for the relevant fiscal year for the purchase or service which is the subject of such purchase order. 
(5)  The city manager shall be authorized, after consultation with and approval by the mayor, to approve purchases in an emergency situation without regard to the other requirements contained in this article, where the immediate procurement of the purchases or services is essential to prevent delays in work undertaken by or on behalf of the city which may vitally affect the life, health or convenience of the city or its citizens. 
(Code 1986, § 10-4; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-203. - Limitation of city's liability. 
    The city shall not be liable for any purchase made, work done or service rendered for which a purchase order has not been first issued and signed by the purchasing agent or designee as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 10-4.1; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-204. - Cooperative purchasing plans. 
    The city or the city purchasing agent, if such purchase is otherwise authorized pursuant to this article, shall have the authority to join with other units of government in cooperative purchasing plans when the best interests of the city would be served thereby. 
(Code 1986, § 10-4.2; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-205. - Prohibition of interest. 
    Any purchase, purchase order or contract within the purview of this article in which any officer or employee of the city if financially interested, either directly or indirectly, shall be void, except that, before the execution of a purchase order or contract, the city council shall have the authority to waive compliance with this section when it finds that such action is in the best interest of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 10-4.3; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-206. - Authority of city council. 
(a)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed so as to limit the authority of the mayor and city council with respect to the approval of purchases by the city or the approval of proposed contacts by such body. 
(b)  Nothing herein shall be construed so as to alter, amend, modify or delete any requirement that all written contracts entered into by the city must be approved by the city council and must be executed by the mayor and attested to by the city clerk in order for the city to be bound thereby. 
(Code 1986, § 10-4.4; Ord. No. O-88-07-25, 7-25-1988) 
Sec. 2-207. - Purchases of landscaping materials, supplies, and services required by natural disaster. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of this article, in the event that a natural disaster occurs within the City of Americus and is so declared by the governing body of the city, the city shall be authorized, upon approval by the governing body of the city, to purchase landscaping trees, shrubs, bushes, plants, landscaping materials, landscaping services, and similar items, materials, or services (hereinafter referred to as "landscaping renovations") for planting, installation, and use upon publicly owned property damaged by such natural disaster without the necessity for competitive bidding for such landscaping renovation, unless competitive bidding is required in connection with such purchases by federal or state law, under the following circumstances: 
(1)  Any group of local citizens interested in the landscaping needs of the city, particularly as such needs relate to landscaping damages occurring to publicly owned property of the city damaged by a natural disaster, which takes steps to establish and constitute themselves as an Americus Re-Greening Committee, consisting of either local citizens, members of the governing body, or a combination thereof, may be recognized by the city as a private citizens' committee, but such committee shall be deemed to be solely a private committee and not a committee appointed by the governing body of the city, and neither shall such committee be deemed to be an agency or agent of the city; 
(2)  The existence of such committee shall be reported in writing to the city manager of the city upon the establishment thereof, and the city manager shall be authorized to provide such assistance, including technical assistance to the committee, as the city manager may deem appropriate once the committee is recognized by the city; 
(3)  Such committee shall be authorized to investigate, review and assess the damages and determine the required landscaping needs and landscaping renovations, including determining the quantity and type of landscaping trees, shrubs, bushes, plants, landscaping materials, landscaping services, and similar items, materials and services that are necessary in order to repair the damage to the landscaping caused by or resulting from the natural disaster with respect to such publicly owned property within the city; 
(4)  After such investigation, review and assessment, if the committee desires to provide its findings and recommendations to the city, the committee shall review the requirements of the landscaping renovations that the committee has determined to be necessary with any local and nonlocal vendors that the committee determines have or may have the capability and qualifications to provide such landscaping renovations as the committee may determine appropriate, in order that the committee may determine the best available price, the best material and service availability, and the vendor or vendors which can best meet the requirements found by the committee to be necessary in order to undertake and complete the landscaping renovations; 
(5)  After such determination, if the committee desires to provide its findings and recommendations to the city, the committee may make written recommendations to the governing body of the city regarding: 
a.  The required landscaping renovations; 
b.  The cost thereof; 
c.  The vendor or vendors that the committee has determined can best meet the requirements found by the committee to be necessary in order to undertake and complete the landscaping renovations; and 
d.  Any other matters that the committee may deem appropriate. 
(6)  The governing body shall be authorized to consider such recommendations, and may approve, disapprove, or modify and approve, such recommendations, and if the recommendations are approved or approved with modifications by the governing body, and if the landscaping renovations and purchases are to be made utilizing funds donated or granted to the city by other public agencies, public foundations, private entities, private foundations, or private individuals, the committee may act as agent for the city in procuring such landscaping renovations and purchases which are approved by the governing body, and the governing body shall be authorized to approve and authorize the expenditure of such donated or grant funds for such landscaping renovations and purchases without the necessity of utilizing a competitive bidding process. 
(Ord. No. O-07-09-33, § 10-2.1, 9-20-2007; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 2-208-2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - IDENTITY THEFT PREVENTION PROGRAM 

Sec. 2-301. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "identity theft prevention program". 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-302. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to comply with 16 CFR § 681.2, in order to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft by identifying and detecting identity theft "red flags" and by responding to such "red flags" in a manner that will prevent identity theft. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-303. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this article, the following definitions apply: 
    City means the City of Americus. 
    Covered account means: (i) an account that the city offers or maintains, primarily for personal, family or household purposes, that involves or is designed to permit multiple payments or transactions, such as a mortgage loan account, utility account; and (ii) any other account that the City of Americus offers or maintains for which there is a reasonably foreseeable risk to customers or to the safety and soundness of the City of Americus from identity theft, including, but not limited to, financial, operational, compliance, reputation or litigation risks. 
    Credit means the right granted by the City of Americus to a debtor to defer payment of debt or to incur debts and defer its payment or to purchase property or services and defer payment therefor. 
    Creditor means the City of Americus when it regularly extends, renews or continues credit; any person who regularly arranges for the extension, renewal or continuation of credit; or any assignee of an original creditor who participates in the decision to extend, renew or continue credit. 
    Customer means a person that has a covered account with the city. 
    Identity theft means a fraud committed or attempted, using identifying information of another person without authority. 
    Person means a natural person, a corporation, government or governmental subdivision or agency, trust, estate, partnership, cooperative or association. 
    Personal identifying information means a person's credit card account information, debit card information bank account information and driver's license information and for a natural person includes their Social Security Number, mother's birth name and date of birth. 
    Red flag means a pattern, practice or specific activity that indicates the possible existence of identity theft. 
    Service provider means a person that provides a service directly to the city. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-304. - Findings. 
(a)  The city is a creditor pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.2, due to its provision or maintenance of covered accounts for which payment is made in arrears. 
(b)  Covered accounts offered to customers for the provision of city services include, utility services and community development loans. 
(c)  The processes of opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account, and making payments on such accounts, have been identified as potential processes in which identity theft could occur. 
(d)  The city limits access to personal identifying information to those employees responsible for or otherwise involved in opening or restoring covered accounts or accepting payment for use of covered accounts. Information provided to such employees is entered directly into the city's computer system and a hard copy is filed in a secured location. 
(e)  The city determines that there is a low risk of identity theft occurring in the following ways (if any): 
(1)  Use by an applicant of another person's personal identifying information to establish a new covered account; 
(2)  Use of a previous customer's personal identifying information by another person in an effort to have service restored in the previous customer's name; 
(3)  Use of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment by a customer to pay such customer's covered account or accounts; 
(4)  Use by a customer desiring to restore such customer's covered account of another person's credit card, bank account, or other method of payment. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-305. - Process of establishing a covered account. 
(a)  As a precondition to opening a covered account with the city, each applicant shall provide the city with personal identifying information of the customer for utility accounts, a picture identification, Social Security Number, and lease document if currently renting. For loans, Social Security Number, consumer credit check, and financial statements/tax returns. Applicant shall also provide any information necessary for the department providing the service for which the covered account is created to access the applicant's consumer credit report. Such information shall be entered directly into the city's computer system and a hard copy filed in a secure storage area. 
(b)  Each account shall be assigned an account number. The city may utilize computer software to randomly generate the account number. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-306. - Access to covered account information. 
(a)  Access to customer accounts shall be protected and shall be limited to authorized city personnel. 
(b)  Such protection shall be established through the security module of the accounting software. Modifications to security shall be performed by only authorized personnel. Security access shall be limited to the finance director and the information system administrator. 
(c)  Any unauthorized access to or other breach of customer accounts is to be reported immediately to the finance director and the system security changed immediately. 
(d)  Personal identifying information included in customer accounts is considered confidential and any request or demand for such information shall be immediately forwarded to the city manager and the city attorney. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-307. - Credit card payments. 
(a)  In the event that credit card payments that are made over the internet are processed through a third-party service provider, such third-party service provider shall certify that it has an adequate identity theft prevention program in place that is applicable to such payments. 
(b)  All credit card payments made over the telephone or the city's website shall be entered directly into the customer's account information in the computer data base. 
(c)  Account statements and receipts for covered accounts shall include only the last four digits of the credit or debit card or the bank account used for payment of the covered account. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-308. - Sources and types of red flags. 
    All employees responsible for or involved in the process of opening a covered account, restoring a covered account or accepting payment for a covered account shall check for "red flags" as indicators of possible identity theft and such "red flags" shall include: 
(1)  Alerts from consumer reporting agencies, fraud detection agencies or service providers. Examples of alerts include, but are not limited to: 
a.  A fraud or active duty alert that is included with a consumer report; 
b.  A notice of credit freeze in response to a request for a consumer report; 
c.  A notice of address discrepancy provided by a consumer reporting agency; 
d.  Indications of a pattern of activity in a consumer report that is inconsistent with the history and usual pattern of activity of an applicant or customer, such as: 
1.  A recent and significant increase in the volume of inquiries; 
2.  An unusual number of recently established credit relationships; 
3.  A material change in the use of credit, especially with respect to recently established credit relationships; or 
4.  An account that was closed for cause or identified for abuse of account privileges by a financial institution or creditor. 
(2)  Suspicious documents. Examples of suspicious documents include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Documents provided for identification that appear to be altered or forged; 
b.  Identification on which the photograph or physical description is inconsistent with the appearance of the applicant or customer; 
c.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with information provided by the applicant or customer; 
d.  Identification on which the information is inconsistent with readily accessible information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor, such as a signature card or a recent check; or 
e.  An application that appears to have been altered or forged, or appears to have been destroyed and reassembled. 
(3)  Suspicious personal identification, such as suspicious address change. Examples of suspicious identifying information include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Personal identifying information that is inconsistent with external information sources used by the financial institution or creditor. For example: 
1.  The address does not match any address in the consumer report; or 
2.  The Social Security Number (SSN) has not been issued, or is listed on the Social Security Administration's Death Master File. 
b.  Personal identifying information provided by the customer is not consistent with other personal identifying information provided by the customer, such as a lack of correlation between the SSN range and date of birth. 
c.  Personal identifying information or a phone number or address, is associated with known fraudulent applications or activities as indicated by internal or third-party sources used by the financial institution or creditor. 
d.  Other information provided, such as fictitious mailing address, mail drop addresses, jail addresses, invalid phone numbers, pager numbers or answering services, is associated with fraudulent activity. 
e.  The SSN provided is the same as that submitted by other applicants or customers. 
f.  The address or telephone number provided is the same as or similar to the account number or telephone number submitted by an unusually large number of applicants or customers. 
g.  The applicant or customer fails to provide all required personal identifying information on an application or in response to notification that the application is incomplete. 
h.  Personal identifying information is not consistent with personal identifying information that is on file with the financial institution or creditor. 
i.  The applicant or customer cannot provide authenticating information beyond that which generally would be available from a wallet or consumer report. 
(4)  Unusual use of or suspicious activity relating to a covered account. Examples of suspicious activity include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Shortly following the notice of a change of address for an account, city receives a request for the addition of authorized users on the account. 
b.  A new revolving credit account is used in a manner commonly associated with known patterns of fraud patterns. For example, the customer fails to make the first payment or makes an initial payment but no subsequent payments. 
c.  An account is used in a manner that is not consistent with established patterns of activity on the account. For example, where there is: 
1.  Nonpayment when there is no history of late or missed payments; 
2.  A material change in purchasing or spending patterns. 
d.  An account that has been inactive for a long period of time is used. 
e.  Mail sent to the customer is returned repeatedly as undeliverable although transactions continue to be conducted in connection with the customer's account. 
f.  The city is notified that the customer is not receiving paper account statements. 
g.  The city is notified of unauthorized charges or transactions in connection with a customer's account. 
h.  The city is notified by a customer, law enforcement or another person that it has opened a fraudulent account for a person engaged in identity theft. 
(5)  Notice from customers, law enforcement, victims or other reliable sources regarding possible identity theft or "phishing" relating to covered accounts. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-309. - Prevention and mitigation of identity theft. 
(a)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account becomes aware of "red flags" indicating possible identity theft with respect to existing covered accounts, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such "red flag" or combination of "red flags" suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such "red flags" to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile "red flags", the employee shall convey this information to the finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director in his or her discretion determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following actions, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: 
(1)  Contact the customer; 
(2)  Make the following changes to the account if, after contacting the customer, it is apparent that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's covered account: 
a.  Change any account numbers, passwords, security codes, or other security devices that permit access to an account; or 
b.  Close the account. 
(3)  Cease attempts to collect additional charges from the customer and decline to sell the customer's account to a debt collector in the event that the customer's account has been accessed without authorization and such access has caused additional charges to accrue; 
(4)  Notify a debt collector within 48 hours of the discovery of likely or probable identity theft relating to a customer account that has been sold to such debt collector in the event that a customer's account has been sold to a debt collector prior to the discovery of the likelihood or probability of identity theft relating to such account; 
(5)  Notify law enforcement, in the event that someone other than the customer has accessed the customer's account causing additional charges to accrue or accessing personal identifying information; or 
(6)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(b)  In the event that any city employee responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account becomes aware of "red flags" indicating possible identity theft with respect an application for a new account, such employee shall use his or her discretion to determine whether such "red flag" or combination of "red flags" suggests a threat of identity theft. If, in his or her discretion, such employee determines that identity theft or attempted identity theft is likely or probable, such employee shall immediately report such "red flags" to the finance director. If, in his or her discretion, such employee deems that identity theft is unlikely or that reliable information is available to reconcile "red flags", the employee shall convey this information to the finance director, who may in his or her discretion determine that no further action is necessary. If the finance director, in his or her discretion, determines that further action is necessary, a city employee shall perform one or more of the following responses, as determined to be appropriate by the finance director: 
(1)  Request additional identifying information from the applicant; 
(2)  Deny the application for the new account; 
(3)  Notify law enforcement of possible identity theft; or 
(4)  Take other appropriate action to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-310. - Updating the program. 
    The governing body of the city shall annually review and, as deemed necessary by the council, update the identity theft prevention program along with any relevant "red flags", in order to reflect changes in risks to customers or to the safety and soundness of the city and its covered accounts from identity theft. In so doing, the governing body shall consider the following factors in exercising its discretion in amending the program: 
(1)  The city's experiences with identity theft; 
(2)  Updates in methods of identity theft; 
(3)  Updates in customary methods used to detect, prevent and mitigate identity theft; 
(4)  Updates in the types of accounts that the city offers or maintains; and 
(5)  Updates in service provider arrangements. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-311. - Program administration. 
    The finance director is responsible for oversight of the program and for program implementation. The city manager of the city ("CAO") is responsible for reviewing reports prepared by staff regarding compliance with "red flag" requirements and with recommending material changes to the program, as necessary in the opinion of the CAO, to address changing identity theft risks and to identify new or discontinued types of covered accounts. Any recommended material changes to the program shall be submitted to the governing body for consideration. 
(1)  The finance director will report to the CAO at least annually, on compliance with the "red flag" requirements. The report will address material matters related to the program and evaluate issues such as: 
a.  The effectiveness of the policies and procedures of the city in addressing the risk of identity theft in connection with the opening of covered accounts and with respect to existing covered accounts; 
b.  Service provider arrangements; 
c.  Significant incidents involving identity theft and management's response; and 
d.  Recommendations for material changes to the program. 
(2)  The finance director is responsible for providing training to all employees responsible for or involved in opening a new covered account, restoring an existing covered account or accepting payment for a covered account, with respect to the implementation and requirements of the identity theft prevention program. The finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in determining the amount and substance of training necessary. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 2-312. - Outside service providers. 
    In the event that the city engages a service provider to perform an activity in connection with one or more covered accounts the finance director shall exercise his or her discretion in reviewing such arrangements in order to ensure, to the best of his or her ability, that the service provider's activities are conducted in accordance with policies and procedures, agreed upon by contract, that are designed to detect any "red flags" that may arise in the performance of the service provider's activities and take appropriate steps to prevent or mitigate identity theft. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Sec. 2-313. - Treatment of address discrepancies. 
(a)  Pursuant to 16 CFR § 681.1, the purpose of this section is to establish a process by which the city will be able to form a reasonable belief that a consumer report relates to the consumer about whom it has requested a consumer credit report when the city has received a notice of address discrepancy. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: 
(1)  Notice of address discrepancy means a notice sent to a user by a consumer reporting agency pursuant to 15 U.S.C. § 1681(c)(h)(1), that informs the user of a substantial difference between the address for the consumer that the user provided to request the consumer report and the address(es) in the agency's file for the consumer. 
(2)  City means City of Americus. 
(c)  Policy. In the event that the city receives a notice of address discrepancy, the city employee responsible for verifying consumer addresses for the purpose of providing the city service or account sought by the consumer shall perform one or more of the following activities, as determined to be appropriate by such employee: 
(1)  Compare the information in the consumer report or other identifying documentation with: 
a.  Information the city obtains and uses to verify a consumer's identity in accordance with the requirements of the customer information program rules implementing 31 U.S.C. § 5318(l); 
b.  Information the city maintains in its own records, such as applications for service, change of address notices, other customer account records or tax records; or 
c.  Information the city obtains from third-party sources that are deemed reliable by the relevant city employee; or 
(2)  Verify the information in the consumer report with the consumer. 
(d)  Furnishing consumer's address to consumer reporting agency. In the event that the city reasonably confirms that an address provided by a consumer to the city is accurate, the city is required to provide such address to the consumer reporting agency from which the city received a notice of address discrepancy with respect to such consumer. This information is required to be provided to the consumer reporting agency when: 
(1)  The city is able to form a reasonable belief that the consumer report relates to the consumer about whom the city requested the report; 
(2)  The city establishes a continuing relationship with the consumer; and 
(3)  The city regularly and in the ordinary course of business provides information to the consumer reporting agency from which it received the notice of address discrepancy. 
(e)  Such information shall be provided to the consumer reporting agency as part of the information regularly provided by the city to such agency for the reporting period in which the city establishes a relationship with the customer. 
(f)  Methods of confirming consumer addresses. The city employee charged with confirming consumer addresses may, in his or her discretion, confirm the accuracy of an address through one or more of the following methods: 
(1)  Verifying the address with the consumer; 
(2)  Reviewing the city's records to verify the consumer's address; 
(3)  Verifying the address through third-party sources; or 
(4)  Using other reasonable processes. 
(Ord. No. O-09-04-14, 4-23-2009) 
Secs. 2-314-2-340. - Reserved. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2017-4, adopted April 20, 2017, repealed ch. 6, §§ 6-1-6-16, and 6-36-6-52 and enacted a new ch. 6 as set out herein. Former ch. 6 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from The Code of 1962; the Code of 1986; Ord. of 4-22-1985; Ord. of 8-25-1986; Ord. No. O-88-02-08, adopted February 22, 1988; Ord. No. O-89-01-03, adopted January 23, 1989; Ord. No. O-90-12-20, adopted December 26, 1990; Ord. No. O-93-12-40, adopted December 27, 1993; Ord. No. O-95-12-42, adopted December 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-50, adopted December 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-96-06-24, adopted June 20, 1996; Ord. No. O-99-10-39, adopted October 18, 1999; Ord. No. O-01-12-42, adopted December 20, 2001; Ord. No. O-02-03-09, adopted March 21, 2002; Ord. No. O-03-01-04, adopted January 23, 2003; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, adopted January 20, 2005; Ord. No. O-05-11-41, adopted November 17, 2005; Ord. No. O-05-10-37, adopted October 20, 2005; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, adopted January 20, 2005; Ord. No. O-06-10-36, adopted October 20, 2006; Ord. No. O-08-05-12, adopted May 22, 2008; Ord. No. O-08-11-37, adopted November 20, 2008; Ord. No. O-09-06-18, adopted June 18, 2009; Ord. No. O-10-08-24, adopted August 19, 2010; Ord. No. O-10-11-42, adopted November 18, 2010; Ord. No. O-2012-14, adopted May 24, 2012; Ord. No. O-2012-31, adopted December 20, 2012; Ord. No. O-2014-20, adopted October 20, 2014; Ord. No. O-2015-8, adopted March 19, 2015; Ord. No. O-2015-15, adopted July 19, 2015; Ord. No. O-2016-4, adopted July 21, 2016 and Ord. No. O-2017-3, adopted March 23, 2017; Ord. No. O-2017-5, adopted June 22, 2017. 
State Law reference- Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq.; local regulation of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Agent means an individual who does not have an ownership interest in the licensed premise, who meets the requirements of section 6-40 of this chapter, who is employed in a managing capacity and designated by the owner of the licensed premise to be licensee. 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage means and includes alcohol, distilled spirits, malt beverage, hard cider, wine or fortified wine. 
    Amusement park means a place owned and operated permanently and exclusively for the purpose of providing amusement, attraction, and entertainment to the general public through the means of rides, live entertainment and games either on a seasonal or year round basis, which park has at least 25 rides and 50 games or attractions and the area of the amusement park is comprised of at least 80 acres exclusive of parking. 
    Applicant means the person making application for a license under this chapter for the sale of alcoholic beverages and, if applicable, any individual designated by that person to be licensee. 
    Bar shall be an establishment that does not meet the definition of a restaurant, nightclub, lounge, farm winery or hotel, and serves alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises. A licensee of a bar shall obtain and keep in force and affect a food service permit. In being classified as a bar, the sales for alcoholic beverages must be a minimum of 75 percent of gross sales of the business. 
    Bottle house means any place of business open to the public or any private club providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business that allows guest, patrons or members to bring in and to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
    Business area means any street length between intersections where 50 percent or more of the linear feet of that street length is in use for business purposes. 
    Business license manager or supervisor means the individual employed by the City of Americus who handles alcoholic beverage licenses, as such position presently exists, or by whatever name the position may be designated in the future. 
    Church means a permanent building where persons regularly assemble for religious worship and shall be publicly designated as a church. 
    City means the City of Americus. 
    Closed function means an event not open to the general public that must have a written, limited guest list prepared at least 48 hours in advance of the date on which the closed function is to occur, and which occurs on property owned and maintained by the city. No pay-at-the-door guest or drop-ins are to be permitted. Alcoholic beverages may be served without charge and consumed at closed functions, but the offer and sale of alcoholic beverages at such functions is prohibited. 
    College means only such state, county, city, church or other colleges that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common colleges of this state, and shall not include private colleges where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught. 
    Convenience store means a retail establishment whose primary business is the sale of pre-packaged or unprepared food and grocery items and which may also sell fuel products, household items, or tobacco products and other goods commonly associated with the same. 
    Conviction means adjudication of guilt, plea of guilty, plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, but shall not include a discharge under provisions of what is commonly referred to as the State of Georgia First Offender Act, being O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60, or as may be amended from time to time. 
    Craft beer means an alcoholic beverage that is obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing six percent or more alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
    Distance means the measurement in linear feet from the center of the primary entrance as designated by the fire marshal for the proposed premises of a licensee in a direct line to the closest point of the applicable structure at issue under sections 6-42 and 6-43 of this chapter. A radius shall be measured from the center of any door of customer entry of the proposed premises of any licensee. Should the proposed premises contain two or more customer entry doors, the distance shall be the shortest measurement in linear feet from the center of any door of customer entry as determined by city officials to the structure at issue. Applicant must provide a stamped survey, performed by a State Licensed Professional Surveyor, indicating the radius locations. 
    Drink means any spirituous liquor not in its original package served for consumption on the premises, which may or may not be diluted by any other liquid. 
    Family means any person related to the holder of an alcoholic beverage license within the first degree of consanguinity or affinity as determined according to the laws of descent and distribution of the State of Georgia. 
    Farm winery means a domestic manufacturer of wine in quantities of less than 100,000 gallons of wine per calendar year, that is licensed by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-6-21.1, or as may be amended from time to time. Provided a license is issued as required by this chapter, a farm winery is authorized to sell wine by the package, by the drink and operate a wine tasting facility on the premises of the farm winery without additional license requirements, except as is required in the city zoning ordinance. 
    Food caterer means any person whose primary business is the preparation of food for consumption off the premises. 
    Fortified wine means an alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, brandy. The term does not include hard cider. 
    Good cause for discontinuing operations shall mean the licensee discontinued operations for a period of more than three months as a direct result of reasons beyond his or her control such as: an Act of God; civil disobedience of someone other than the licensee; delays caused by a governmental entity; fire; flood; material shortages; a natural disaster; a riot; strikes; and/or war. 
    Good cause for failure to open shall mean the licensee was unable to open the business within the allotted time for reasons beyond his or her control such as delays caused by: an Act of God; a construction delay; civil disobedience of someone other than the licensee; delays caused by a governmental entity; fire; flood; material shortages; a natural disaster; a riot; strikes; and/or war. 
    Grocery store means a retail establishment whose primary function is the sale of packaged or unprepared food and grocery items for consumption off the premises and whose annual gross sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales. 
    Growler means a container capable of being properly sanitized and which has a capacity that does not to exceed 128 fluid ounces. 
    Hard cider means an alcoholic beverage that contains at least one-half of one percent of alcohol by volume which is made by the fermentation of the natural juice of apples or pears. 
    Hotel means a building or other structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where food is actually served and consumed and sleeping accommodations are offered for adequate pay to travelers and guests, whether transient, permanent or residential, in which 50 or more rooms are used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and having one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen and a seating capacity of at least 40 people, where meals are regularly served to such guests, such sleeping accommodations and dining rooms being conducted in the same building or in separate buildings or structures used in connection therewith that are on the same premises and are a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out in this definition for hotels shall be classified in the same category as hotels. Hotels shall have the privilege of granting franchises for the operation of a bar, lounge, restaurant or nightclub on their premises; and the holder of such franchise shall be included in the definition of hotel. 
    Indoor entertainment hall means a publicly or privately owned licensed commercial establishment that satisfies all of the following requirements: (i) provides, professional, live musical entertainment or concerts, performed on-site indoors, at least three nights a week on average over the course of a calendar year; (ii) regularly serves prepared food, with a full service kitchen, consisting of a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed, and refrigerator, all of which must be approved by the health and fire departments; (iii) is prepared to serve food every hour it is open; (iv) derives at least 25 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods, admission charges, ticket sales, sale of merchandise, vending sales, attendance fees, or other recreational, promotional, or operational activities; (v) does not provide any sexually related adult entertainment at any time; (vi) has at least 40,000 square feet of enclosed heated space; (vii) has an occupant capacity of at least 3,500; (viii) is located on a major thoroughfare; (ix) does not provide the sale of alcohol on Sundays, unless such establishment qualifies for Sunday sales under state law and the provisions of this chapter of the Americus Code of Ordinances; and, (x) does not allow the admission of any natural person who is under the age of 21 years of age during hours when alcohol is served, except in accordance with the provisions of section 6-90 of this chapter. Indoor entertainment halls shall be allowed to sell alcoholic beverages through concession sales. 
    License means the authorization by the mayor and city council to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages either by the package or consumption on the premises. 
    License review board means the board created by the governing body of the City of Americus. 
(1)  There is hereby established a license review board. 
(2)  The license review board established by this section shall have the following duties: 
a.  To hear due cause hearings as provided in chapter 6 of this Code. 
b.  To consider and act upon any matters specifically delegated to the license review board by any other city ordinance or resolution or action of the city council. 
(3)  Applicants or licensee shall be given notice of the date, time and place when the license review board will consider the respective matter. 
(4)  The license review board, other than as expressly provided in chapter 6, shall have no authority or jurisdiction to hear, consider or render decisions of any kind with respect to the suspension, revocation, probation or other disciplinary action against a license or licensee. 
(5)  Any decision or recommendation of the license review board may be appealed to the city council pursuant to section 6-63. Any decision or recommendation of the license review board not appealed to the mayor and council must be approved by the city council or set down for a second due cause hearing before the city council. 
(6)  The decision of the city council on an appeal under this article shall be final unless appeal is made to the superior court of the county. Any aggrieved party may appeal a decision of the city council by filing a petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court within 30 days of the decision of the city council. 
(7)  The license review board shall have no jurisdiction or authority to hear any appeal from or to reverse, modify or set aside any decision of the city council. 
(8)  The license review board members shall be appointed by and serve at the pleasure of the mayor and city council and shall be composed of five members. Three members of the license review board will serve two-year terms and two members will serve one-year terms. 
(9)  If there is a vacancy on the license review board by virtue of a member resigning, or for any other reason, then the mayor shall appoint a replacement for the vacant position. The replacement shall serve temporarily until the city council ratifies such appointment, and in such case, the replacement for that position shall become permanent. If the council fails to ratify such replacement, then the mayor shall appoint a different replacement until a new member for that position is appointed and ratified as provided herein. 
(10)  By majority vote, the city council may terminate any term of a license review board member prior to the expiration of such term. Terms of service by any board member shall terminate at the end of their respective terms. Any member of the license review board may be reappointed by the city council subject to the consecutive term rule below. There shall be a three consecutive term limit on the number of times such terms can be renewed. After three terms, the member is required to sit out one term prior to being reconsidered for a subsequent appointment. 
(11)  The license review board shall meet at such times as necessary, to be determined by such board, and shall render decisions in public on the date of the consideration by the board. The decision shall then be memorialized in writing and delivered to the affected parties after such decision is announced in public. 
(12)  The license review board shall select one of its members to serve as chair and one of its members to serve as secretary, to serve at the pleasure of the license review board. Minutes and records of all proceedings shall be kept and maintained in the office of the city clerk. 
(13)  Each member of the license review board shall either be a resident of the city or have an ownership interest as principal shareholder, general partner or sole proprietor in at least one business that is located in the city. No employee or elected official of the city shall be appointed to the board. The mayor may appoint and the city council may ratify the appointment of any person who is an alcoholic beverage license holder, provided that only three such license holders, if any, serve on the board. 
    Licensee means a person holding any class of license issued under the terms of this chapter. 
    Lounge means a separate room in which alcoholic beverages are sold, connected with a part of and adjacent to a restaurant or located in a hotel as defined in this section with all booths, stools and tables being unobstructed and open to view. All lounges shall be air conditioned and have a seating capacity of at least 50 people. A lounge, as defined in this section, which is operated on a different floor in the premises, or in a separate building, or is not connected to or adjacent to a restaurant, shall be considered a separate establishment and shall pay an additional license fee therefor. 
    Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager, beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "beer" and "malt beverage" are interchangeable throughout this chapter. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Managing capacity means the president or chief executive officer of a corporation, or the managing member of a limited liability company, or the general partner of a limited partnership, or a person who has responsibility for management of the operations, including sale of alcoholic beverages, or who is authorized to act on behalf of the licensee in any capacity at the location to be licensed or supervision of management of the operation, including sale of alcoholic beverages, at the location to be licensed, whether or not such person is an employee of the licensee. 
    Manufacturer means any maker, producer, or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
    Minor means any natural person less than 18 years of age. 
    Nightclub means an establishment having a seating capacity of at least 100 people with all booths and tables being unobstructed and open to view, deriving its primary income from the sales of alcoholic beverages, and providing to its patrons a band and/or other professional live entertainment performed onsite, including, but not limited to, music, comedy, readings, dancing or acting. All nightclubs shall be equipped with air conditioning and shall maintain an adequate kitchen with a sufficient number of servers and employees for cooking, preparing and serving food and meals for their patrons, provided that nightclubs located in hotels having dining room and kitchen facilities may be excluded from the requirement of maintaining a kitchen in connection with such nightclub. The principal business of such nightclubs shall be entertainment, and the serving of food and spirituous liquors shall be incidental thereto. 
    Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
    Package store means a business establishment whose primary business activity is the retail sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
    Permit holder means that person authorized with a server permit and designated by the licensee to sell alcoholic beverages at the licensed premise. There will be an annual fee for this permit that will be listed in the city fee schedule also approved each year. 
    Person means any individual, sole proprietor, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business trust, receiver, fiduciary, limited liability company, limited partnership, limited liability partnership, general partnership or other group or combination acting as a unit, whether public, private or quasi-public. In the case of a general partnership, it includes all partners. In the case of a limited partnership, it includes the general partner. In the case of a corporation, it includes all principal shareholders. In the case of a limited liability company, it includes all members who are deemed to be principal shareholders under the definition of that term contained in this section. 
    Pouring license means a license that authorizes on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
    Principal shareholder means a person who owns any shares of a corporation with less than 35 shareholders; or, if the corporation has more than 35 shareholders, a person who owns more than five percent of the shares of the corporation, except that a person who owns shares which are publicly traded shall not be deemed to be a principal shareholder or to have a beneficial interest in the corporation based solely on the fact of stock ownership. Principal shareholder shall also include a person who owns any membership interests in a limited liability company with less than 35 members; or, if the limited liability company has more than 35 members, a person who owns more than five percent of the outstanding membership interests in the limited liability company. 
    Private club means a non-profit association organized and existing under the laws of the state, actively in operation within the city, which has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license to be issued under this chapter; and which complies with all requirements set forth in this section: it has at least 75 members who regularly pay monthly, quarterly, or semiannual dues; and, it is organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation and other non-profit purposes; and, no part of its net earnings inure to the benefit of any shareholders or members; and, it owns, hires or leases a building or space therein for the reasonable use to its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; and, it maintains and uses a sufficient number of servers and employees for cooking, preparing and serving meals for its members and guest; provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid or receives, directly or indirectly, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of spirituous liquors to the club or its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at any annual meetings or by its governing board out of the general revenue of the club. 
    Private party function means an event held where alcoholic beverages are provided. The licensee must submit to and have the private party function approved by the supervisor of the city's business license office provided such function does not threaten the health, safety and welfare of the participants or public. In the event the private party function is not approved by the business license supervisor, the licensee may appeal said decision to the mayor and city council. The mayor and city council shall have authority to approve the private party function provided the function does not threaten the health, safety and welfare of the participants or public. 
    Private residence means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one or more than two families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, an apartment house having facilities for housing more than two families, a boardinghouse or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers, any residence which has been unoccupied for a period of six consecutive months immediately prior to the filing of any application for license, or any residence that shall be a nonconforming use in a commercial zone. 
    Properly sanitized means the container was: sanitized per the instructions of Star San sanitizer or any product that is the equivalent of Star San sanitizer; or, placed in an oven at a temperature of 340 degrees or higher for at least 60 minutes; or, washed in an automatic dishwasher for a full wash and heat dry cycle with or without the addition of detergent agents; or, sanitized in conformance with the sanitation requirements for glassware used in restaurants as set forth in the rules or regulations of the Sumter County Health Department. 
    Purchase price means the consideration received for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink valued in money, whether received in cash or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits and property, or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the licensee or his agent to the purchases, without any deduction there from whatsoever. 
    Purchaser means any person who orders and gives present or future consideration for any alcoholic beverages by the drink. 
    Restaurant means any public place kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public as a place where meals are served, and where meals are actually and regularly prepared and served, without sleeping accommodations, such place seating a minimum of 40 or more people, and holding a certificate of approval from the county health department. A restaurant shall maintain a full-service kitchen which consists of, at a minimum, a three-compartment pot sink, a stove or grill permanently installed and a refrigerator. In order to be classified as a restaurant under this chapter, the licensee must derive a minimum of 40 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales, over any 12-month period of time, from the sale of prepared meals or food. In the case of an audit, the relevant time period shall be the 12 months immediately preceding the commencement of the audit. If the restaurant being audited has been in operation as a restaurant for less than 12 months, the audit period shall be the period of time the entity has operated as a restaurant, and the restaurant must derive a minimum of 40 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales for that audit period from the sale of prepared meals or food, if the restaurant previously operated as another type of business, e.g., a bar as that term is defined in this section, total annual gross food and beverage sales for the time period it has been operated as a restaurant shall be the only data relevant to the audit and the data for the period it operate as another type of business shall not be examined during the audit. 
    Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
    Retail sale means selling or offering for sale alcoholic beverages to any member of the public. Such term shall also include, without limitation, the sale to any member of the public of any ticket or license, or the charging of any cover charge or fee, for admission to any event or premises where alcoholic beverages are available without further charge, as well as the sale of any ticket, stamp, token or similar item which may be redeemed or exchanged for alcoholic beverages. 
    Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
    School means only such state, county, city, church or other schools that teach the subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690, or as may be amended from time to time, including any public or private location that teaches the Georgia Pre-Kindergarten Program and shall not include private schools where only specialized subjects such as law, stenography, business, music, art, medicine, dentistry, vocational occupations and other special subjects are taught and shall not include residences where home study programs are located. 
    Spirituous or alcoholic liquors means all beverages containing alcohol, obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume, including fortified wines. 
    Theater shall mean any theater located within the city limits seating more than 500 persons in its customary seating configuration and having the facilities for all of the following: 
(1)  The showing of films and movies; 
(2)  The staging of plays; 
(3)  The presentation of musical concerts and shows; and 
(4)  The presentation of other forms of entertainment where an admission fee is generally charged. 
    Underage person means any person below the age at which alcoholic beverages may be legally purchased in the State of Georgia, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, or as may be amended from time to time. 
    Wine means an alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent of alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or with natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. The term does not include hard cider. 
    Wholesaler means any person engaged in distribution or selling to retailers for the purpose of resale of any alcoholic beverages as defined in this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose of chapter. 
    This chapter has been enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purpose, among others, of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to establish reasonable and ascertainable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages, to protect and preserve schools and churches, to give effect to existing land use and to preserve certain residential areas, with reasonable considerations, among others, to the character of the areas and their peculiar suitability for particular uses, the congestion in the roads and streets, and with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions and sustaining stability of neighborhoods and property values. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-3. - Compliance required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages without having first complied with the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The city shall have the authority to conduct an audit of the books and records of any licensee and/or require regular reporting of the books and records of any licensee to assure licensee's compliance with the provisions of this chapter. In such event, the city shall notify the licensee of the date, time and place of the audit or reporting requirements. In conducting such audit, the city may require the licensee to provide the books and records in electronic form if such books or records are maintained, in the regular course of business by the licensee, in electronic form. 
(c)  Some of the business operations described in this chapter must, to continue operating as that type of business, maintain: 
(1)  In the case of an indoor entertainment hall, 25 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or foods, admission charges, ticket sales, sale of merchandise, vending sales, attendance fees, or other recreational, promotional, or operational activities. 
(2)  In the case of a grocery store, the sales of alcoholic beverages do not exceed five percent of its total gross sales. 
(3)  In the case of a restaurant, the licensee must derive a minimum of 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales, over any 12-month period of time, from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
(d)  In determining whether these entities have complied with these percentages, the city shall be entitled to audit the books and records of the entities. The following shall be applicable to such audits: 
(1)  If the business has operated as that type of entity (e.g., a restaurant) for 12 months or more prior to the date on which the audit is commenced, the auditor shall consider the annual gross food and beverage sales, or the annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the 12 months preceding the date on which the audit is commenced to determine whether the entity has maintained the required percentage set forth in the definition of that entity found in this chapter. 
(2)  If the business has operated as that type of entity for less than 12 months prior to the date on which the audit is commenced, the auditor shall consider the annual gross food and beverage sales, or the annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the time that the business has operated as that type of entity to determine whether the entity has maintained the required percentage set forth in the definition of that entity found in this chapter. 
(3)  If the entity operated as one type of entity, e.g., a bar as defined in this chapter, and changed to another type of entity, e.g., a restaurant as defined in this chapter, the audit shall consider only the annual gross food and beverage sales, or the annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the period it operated after the change of the type of entity to determine whether the entity has maintained the required percentage set forth in the definition of that entity found in this chapter. 
(4)  If the entity has failed to maintain the percentage required by the definition, the entity shall be placed on probation for a period of three months from and after the date the entity is notified of its failure to maintain the required percentage. The notification placing the entity on probation shall be in writing and provide the percentages determined as part of the audit. During that probationary time period, the entity can attempt to attain the percentage required by the definition for that entity. At the end of the probationary period, a second audit will be conducted. The second audit will audit only the annual gross food and beverage sales, or annual gross sales, or total gross sales, as the case may be, during the probationary period and whether the entity attained the percentage required by the definition for that entity during the probationary period. Should the entity fail to attain the required percentage during the second audit, the entity will be informed, in writing, that it can no longer operate as that type of entity, e.g., a restaurant that fails to maintain the percentage required by the definition for that entity will be notified that it can no longer operate as a restaurant and may operate only as a bar. Should the licensee change its entity, for instance from a restaurant to a bar, it shall be the licensee's responsibility to assure that it complies with all the requirements of these ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, any licensing applicable to that entity. 
(5)  The entity may appeal the audit decision generated by a failure to meet the required percentage during the second audit. Any such decision to appeal must be made, in writing, and filed with the license review board no later than ten calendar days from and after the entity's receipt of the decision appealed. If the results of the second audit are mailed by the auditor to the licensee, that decision of the auditor is deemed received by the licensee three days from and after the decision is mailed and an additional copy filed with the city clerk. That notice of appeal must specify, in detail, why the entity believes the audit decisions are flawed. Where a hearing is scheduled by the license review board, the entity shall be provided written notice of such hearing no less than five calendar days prior to the date scheduled for the hearing. If the license review board upholds the auditor's decision, the entity shall have the right to appeal to the city manager. Any such appeal to the city manager must be in writing and filed with the city clerk and the city manager's office no later than ten calendar days from and after date on which the entity receives the decision of the license review board. If the decision of the license review board is mailed, that decision is deemed received by the licensee three days from and after the decision is mailed. The appeal to city manager shall contain the following: a detailed explanation of why the entity believes the audit results and the decision of the license review board is flawed; statistics showing the entity has complied with the percentage contained in the definition for that entity found in this chapter; a copy of the results of the first and second audits; and, a copy of the decision of the license review board. Failure of the entity to submit all of the appeal documents shall be fatal to the appeal. It shall be within the discretion of the city manager whether a hearing will be held on the appeal. If a hearing is scheduled by the city manager of the city, the entity shall be provided written notice of such hearing no less than five calendar days prior to the date scheduled for the hearing. 
(6)  The appeals shall consider only evidence of sales during the audit periods and shall not consider evidence of any sales during the appeal periods. 
(7)  The entity shall be allowed to operate during the time it is appealing the decision of the audit. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-4. - Territorial application of chapter. 
    The terms and provisions of this chapter shall apply only within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-5. - Sale, possession, or consumption. 
    No alcoholic beverages shall be sold, possessed or consumed by any person on or in any public park or public property except as otherwise approved pursuant to section 6-71, 6-72 or 6-73 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Secs. 6-6-6-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 6-31. - License required for manufacture, sale. 
    No alcoholic beverages shall be manufactured or sold at wholesale or retail, in the original package or by the drink, nor shall any bottle house be operated except under a license granted by the mayor and city council. A farm winery is required to obtain a license as provided in this chapter for the manufacture of wine, fortified wine, or hard cider. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Local permit or license for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 6-32. - Separate licenses required for package sales and sales for on-premises consumption. 
(a)  A licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises shall have the right to serve malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, or hard cider or allow the consumption of malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, or hard cider on the premises during the same hours as are permitted under this chapter for the serving of distilled spirits by the drink. 
(b)  Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink that allow the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises and the sale of malt beverages by the drink shall not permit the sale of distilled spirits by the bottle or package. Such licensees shall have the right to sell wine, fortified wine, champagne, or malt beverages to the public by the bottle or package for consumption on the premises without the issuance of a separate retail license therefor. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Governing authority to set forth ascertainable standards pertaining to the granting, refusal, suspension or revocation of alcoholic beverage permits or licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(b)(l). 
Sec. 6-33. - Sunday permits. 
(a)  A separate permit is required for the Sunday sale of any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Licensed establishments that derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food and licensed establishments that derive at least 50 percent of their total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging may apply to the business license division manager for a permit for the purpose of selling alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until Monday 1:00 a.m. No Sunday sales of alcoholic beverages shall be made by such an establishment without first having obtained the permit provided for in this subsection. A separate charge shall be made for issuance of such permit. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-34. - Application-Filing; form; contents; timing. 
(a)  All persons desiring to obtain a license required under this chapter shall make written application to the city at city hall for such privilege upon forms to be prepared and approved by the city. Such applications shall state the name and address of the applicant. If the applicant is other than an individual, the application shall state the owner of the license, the name of the proposed licensee and a d/b/a name of the proposed licensed premise, if applicable. The application shall state the address where the proposed business is to be located; the nature and character of the business to be carried on; if a partnership, the names of the partners; if a corporation, the names of the officers and principal shareholders; and such other information as may be required by the mayor and city council, the business license division manager, or the police department, and shall be sworn to by the applicant or agent thereof. 
(b)  All applications for a license under this chapter shall furnish all data, information and records requested by the city, through any authorized officer, such as the business license manager or chief of police, and failure to furnish such data, information and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. Applicants by filing an application agree to produce for oral interrogation any persons requested by the city through its duly authorized representative, such as the business license manager, chief of police, or city attorney, and considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to the issuance or denial of such license. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic denial, with prejudice, of such application. 
(c)  All applications for license, both original and renewal, must be accompanied by a full and complete statement under oath of information relative to any and all interest in retail liquor stores. This shall include: 
(1)  The names and addresses of all persons interested in the ownership of the business of selling at retail package liquor, together with any interest each person or any member of his immediate family has in any other retail liquor store; 
(2)  The ownership of the land and building where such retail business is operated; 
(3)  The amount of rental paid for such land and building and the manner in which the same is determined and to whom and what intervals it is paid; 
(4)  The names and addresses, by affidavit from the owner, lessor or sub lessor of such land and building, of all persons having any whole, partial, beneficial or other interest in and to the land and building on and in which the retail liquor store is located; and 
(5)  Any other information called for by the business license office or its duly authorized representative, such as the business license division manager, the police department, or city attorney. 
(d)  Each application furnished under this section must be completed in its entirety before being accepted by the city for filing and processing. 
(e)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any new license under this chapter and as a prerequisite to the issuance of a renewed license under this chapter, all applicants and existing licensees shall be required to execute and deliver to the city a verified statement indicating receipt of this Code relating to alcoholic beverages. 
(f)  After staff has determined that an application is complete, the request shall be heard following advertising as set forth herein at the earliest regularly scheduled meeting of mayor and city council, or as soon thereafter as possible. A decision shall be rendered not later than 45 days after the public hearing but the failure to render a decision within such time period shall not result in the automatic issuance of the license for which application has been made. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-35. - Same-Investigation; report. 
(a)  All applications required by this chapter shall be investigated by the police department, including, but not limited to, an investigation into the criteria as outlined in sections 6-34 and 6-45 of this chapter. After such investigation, the police department shall report its recommendation to the business license manager. No further action shall be taken by the city or by the applicant with respect to any application until completion by the police department of its investigation. Once the applicant has submitted all of the required information and provided any additional information requested by the business license manager or the police department, the police department shall make its recommendation. 
(b)  All licensed premises shall be open for inspection by an inspector or member of the city police department, or any other person so designated by the mayor, council, city manager or chief of police. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-36. - Same-Advertisement of intent to engage in business. 
(a)  All applicants for license under this chapter shall give notice of the purpose of making such application by advertisement at least one time per week for two consecutive weeks in the legal organ published in the county in which the legal advertisements of the city are carried, which notice shall contain a particular description of the location of the proposed business and shall give the name of the applicant, and if a partnership, the names of the partners, and if a corporation, the names of the officers, and the date and time the mayor and city council will hear the application. The advertisement referred to in this section shall be of type not smaller than ten-point capital and lower case and shall be at least a one-inch column advertisement. 
(b)  The running of the advertisement required in this section in a newspaper may be concurrent with the time after the application for license is filed, and if the one day's advertisement in two weeks is not made before the filing of the application, the application shall state that the advertisement is being made. 
(c)  The applicant shall cause to be placed upon the location of the proposed business a sign or signs stating the following:"_________ license applied for. A hearing before the mayor and city council of the city shall be held on the ______ day of ______, 20___. All interested persons take notice." The sign or signs shall not be less than 18 inches by 24 inches, and shall face toward all public streets, sidewalks or other public property which adjoins the location so as to be clearly legible to persons using such public areas. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-37. - Same-Public hearing; approval. 
    All applications, with the exception of renewals under section 6-59, for license under this chapter shall be acted upon by the mayor and city council after a public hearing after advertisement as required in this article. No license shall be issued until it has been approved by the mayor and city council. All reasons for denial or approval for license shall be recorded in the minutes of the hearing. Denial of application shall be provided to the applicant in writing providing the reasons for denial and mailed to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-38. - Same-Acceptance and consideration after rejection. 
    When an application for license under this chapter is denied by the city, the city shall not accept or consider an application for a license under this chapter from that applicant or licensee within 12 months of the denial. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-39. - Architectural standards. 
    All applicants for license shall furnish plans and renderings of the new proposed premises with the application. Such premises shall be constructed, renovated or built so as to be equal to and compatible with the surrounding neighborhood or better. The exterior shall be of finished building material such as brick, stone or wood, but not concrete block. The applicant shall comply with all building, health and similar city, county and State codes. The applicant shall obtain and file with his application a certification of zoning certifying the property where the applicant shall operate his business to be zoned C-1, C-2, C-3, I, l-N, A-G, NS, or such other commercial districts as may be approved or adopted from time to time. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-40. - Citizenship, residence and age requirement. 
(a)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a corporation, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the corporation and either the principal shareholder thereof, or an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. 
(b)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a partnership, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the partnership and either the general partner of the partnership, or an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. 
(c)  Where the applicant for a license under this chapter is a sole proprietor, any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor, provided that the sole proprietor works in a full-time managing capacity on the licensed premises. If the sole proprietor does not work in a full-time managing capacity on the licensed premises, then the license shall be applied for by and shall be issued to the sole proprietor and an agent, as agent is defined in this chapter. 
(d)  Each of the persons named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section must be a U.S. citizen, or a legal alien for at least one year prior to making application. 
(e)  Each of the persons named in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of this section must be 21 years of age or older at the time the application for a license is filed. 
(f)  The principal shareholder in the case of a corporate applicant, the general partner in the case of a partnership applicant, the sole proprietor in the case of a sole proprietor applicant or the agent of such applicant shall be a resident of the State of Georgia at the time the application for a license is filed or renewed. 
(g)  The licensee shall notify the city in writing and shall keep such notification current, of the name, address and telephone number for such licensee and the agent of such licensee at such address and telephone number for the purpose of receiving communication and notices required under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-41. - Location of business-districts where permitted. 
(a)  Wholesaler's license. No license shall be issued to a wholesaler of alcoholic beverages except where the wholesale business is to be located in the area of the city which is C-1 or C-2. 
(b)  License for on-premises consumption. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink shall be issued unless the location has been zoned, C-1, C-2, C-3, I, l-N, A-G, NS, under the zoning laws of the city or is in use as a business under specific special use permit; provided, this subsection shall not apply to private clubs. No license shall be issued for a location that operates as a nonconforming use. 
(c)  Package distilled spirits. No license to engage in the retail sale of distilled spirits, in package form, shall be issued to any person for the operation of such business except within the areas zoned, C-1, C-2, C-3, I, l-N, A-G, NS. No license shall be issued for a location that is a nonconforming use. 
(d)  All licenses granted herein shall be further subject to O.C.G.A. 3-3-21, or as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-42. - Same-distance from residence; distance from housing authority. 
(a)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be granted for any location that is a distance of 300 feet or less from a property line of a lot where a private residence is located. However, if the mayor and city council consider evidence that the property values of the residence or other residences will not be affected, that the quiet enjoyment of the premises by the residents thereof shall not be adversely affected and the grant of such license shall not have any other adverse affect on the private residence, then the mayor and city council may waive this provision. This provision shall not apply to private residences located on commercially zoned property or within the bounds of the Central Business Improvement District as it exists now or may change from time to time. No license in effect as of November 1, 2016 shall be revoked before the date of expiration thereof solely by reason of the location of the licensed premises being in violation of this section. This subsection shall not apply to any location for which a license has been issued prior to November 1, 2016, nor to the renewal of such license by the licensee or by any third party. 
(b)  No person shall knowingly and intentionally sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This section shall not apply to any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply to any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
State Law reference- O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-43. - Same-distance from schools, churches, parks, hospitals and public buildings. 
(a)  No license shall be issued under this chapter where the place of business of the applicant is located within a distance of 300 feet of any school ground, college campus, church; provided, however, that at a public hearing by the mayor and city council, the mayor and city council may waive the distance requirement of this section if satisfactory evidence shall be produced that no adverse effect to property values or the use of the facilities for the aforesaid purposes would occur if a license was granted. This section does not apply to any school ground, college campus, and church within the bounds of the Central Business Improvement District as it exists now or may change from time to time. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (a) above notwithstanding, in no event shall a license be issued for: 
(1)  The package sale of any distilled spirits within 300 feet of any church building, school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(2)  The package sale of any distilled spirits, wine, fortified wine, hard cider, or malt beverages within 300 feet of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This subsection shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981. 
(3)  Any sale of any alcoholic beverage that violates any provision of state law. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-44. - Same-additional considerations. 
    The mayor and city council may take into consideration in its discretion the zoning of the surrounding area, the nature of the area, and the impact on traffic as factors in the consideration of a license application under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-45. - Conditions disqualifying application. 
(a)  No application for any license under this chapter shall be granted, retained, renewed or transferred where the application or the evidence shows any of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  Evidence that the applicant, licensee or any individual having an ownership interest in said license, has been convicted within ten years immediately prior to the filing of the application for any felony or crime of moral turpitude. 
(2)  Evidence that the applicant has had revoked within the last 12 months any alcohol-related license or permit issued under the police powers of any county, state, municipality, or other governmental entity. 
(3)  Evidence that the applicant or licensee is family, as family is defined in this chapter, to any distributor or wholesaler of alcoholic beverages or employees thereof. This subsection shall not restrict a farm winery from selling at retail or wholesale. 
(4)  Evidence that the applicant or licensee has failed to answer any question on the alcoholic beverage application accurately or failed to provide accurate information to the mayor and city council, license review board, police department, business license division staff or any city official or city employee. 
(b)  In addition to the standards stated elsewhere in this chapter, the following standards may also apply to the issuance, retention, renewal, transfer or denial of a license for alcoholic beverages either by the package or for consumption on the premises: 
(1)  Evidence that the applicant has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(2)  Evidence that the applicant has insufficient mental capacity to conduct the business for which application is made. 
(3)  Evidence that, despite compliance with the minimum distance requirement, the type and number of schools or number of churches in the vicinity causes underage persons to frequent the area. 
(4)  Evidence that the location and type of structure could create a difficulty in police supervision. 
(5)  Evidence that there are no licenses granted in the area or that the proposed area already is adequately supplied with such licenses. 
(6)  Evidence that a license for the location would be detrimental to the property values in the area. 
(7)  Evidence that the license in that location would be detrimental to traffic conditions or that there is a lack of sufficient parking which would result in parking on the streets or adjoining property. 
(8)  Evidence that the conduct of the business creates a disturbance, congregation of intoxicated persons, congregation of underage persons, or consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises by underage persons, or causes the police to answer complaints or make extra surveillance of the premises. More than three underage persons without supervision of a parent or one authorized by a parent shall be prima facie evidence of a congregation of underage persons. 
(9)  Evidence of unusual police observation, responding to premises, or inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance regulating such business, if the applicant is a previous holder of a license. 
(10)  Evidence that the application is a guise or dummy application for another person who cannot meet the qualifications of this chapter for the issuance of a license. 
(11)  Evidence that the applicant or any corporation or partnership of which the applicant is or was an officer, director, principal shareholder, general partner or managing agent is delinquent in the payment of any property tax or other tax or license fee payable to the city, the county or the state. 
(12)  Evidence that alcoholic beverages have been sold or furnished to an intoxicated person as prohibited under O.C.G.A 3-3-22 or to an underage person as prohibited by O.C.G.A 3-3-23 or O.C.G.A 3-3-23.1. 
(c)  The city manager shall have authority to deny an application for a new license under this chapter upon a showing that any one or more of the conditions in subsection (a) exists. Upon such a denial, the applicant shall have a right to an appeal pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein within ten days of the decision to deny on such basis. Upon the showing that any one or more of the conditions outlined in subsection (b) exists on an existing licensee, the licensee shall be entitled to notice and a hearing pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein prior to any action taken on said license by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Secs. 6-46, 6-47. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-48. - Wholesale licenses prohibited from holding interest in other licenses. 
    No person who has any direct financial interest in a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at wholesale shall hold any other license under the terms of this chapter. This section shall not apply to farm wineries. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-49. - License to be obtained within two weeks of approval; issuance. 
(a)  All licenses must be obtained not later than two weeks from the date of approval of the application by the mayor and city council, and if not so obtained, the license granted by the mayor and city council shall be void. 
(b)  When a license has been approved and the applicant has deposited with the city the required fee, the license shall be issued, subject to subsection (a). 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-50. - Completion of proposed licensed premises. 
    Where a building in which a retailer or bottle house operator intends to operate under the provisions of this chapter is, at the time of the application for such license, not in existence or not yet completed or renovated, a license may be issued for such location, provided the plans for the proposed building show clearly a compliance with the other provisions of this chapter. No sales or consumption shall be allowed in such establishment until it has been completed in accordance with the plans and is in conformity with all of the other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-51. - Time limit for commencement of business; forfeiture for nonuse. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this chapter must within three months after the issuance of such license open for business the establishment referred to in the license. Failure to open the licensed establishment within the three-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and revocation of the unused license and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. The time period in which to commence operations shall not be extended and the license revoked unless the time period to commence operations is extended by: 
(1)  The license review board pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia; or 
(2)  The city manager or his or her designee after the licensee produces written proof in the form of an affidavit on a form approved by the city manager or his or her designee showing good cause for failure to open. 
(b)  Any holder of a license under this chapter who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall upon completion of such three months automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of the failure to operate, be revoked without the necessity of any further action by the city. The license shall not be revoked under this subsection if, prior to the date which is three months from and after the cessation of business, the licensee produces written proof in the form of an affidavit on a form approved by the city manager or his or her designee showing good cause for discontinuing operations. In addition to such proof, the licensee shall provide an action plan concerning the date on which operations will be commenced. If the city manager or his or her designee finds that the licensee has produced the necessary proof showing good cause for discontinuing operations, the licensee shall have until the date set forth in his action plan to commence operations. Should the licensee fail to commence operations on the date set forth in the action plan, the licensee shall automatically forfeit his or her license. Nothing in this subsection shall relieve the licensee of his or her obligations to renew his or her license as set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  No license holder whose license is forfeited or revoked pursuant to this section may apply for a new alcohol license for a period of 12 months from and after the date of such forfeiture or revocation. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-52. - License fees; duration. 
(a)  The annual license fee for each classification of license under this chapter shall be set by the mayor and city council in the business fee schedule, or as maybe amended from time to time. 
(b)  The schedule of fees for each license classification under this chapter shall be on file at the Americus City Hall at the business license office. 
(c)  Any new license issued under this chapter shall be effective from the date of the license through December 31 of that year. Thereafter, the licensee shall be required to renew the license annually in January of each year. In the case of revocation or surrender of license before the expiration date of that license, the holder of the license shall not be entitled to receive any refund whatsoever. 
(d)  Each person manufacturing or selling distilled spirits in the city shall pay a license fee based on the annually adopted fee schedule for the city. 
(e)  On or after July 1 of a calendar year, all initial distilled spirits license and permit fees for that year shall be one-half of the basic fees set forth in subsection (d) of this section. 
(f)  Each person selling malt beverages, wine, fortified wine, and/or hard cider in the city shall pay a license fee based on the annually adopted fee schedule for the city. 
(g)  Any person holding a license granted under any subsection of this section 6-52 is eligible for applying for a license to sell and/or re-fill growlers. The fee for a growler license shall be the sum of $200.00 per calendar or any portion of a calendar year. The application shall be submitted on forms approved by the city manager or his or her designee. To be valid, the growler license must be approved by the mayor and city council. 
(h)  The total for off-premise license fees shall not exceed the statutory maximum prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-11-2(e), as amended. For retail package licenses, a half year is authorized as in subsection (e) of this section. 
(i)  All license fees required under this chapter shall be paid in cash or by certified check or by cashier's check. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-53. - Penalty for late fee payment. 
    Any licensee, person or entity who fails to pay any fee, tax or other payment due to the city of any kind when due shall pay, in addition to such fee, tax or other charge, a one-time separate penalty equal to ten percent of the required fee, tax or other charge received more than 30 days after the due date. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-54. - Payment of fees, number of licenses, renewal; annual sales statement, inspection of records. 
(a)  On an annual basis, the licensee shall submit renewed information and application on forms prescribed by the city no later than November 1 of each year in order to renew the license. The annual license fee under this chapter for those seeking renewal of a license accrues and is due and payable on December 31 of each year. The failure of the licensee to timely submit renewed information and application and/or the failure of the licensee to timely pay the annual license fee shall result in the expiration of the license. 
(b)  Upon expiration of the license, the licensee shall cease the sale of alcoholic beverages until the licensee obtains a valid license under this chapter. If the licensee fails to cease the sale of alcoholic beverages, the licensee shall be subject to the penalty as provided in section 6-53, in addition to other remedies under state or federal law and/or actions taken by the license review board and/or the mayor and city council. 
(c)  A person doing business at more than one place shall take out and pay for a separate license for each place of business. 
(d)  Each licensee shall provide the city with a certified statement prepared by his bookkeeper or accountant of the gross sales of the business for the preceding calendar year. Copies of the state sales tax returns for the same period shall be attached to the statement. Such statement must be properly notarized and certified to be true and correct by the licensee or his agent under penalty of law, and shall accompany the basic license fee payment on or before December 31 of each year. 
(e)  Any holder of or applicant for an alcoholic beverage license must make available for audit any and all records concerning such business upon request of the business license division manager or his/her representative. The books, records, inventory, stock and facilities of any alcoholic beverage license holder or applicant for same shall be open for inspection at any time for agents of the business license office and the police department. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-55. - Supplemental requirements for the sale of spirituous liquors for on-premises consumption. 
    No license for the sale of spirituous liquors by the drink or for the operation of a bottle house shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a bar, restaurant, hotel, or private club, lounge or nightclub as defined in this chapter. No bottle house shall operate unless it shall obtain a pouring license. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-56. - Event permits. 
(a)  In order to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages at an event authorized pursuant to section 6-71 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia, the applicant, who is a licensed alcoholic caterer, intending to sell such alcoholic beverages must: 
(1)  Provide the city with a copy of a valid license from a county or municipality within the state which authorizes the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(2)  Provide the city with a copy of valid annual off-premise license from the city which authorizes the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(3)  Apply to the city for an event permit, providing the name of the applicant, the date, the applicant's address, the date or dates of the event, the time of the event, the applicant's alcoholic beverage caterer's license number. 
(4)  Pay an event permit fee as set forth in the fee schedule as approved by the mayor and city council. 
(5)  Pay local excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city. This subsection only applies to those licensed alcoholic beverage caterers who are domiciled in a local political subdivision other than the city. 
(6)  Maintain the original event permit in the vehicle while transporting the alcoholic beverages to the event and post it in a conspicuous location at the event for the duration of the event. 
(b)  In order to distribute or sell alcoholic beverages at an event authorized pursuant to section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia, the applicant intending to sell such alcoholic beverages must: 
(1)  Provide the city with a copy of a valid liquor license from a county or municipality within the state which authorizes the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or by the package for consumption off the premises. 
(2)  Provide the city with a copy of a valid annual off-premise alcohol license from the city; or, if the applicant does not have an off-premise alcohol license from the city, obtain one to submit with the application for an event permit. 
(3)  Apply to the city for an event permit, providing the name of the applicant, the date, the applicant's address, the date or dates of the event, the time of the event, the applicant's liquor license number. 
(4)  Pay an event permit fee as set forth in the fee schedule as approved by the mayor and city council. 
(5)  Pay local excise taxes on the total quantity of alcoholic beverages brought into the city. This subsection only applies to those applicants who are domiciled in a local political subdivision other than the city. 
(6)  Maintain the original event permit in the vehicle while transporting the alcoholic beverages to the event and post it in a conspicuous location at the event for the duration of the event. 
(c)  The event permit is valid for the duration of the authorized event and shall expire at the end of the event. The event permit is also only valid for the sale of the same type of alcoholic beverages that the applicant is allowed to sell under his or her liquor license or off-premise license. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any such applicant to employ any person who is less than 21 years of age who, in the course of such employment, would dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages. Any and all persons, regardless of the person's title or position, employed by the applicant who dispense, serve, sell, or handle alcoholic beverages at the event must have a valid server license issued by a governmental entity within the state. That server license must be carried by the licensee and available for review on request whenever the licensee is working at an event. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person or entity to distribute or sell any alcoholic beverages in connection with an event approved under section 6-71 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia, without first having obtained an event permit as provided in subsection (a) of this section 6-56. 
(f)  it is unlawful for any person or entity to distribute or sell any alcoholic beverages in connection with an event approved under section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinance, Americus, Georgia, without having obtained an event permit as provided in subsection (b) of this section 6-56. 
(g)  The event permit as contemplated by this section 6-56 shall be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the mayor and city council, or the city manager of the city or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- O.C.G.A. § 3-11-1 et seq. 
Sec. 6-57. - Requirements for sale of alcoholic beverages at an amusement park. 
(a)  When an amusement park is not open to the general public, the amusement park may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages to its private party function participants. Alcoholic beverages shall not be removed from the amusement park premises, which premises shall not include the parking or amphitheater areas of the amusement park. 
(b)  When the amusement park is open to the general public, the amusement park may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at a private party function in restricted areas. Such restricted areas shall be: 
(1)  Not open to the general public; 
(2)  Not an amphitheater or parking for the amusement park; 
(3)  Contain a fence or barrier which limits access to the restricted area; and 
(4)  The location of the restricted areas has been submitted to and approved by the business license manager. 
    In the event a designated area is denied by the business license manager, the owner/licensee may appeal said decision within ten days of said decision pursuant to the procedures set forth in section 6-63 herein. The mayor and city council shall have the authority to approve a designated area provided it meets the standards of this subsection. Alcoholic beverages shall be limited to the restricted areas only and shall not be removed from the restricted areas. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-58. - Name of license and license number to be displayed 
    The license itself shall be prominently displayed so as to be visible to the public inside the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-59. - Renewal-Required annually. 
    All licensees under this chapter shall, in order to continue such business, renew their licenses annually. Renewing licenses are not required to meet the posting and advertising provisions of section 6-34 and 6-36 of this chapter or to appear before the license review board or the mayor and council when the following requirements are satisfied. If all of these requirements are met, the city manager or his designee shall be authorized to approve such renewal applications: 
(1)  Same applicant and information as contained in the formerly approved application. 
(2)  Updated background check for criminal record or alcohol violations in the past year conducted by police department which contains no disqualifying information. 
(3)  No prior, existing, or pending violations of the alcoholic beverage ordinance. 
(4)  Compliance with all state alcoholic beverage regulatory statutes and regulations. 
(5)  Timely payment of renewal fees and timely submission of renewed information. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-60. - Same-Application for existing licensed premises. 
    Any application for renewal of a license on an existing licensed location shall not be required to meet the distance requirements set forth in this chapter, if not originally in violation; provided, that no license may be issued in violation of state distance requirements. An application for license renewal filed under this section shall meet and qualify under all other requirements of this chapter for the granting of a new license. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-61. - Transfer of license, restrictions. 
    Licenses, under this chapter shall not be transferable as to location or ownership, except upon approval of the mayor and city council and issuance of and payment for the license, subject to the following: 
(1)  In case of the death of any person holding a license, or any interest therein, such license may, in the discretion of the city, be temporarily transferred to the administrator, executor or the lawful heirs of the deceased person, for a period of up to 60 days, provided that such transferee otherwise meets the requirements for holding an alcohol license under this section. 
(2)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more of the partners in a partnership holding a license to withdraw from the partnership in favor of one or more of the partners, who were partners at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not however, serve to bring any new ownership into the partnership. 
(3)  Nothing in this section, however, shall prohibit one or more principal shareholders in a corporation holding a license to withdraw from the corporation, who were principal shareholders at the time of the issuance of the license. Such a withdrawal shall not, however, serve to bring any new ownership into the corporation. 
(4)  Should a transfer of location be approved, there shall be no pro rata return of any license fee and the new location shall be considered under and meet the requirements of a new license under this chapter. Provided, however, where a transfer of an existing location is approved and there is no change in the ownership of the business, the license fee paid for the old location shall be applied to the new location. 
(5)  It shall be deemed a change of ownership when an owner or licensee adds an additional partner or partners or an additional principal shareholder or principal shareholders. 
(6)  All applications for transfer of location shall be posted as required by section 6-36. 
(7)  A change in ownership as set forth in this section requires an application for a new license and the payment of a new license fee according to the procedures in this chapter. 
(8)  It shall be the duty of each licensee to promptly report any changes of any kind in the ownership or distribution of ownership to the business license office. 
(9)  If a licensee desires to sell the business for which the license was issued, the purchaser of the business must be informed by the licensee that the purchaser of the business must make application for and obtain a license prior to operating the business. Any transfer of the business for which the license is issued without the new owners being licensed shall cause the automatic revocation of the license. 
(10)  In the event that an alcoholic beverage license is issued to a corporation and an agent, and the owner of the license desires re-issuance of the license under an alternative agent, such re-issuance shall not be deemed to be a change of ownership; provided however, that the owner of the license provide the name of a principal shareholder or alternative agent for purposes of background investigation, including fingerprinting of such person. No license under this chapter shall reissue to such designated alternative person unless and until the city grants approval of such background investigation. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-62. - Licenses constitute grant or privilege. 
(a)  All alcoholic beverage licenses constitute a mere grant or privilege to carry on such business during the term of the license subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by this chapter and related laws and other ordinances and resolutions of the city relating to such business. 
(b)  All licenses under this chapter shall have printed on the front these words: "this license is a mere privilege subject to being revoked and annulled by the mayor and city council, and is subject to amendments to this chapter or state law upon hearing prior to revocation with or without cause." 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-63. - Procedure for suspension and revocation. 
(a)  No alcoholic beverage license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued shall be suspended or revoked except for due cause, as defined in this section, after a hearing and upon written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge or charges upon which such hearing shall be held. Five days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods of notice shall be authorized as the mayor or city manager may deem the circumstances to justify. 
(b)  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any laws, regulations, ordinances regulating such business; the violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating such business; the violation of any state or federal law; any change in the area where such business is located, which change is deemed by the city council to authorize the city council to refuse the issuance of a license, including those circumstances as outlined in section 6-45; the arrest or conviction of a drug-related, alcohol or sex-related crime, or a crime involving moral turpitude; or any violation of this chapter. 
(c)  The police department shall provide written notification to the city manager of any violation of this chapter or any facts that may constitute due cause for the suspension or revocation of a license. Such notification shall include facts constituting due cause and shall also include a history, if any, of previous violations of this chapter or previous findings of due cause for the probation, suspension or revocation of said license and the penalty, if any, imposed by the city for such violations or previous findings. 
(d)  Upon receipt of the notification as provided in subsection (c), the city manager shall place the matter for a first due cause hearing by the license review board, provided that the licensee has not been on probation or suspension within the last 24 months from the date of the writing as provided in subsection (c). 
(e)  If the licensee has been on probation or suspension within the last 24 months from the date of the writing as provided in subsection (c), then the city manager shall place the matter for a first due cause hearing by the mayor and city council, wherein the mayor and city council shall consider revocation of the license. 
(f)  Written notice of the time, place and purpose of the first due cause hearing and a written statement of the charge or charges shall be provided to the licensee. Five days' notice shall be deemed reasonable, but shorter or longer periods shall be authorized as the mayor or city manager may deem the circumstances to justify. 
(g)  After the due cause hearing as provided in subsection (d), the license review board may place on probation with conditions, recommend suspension for a period of time not to exceed 12 months or recommend revocation of the alcohol license. The city manager shall send written notice to the licensee of the license review board's decision and prepare a written report to the city council regarding the decision. 
(h)  In the event that the license review board recommends that the alcoholic beverage license be on probation with conditions and/or be suspended for less than six months, the owner of the alcoholic beverage license, the licensee or both have no recourse to file an appeal with the city manager of such recommendation. In the event that the license review board recommends suspension for more than six months or revocation, then a second due cause hearing may be conducted before the mayor and city council after meeting appeal process and notice requirements. 
(i)  For those hearings conducted by the license review board wherein the license review board recommended suspension for six months or more or revocation, upon review of the city manager's report, the city council shall either approve such recommendations or cause the matter to be placed before the mayor and council for a second due cause hearing after meeting appeal process and notice requirements. 
(j)  In the event that the license review board recommends any probation, suspension, or revocation of a license under this section, the police department shall immediately place signage in or on the premises indicating that such recommendation has been made and the basis for such recommendation, pending review and approval by the mayor and council. Such signage shall remain in place until mayor and council shall take action on such recommendation. 
(k)  In all hearings held pursuant to this section, the proceedings shall be as informal as compatible with justice and the following procedures shall prevail: 
(1)  The charges and specifications against the licensee and the responses, if any, filed by the licensee shall be read into the record, unless expressly waived by the city representative and the licensee. 
(2)  The city representative shall present evidence and then the licensee shall present evidence, with the opportunity for each party to present rebuttal evidence, examination and cross examination of witnesses, and interrogation by the city manager or city council. No evidence shall be presented which is not relevant to the charges. Evidence of previous probation(s) and suspension(s) is relevant. 
(3)  The license review board and the mayor and city council, through the city manager, shall be authorized to issue subpoenas when such subpoena power is authorized by law. All testimony taken by the board shall be under oath. The board shall apply to the Americus Municipal Court for the enforcement of any subpoena issued by the board. 
(I)  After any due cause hearing under this section by the mayor and city council, if the mayor and city council determine that due cause exists, the mayor and city council may place on probation, suspend with or without conditions or revoke the license. The city manager shall send written notice to the licensee of the city council's decision. 
(m)  In the event a license to sell alcoholic beverages is suspended as a result of selling alcoholic beverages to an underage person, an intoxicated person or an unauthorized Sunday sale, a sign issued by the city business license office shall be placed at each entrance to the facility wherein alcoholic beverages were sold with a sign providing: "THE LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ISSUED TO OWNER AND LICENSEE OF THIS BUSINESS HAS BEEN SUSPENDED FROM ______________ TO ______________AS A RESULT OF SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO AN UNDERAGE PERSON. AN INTOXICATED PERSON OR AN UNAUTHORIZED SUNDAY SALE." 
(n)  In the event that the license to sell alcoholic beverages is revoked as a result of selling alcoholic beverages to an underage person, an intoxicated person or an unauthorized Sunday sale, a sign issued by the city business license office shall be placed at each entrance wherein alcoholic beverages were sold with a sign providing: "THE LICENSE TO SELL ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES ISSUED TO OWNER AND LICENSEE OF THIS BUSINESS HAS BEEN REVOKED AS A RESULT OF SELLING ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES TO AN UNDERAGE PERSON, AN INTOXICATED PERSON OR AN UNAUTHORIZED SUNDAY SALE." The sign shall stay in place for the period of suspension or in the case of a revocation for a period of 30 days. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-64. - State revocation revokes city license. 
    Whenever the state shall revoke any permit or license to manufacture or sell at wholesale or retail any alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or deal in such products shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any action by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-65. - Removal of signs where license revoked, suspended or denied. 
    When any license for selling alcoholic beverages is revoked, suspended or denied, all signs indicating that such beverages may be sold or purchased, including any and all advertisement signs, shall be removed from such place of business, both outside and inside. Upon receipt by the police department of notice of such revocation, suspension or denial, the police department shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-66. - False information in application. 
    Any material omission, or untrue or misleading information contained in or left out of an original, renewal or transfer application for any license issued under this chapter shall be unlawful, and shall be the cause for the denial thereof, and if any such license has previously been granted under these circumstances, such shall constitute due cause for the revocation of such license. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-67. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-68. - Joint sales of alcoholic beverages by the drink and by the package prohibited. 
    A pouring license shall not permit the sale of alcoholic beverages by the bottle or package. This section shall not apply to farm wineries selling wine, fortified wine, or hard cider by the package. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-69. - Mandatory workshop for licensee; mandatory training for permit holders. 
(a)  Licensee policy workshop. All applicants for an alcoholic beverage license or a renewal after January 1, 2016, shall attend an alcohol sales and service policy workshop for owners and managers, which workshop shall be provided by an external training firm, approved by the city manager, mayor and council or their designee. The applicant shall attend such workshop prior to the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license. Such workshop shall be at the applicant's expense and only require the applicants/licensee's attendance one time. If, at the time the application is considered by the mayor and city council, the applicant has not provided evidence that the applicant has successfully completed the alcohol sales and service training workshop, the application shall be denied. This provision shall not be waived. 
(b)  Training of permit holders. 
(1)  Licensees are required to provide information to all permit holders on provisions of the law of this state regarding the sale of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated and underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. 
(2)  Licensees shall provide regular information and training to all permit holders on the methods, procedures and measures to be taken in order to request, obtain and examine proper identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age to purchase alcoholic beverages. 
(3)  Detailed records of such training, including the date, time, persons attending and substance of such training shall be maintained for a minimum of 48 months of the training. Evidence of such training records shall be made available upon request for inspection by the city. 
(c)  The failure of the licensee to comply with this subsection regarding the attendance of a policy workshop and the training of permit holders shall be grounds for due cause to suspend and/or revoke the license to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-70. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2017-9, adopted September 21, 2017, repealed § 6-70. Former § 6-70 pertained to permit holders of licensees-Applications, issuance, and denials and derived from Ord. No. O-2017-4, adopted April 20, 2017. 
Sec. 6-71. - Closed functions. 
(a)  The requirements for obtaining a closed function permit are as follows: 
(1)  The organization sponsoring any closed function which seeks to serve alcoholic beverages must first apply for and obtain a special permit from the city manager or his/her designee in order to serve alcoholic beverages at the closed function. This permit must be posted in a conspicuous location at the closed function at all times during the event. The special permit shall specify the hours in which the closed function is permitted to function. 
(2)  The organization sponsoring any closed function which seeks to serve alcoholic beverages must hire an off-duty city police officer to monitor the function. The city manager or his/her designee shall have the discretion to allow the sponsoring organization to hire an off-duty police officer from another jurisdiction to monitor the function if the circumstances warrant. 
(3)  The special permit as contemplated herein shall be granted or denied at the sole discretion of the city manager or his/her designee. 
(b)  One-day alcoholic beverage permit for bona fide nonprofit civic organizations. In accord with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-9, the city shall be authorized to issue a permit to a bona fide nonprofit civic organization to sell and serve alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises where sold for a period not to exceed one day, subject to compliance with the provisions of this section. The sale and serving of such alcoholic beverages shall be made by the drink, and a permit shall be required hereunder at any event held or sponsored by such organization where alcoholic beverages are to be purchased or served, or both, whether such alcoholic beverages are purchased by the attendees by the payment of dues to the organization or as a result of the purchase of a ticket or the payment of an entry fee to the event. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any such organization which already has a valid alcoholic beverage license from the city shall not be required to obtain a permit hereunder. 
(2)  For purposes of this section, a "bona fide nonprofit civic organization", shall mean a nonprofit corporation licensed and authorized to do business in the State of Georgia which has been issued a letter or certificate of exemption from the payment of federal income taxes by the United States Internal Revenue Service under 26 U.S.C.S. § 501(c). Written proof of such exemption shall be filed with the application. 
(3)  The temporary one-day permit authorized by this section shall be applied for utilizing such forms as may be provided by the city finance director. Such application shall be submitted to the city finance director no later than 20 calendar days in advance of the event. The city shall approve or deny such application within five calendar days of the city's actual receipt of such application. Written notice of the decision approving or denying the application shall be provided to the applicant by the city finance director within such five-day period. Upon approval of such application, the city finance director shall issue a written permit on such forms as the city finance director may provide, and the written permit shall be displayed at all times at the location of the event. The application fee shall be $25.00. Such fee shall be submitted with the application, and if the application is denied, the fee shall be refunded to the applicant. The permit issued in accord with this section shall be valid only for the physical location specified in the permit. No permit shall be issued unless the sale of distilled spirits, wine or malt beverages is lawful in the place and during the time of day for which permit is issued. 
(4)  Final approval or denial of such applications based upon the provisions of this section, shall be by the city manager of the city No more than six permits shall be issued to any single organization under this section during any calendar year. There shall be no appeal from any denial of such an application. 
(5)  The application shall be signed on behalf of the organization by a person having written authority to sign and deliver such application to the city. The person signing such application shall, in all events, be an officer of the organization at the time such application is submitted. At the time of submission, the person signing such application on behalf of the organization shall submit a copy of such person's Georgia driver's license. Such applicant shall be a resident of the city and shall be responsible for the lawful and proper conduct of the activities of the organization pursuant the permit issued hereunder. 
(6)  No organization which has had its alcoholic beverage license suspended or revoked within the previous 24 months shall be eligible to obtain a permit under this section. No organization which has been determined by the city to have violated any of the provisions of this section with respect to a previous permit issued hereunder, shall be eligible to obtain a permit under this section for a period of 24 months after the date of such violation. 
(7)  No organization which is delinquent or past due on any monetary obligations owed to the city, including, but not limited to, ad valorem taxes, business licenses, utility bills, sanitation fees, or any other taxes, fees or monetary obligations, shall be eligible for a permit under this section. 
(8)  The net proceeds from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the organization at such event shall be used only for the charitable purposes of the organization and for no other purpose. 
(9)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, the remaining provisions of this chapter relating to the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be applicable to any organization obtaining a permit hereunder. In addition, if the person signing the application on behalf of the organization would be disqualified from obtaining an alcoholic beverage license under this chapter, then the organization shall not be eligible to obtain a permit hereunder. Any one-day permit issued hereunder may be suspended or revoked in accord with the provisions of this chapter in the same manner and for the same reasons as an alcoholic beverage license may be suspended or revoked for regular alcoholic beverage license holders hereunder. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any suspension of such permit may also be made by the chief of police immediately should the organization be found to be in violation of any of the provisions of this section during the period of time that the one-day permit is in effect. 
(10)  No permit issued hereunder shall be valid for the sale or serving of alcoholic beverages thereunder unless the applicant shall also have been issued a valid one-day permit for the same event by the Georgia Department of Revenue, and such one-day permit from the Department of Revenue shall also be displayed at the location of the event in the manner required by the Department of Revenue. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-72. - Approved events. 
    The possession, transportation, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages on any public property are permitted at: 
(1)  At an event at which the possession, transportation, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages on, in, or over public property is approved by the mayor and city council; or, 
(2)  At an event at which the possession, transportation, consumption, and sale of alcoholic beverages on, in, or over public property is approved by the city manager of the city or his or her designee. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-73 - Consumption of alcohol on city streets. 
(a)  Except for the area and circumstances specified in subsections (b) and (c) herein, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess an alcoholic beverage in an open container, either on their person, in a motor vehicle or otherwise on the streets, sidewalks, parks, squares or other public places within the city. 
(b)  Within the area of the central business district of the city: 
(1)  During a permitted "special event" of the Americus Main Street and/or Downtown Development Authority, any person licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages for on premises consumption may sell one alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup for removal from the premises; provided, however, that the alcoholic beverage is not placed in a can, bottle or other glass container and, further provided, that the licensee may dispense no more than one alcoholic beverage per person, and no person shall remove more than one alcoholic beverage from the premises; 
(2)  Any alcoholic beverage dispensed pursuant to this section shall not exceed 16 fluid ounces in size and no person shall possess an open container containing an alcoholic beverage in excess of 16 fluid ounces on the streets, sidewalks, parks, squares or other public places within the area described in this section; 
(3)  Unless specifically provided otherwise by ordinance, the regulations provided by this section shall be in full force and effect during any festival. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-74. - Wine tastings. 
    Upon filing an application and payment of a license fee of $75.00 per year, the city council may issue an annual permit to hold wine tastings. The permit shall allow the applicant to provide samples of wine to the public for consumption on the premises under the following conditions: 
(1)  The permit holder shall be a business licensed by the city to sell wine, in original packages for off-premises consumption. 
(2)  The permit holder shall maintain on the premises and offer for sale at all times a variety of wines from not less than 20 manufacturers of wine. 
(3)  The establishment where the wine tastings are to be held shall have minimum interior floor area of 1,200 square feet devoted to the storage, display and sale of wine. 
(4)  The permit holder for a wine tasting permit must hold and maintain during the term of the permit a valid current wine license in the state. 
(5)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of any place of business licensed to sell distilled spirits in original packages for off-premises consumption. 
(6)  No wine tasting may be conducted on the premises of a malt beverage and wine store operating in connection with a licensed retail liquor store. 
(7)  Wine tastings may only be conducted in connection with a bona fide instructional or educational promotion. The city shall be given written notice of each planned wine tasting event not less than 30 calendar days prior to such event on such forms as may be prescribed from time to time by the city manager or his designee. Should a special request for a wine tasting occur with less than 30 days' notice to the city, such notice shall be provided to the city as soon as the event is scheduled. 
(8)  All wines secured for tasting purposes must be obtained through a retail or wholesale wine outlet. 
(9)  Wine tastings must comply with all laws and regulations otherwise pertaining to the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(10)  All applicants and permit holders must comply with all state statutes and sections of this Code and other city ordinances concerning alcoholic beverages, including, but not limited to, those dealing with hours of operation, zoning and distance requirements. 
(11)  Any violation of the foregoing provisions by the permit holder, or any violation of the city's alcoholic beverage ordinance or state law regarding alcoholic beverages by the permit holder shall authorize the placing of the permit holder's permit on probation, or the suspension or revocation of such permit, in accord with the provisions of this article of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-11, 10-19-2017) 
Secs. 6-75-6-86. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROHIBITIONS AND RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 6-87. - Employment of minors. 
    No licensee shall allow or require beverages. It shall be unlawful for a beverages. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-88. - Serving customers. 
    Alcoholic beverages by the drink permitted to be sold under this chapter shall only be served by employees of the licensee. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Employee solicitation of patrons for drinks on premises; O.C.G.A. § 3-3-42. 
Sec. 6-89. - Sale to underage persons, incompetents, intoxicated persons. 
    No licensee under this chapter and no employee of such a licensee under this chapter shall furnish, sell or knowingly allow the possession of any alcoholic beverages, whether by the package or by the drink to: 
(1)  Any person under the age at which such beverages may be legally purchased in the state; or 
(2)  Any person in an intoxicated condition; or 
(3)  Any person known to such licensee or his or her employee to be an habitual drunkard; or 
(4)  Any person known to such licensee or his or her employees to be of intemperate habits or of unsound mind. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Offenses involving alcohol and underage persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-90. - Notice; allowing underage person on licensed premises. 
(a)  Licensees that own, operate or manage a nightclub, indoor entertainment hall, bar, lounge or package store and/or their employees shall not permit underage persons on the licensed premises unless such person is (1) accompanied by a parent or legal guardian; or, (2) unless such person is an on-duty employee of the licensee and is at least 18 years of age. However, an indoor entertainment hall may allow persons who are at least 18 years of age to be on the premises without a parent or legal guardian on specially designated days, whether they are designated "special events," "concert nights," or other similar term, not to exceed two days per calendar week, and only one of which may be a day other than Friday and Saturday, under the following conditions: 
(1)  Every patron must be required to present valid identification and proof that the patron is at least 21 years age at the point of sale within the indoor entertainment hall each time such patron attempts to purchase alcoholic beverages while on the premises. In lieu of checking identification and proof of age at the point of sale within the indoor entertainment hall, the licensee or the licensee's employees may check such identification and proof of age at the entrance to the indoor entertainment hall, provided that any person who is 21 years of age or older who enters the premises be provided with a handstamp, nonremovable wrist band, or similar method of confirmation that the patron is legally entitled to purchase alcoholic beverages while on the premises. In such event, no licensee or employee of licensee may sell, serve, or provide any alcoholic beverage on the premises to any patron who does not present such handstamp, nonremovable wristband, or similar method of confirmation that the patron is 21 years of age or older each and every time the patron attempts to purchase an alcoholic beverage. 
(2)  On days the indoor entertainment hall allows underage patrons on the premises in accordance with this section, no patron may be sold, served, or provided more than one alcoholic beverage during any single transaction. 
(3)  A conspicuous notice must be posted at the entrance to the indoor entertainment hall and at each point of sale within the indoor entertainment hall stating that it is illegal under state and local law for persons under the age of 21 years of age to purchase or consume alcoholic beverages, that it is illegal for any person under the age of 21 years of age to misrepresent his or her age in any manner whatsoever, that it is illegal for anyone to purchase alcohol for or on behalf of any other person under the age of 21 years of age, and that any person found in violation of any such law will be subject to arrest and criminal prosecution. "Conspicuous notice" as used in this chapter shall mean a sign on white background with red or black print with the printed message being 28 point type or larger. 
(4)  On days the indoor entertainment hall allows underage patrons on the premises in accordance with this section, licensee must employ or otherwise provide at least two uniformed, off-duty Americus police officers to patrol the exterior of the indoor entertainment hall, including the parking lot. The city manager or his/her designee shall have the discretion to allow the sponsoring organization to hire off-duty police officers from another jurisdiction to monitor the function if the circumstances warrant. Such officers shall not enter the indoor entertainment hall unless requested by licensee or licensee's employees or unless the officers otherwise have reason to believe that illegal activity has taken or is taking place within the indoor entertainment hall or that the health or safety of the patrons is immediately at risk. 
(5)  The indoor entertainment hall must require that each person entering the premises provide valid identification and proof at the entrance to the premises that the person entering the premises is at least 18 years of age. No person under the age of 18 years of age may be admitted to the indoor entertainment hall without a parent or legal guardian. 
(b)  Each licensee shall post a conspicuous notice at the entrance to the indoor entertainment hall and at each point of sale within the indoor entertainment which shall contain the provisions of the laws of this state which deal with the unlawful sale of alcoholic beverages to underage persons and the penalties for violating such laws. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24.2. 
Sec. 6-91. - Purchase, consumption or possession by or for underage persons. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any underage person to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place where underage persons knowingly are allowed and permitted to come and purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy any alcoholic beverage and furnish it to an underage person for consumption. 
(d)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (a), (b) and (c) of section 6-91 of this chapter shall not apply with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; or 
(3)  When the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverages to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(e)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to obtain and examine proper identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age pursuant to the standard as set forth in O.C.G.A. 3-3-23(h), or as may be amended from time to time. The term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing the description of the person, the person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification card, driver's license or state issued identification card for persons without a driver's license. "Proper identification" shall not include birth certificate, traffic citation and complaint form, or student (college/university) identification card. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Offenses involving alcohol and underage persons. O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-92. - Same-Misrepresentation of age. 
    It shall be unlawful for any underage person to falsely misrepresent his/her age in any manner whatsoever. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-93. - Hours of operation. 
(a)  Alcoholic beverages by the package. Licensees for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall not engage in the sale of such beverages except between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m., Monday through Saturday. Licensees for the sale of malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package shall not engage in the sale of malt beverages, and/or wine, and/or fortified wine, and/or hard cider by the package except between the hours of 8.00 a.m. and 1:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and 8:00 a.m. and 11:55 p.m. Saturday. 
(b)  Alcoholic beverages by the drink. Sale of any alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption: licensees shall not engage in the sale of any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily. All alcoholic beverages must be received by 12:30 a.m. and all patrons must be out of the premises by 1:00 a.m., provided that this subsection shall not apply to private clubs hereunder, and establishments holding a valid permit may be made in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 3-3-7(1), or as may be amended from time to time. 
(c)  Wholesalers. The business hours of any wholesaler licensed under this chapter shall be sunup to sundown, exclusive of Sunday. 
(d)  Election days. The sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be permitted on election days as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20, as amended. 
(e)  Nothing contained in this section shall prevent any restaurant that is licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises to permit a patron to remove one unsealed bottle of wine and/or bottle of fortified wine per patron for consumption off premises, provided that the patron has purchased a meal and consumed a portion of the bottle of wine on the restaurant's premises. The securing, resealing and transporting of said bottle of wine and/or bottle of fortified wine shall be in accordance with procedures outlined in O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4. 
(f)  Reserved. 
(g)  If future zoning designations are approved by the mayor and council for designated entertainment zones, the closing times for this designated area may be adjusted to a later time. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- Sale of alcoholic beverages on election days, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20 
Sec. 6-94. - Requirements of wholesalers generally. 
    All wholesalers shall be licensed under the provisions of this chapter and shall comply with this chapter before they can sell or deliver any distilled spirits to any establishment in the city. Deliveries and sales shall only be made to retailers properly licensed under this chapter for the operation of establishments in the city. Deliveries shall be made in a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as set out in this section and shall at all times when deliveries are being made be subject to inspection by any duly authorized authorities of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-95. - Retailers to purchase from properly licensed wholesalers; exception. 
    Retail dealers in alcoholic beverages licensed under the applicable provisions of this chapter shall not buy nor accept deliveries of alcoholic beverages from wholesalers or other persons offering alcoholic beverages for sale except from wholesalers duly licensed under this chapter. Such retail dealers shall only accept deliveries of alcoholic beverages directly to the premises for which their license and permit was issued, and by no means other than a conveyance owned and operated by a wholesaler licensed as required by this chapter; except that, on written request to the business license division manager of the city and upon the granting of permission by the city in writing, deliveries may in special instances be made otherwise upon terms and conditions as prescribed by the mayor and city council as to each delivery. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-96. - Sale or delivery to unlicensed premises or unlicensed caterers. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to make deliveries of any alcoholic beverage by the package beyond the boundaries of the premises covered by the license. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee under this chapter to allow the sale or delivery of any alcoholic beverage by the drink to any area other than the premises covered by the license. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for unlicensed individuals or caterers to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-97. - Discrimination or interference by wholesaler. 
    No wholesaler may discriminate between retail dealers as to quantity, selections, and brands sold to the retail dealer, nor use any business technique so as to control the retail dealer's business and pricing policy, or in any way interfere with the free enterprise operation of the retail dealer. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-98. - Storage-Regulation generally. 
    All licensed retailers shall store all alcoholic beverages possessions on the premises for which the license was issued, and at no other place. All alcoholic beverages stock shall be available for inspection by authorized city officials. Any brand or type of alcoholic beverages found in any retailer's stock that is handled by a wholesaler who is not licensed to make sales and deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-99. - Breaking of packages; consumption on premises; possession of alcoholic beverages on unlicensed premises; spirituous or alcoholic liquors. 
(a)  No retail dealer shall knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking or opening of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the premises where sold or allow or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the premises where sold. This section shall not apply with respect to sales pursuant to a license for consumption on the premises. 
(b)  A restaurant, eatery, cafe, diner or other eating establishment not licensed under this chapter for on-premise consumption shall not knowingly and intentionally allow or permit the breaking or opening of any package or packages containing alcoholic beverages on the unlicensed premises or permit the drinking of the contents of such package or packages on the unlicensed premises. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee who is authorized to sell malt beverages, or hard cider, or wine, to sell, store or possess spirituous or alcoholic liquors without an appropriate license therefor. 
(d)  Upon the suspension, revocation, denial of renewal or denial of transfer of any alcoholic beverage license under this chapter, the licensee shall remove from the licensed premises all alcoholic beverages within 48 hours of the effective date of such suspension, revocation or denial. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 
Sec. 6-100. - Clear view of entrance and interior of licensed premises; lighting; private clubs. 
(a)  No licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package shall operate under the license unless the front entrance to the licensed premises is clearly visible from the public street; provided, however, this restriction shall not apply where the licensee is a hotel, motel, private club or is located in a shopping center or multiple-story business building or any building existing as of the adoption of this chapter. Clearly visible shall mean that not less than 60 percent of the front area shall be glass. Front area shall mean the width of the premises from the ceiling to the floor. 
(b)  No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail store for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any such store. Each such store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(c)  Private clubs which have been granted licenses under this chapter to sell distilled spirits at retail by the package shall not have an outside or street entrance for such retail outlet to sell to the general public, nor shall any such establishment make any sales to any member of the general public who is not a member of the private club. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-101. - Sanitary and fire protection regulations; disturbances; inspections. 
(a)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the condition of premises to include building, and property maintenance codes used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to permit any disturbance of the peace or obscenity or any lewd, immoral or improper entertainment, conduct or practices on any licensed premises. 
(c)  The fire inspector or city building official shall inspect, at least annually, the premises licensed under this chapter to determine compliance with subsections (a) and (d) of this section and report its findings to the city manager. 
(d)  All premises licensed under this chapter shall conform at all times with all fire, building, life safety, and property maintenance codes of the city, county, and state. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-102. - Misrepresentation of alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for licensees or their employees to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. This section shall not preclude the sale and/or refilling of any growler so long as such sale or refilling complies with section 6-111 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-103. - Prices to be conspicuously displayed. 
    Each retail licensee for sale in the package shall have conspicuously displayed within the interior of the licensed premises not less than four copies of a printed price list of the alcoholic beverages offered for sale; provided, however, a licensee, in lieu of having four copies of a printed list, may have the price placed on the bottles or on the bottom of the shelf where alcoholic beverages are exhibited for sale. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-104. - Exterior advertisements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (b) of this Code section, a licensed retail dealer in distilled spirits may display at the licensee's place of business unilluminated signs, using letters not larger than eight inches in height, flat against the outside of the building, below the roof line, bearing the words "liquor," "beer," "wine," "champagne," or any combination thereof, and "package store" or "liquor store," together with the trade name of the retail dealer. In addition to such signs flat against the outside of the building, the retail dealer may display at a location on the tract of property upon which the business is located, but not affixed to the building, one unilluminated sign using letters not larger than eight inches in height bearing the words "package store" or "liquor store" and the trade name of the retail dealer. Subject to any more restrictive size limitations contained in the ordinances of the political subdivision in which the place of business is located, a sign not affixed to the building may be no larger than 16 square feet in area. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this Code section, a licensee shall be authorized by rules and regulations of the Georgia Department of Revenue to permit licensed retail dealers in distilled spirits to display signs inside and outside their retail establishments which advertise or promote any lottery authorized under Chapter 27 of Title 50, the "Georgia Lottery for Education Act," provided that such signs are in compliance with said Chapter 27 of Title 50 and the rules and regulations of the board of directors of the Georgia Lottery Corporation. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
State Law reference- O.C.G.A, § 3-4-3, Retail dealer's signs; signs advertising Georgia lottery. 
Sec. 6-105. - Coin-operated devices, similar machines on licensed premises. 
    No retail dealer in distilled spirits by the package shall permit on his premises any slot machines, other food or cigarette vending machines, or any mechanical music boxes or pinball machines of any kind or character or any machines operated for amusement purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-106. - Possession or consumption on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to: possess or transport alcoholic beverages for the purpose of consumption on public property; possess or consume alcoholic beverages on public property; or, sell alcoholic beverages on any public property, with the following exceptions: at a closed function permitted pursuant to section 6-71 or at an event approved pursuant to section 6-72 of the Code of Ordinances, Americus, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-107. - Public intoxication. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be on public property within the city limits while intoxicated. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-108. - Reserved. 
Sec. 6-109. - Pricing of alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  This section shall be construed to cover, include and apply to every type of alcoholic beverage licensed to be sold in the city, including wine, fortified wine, hard cider, malt beverages and spirituous liquors. 
(b)  No licensee or holder of any license to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises or in any part thereof, or employee or agent of a licensee, shall: 
(1)  Offer or deliver any free alcoholic beverage to the general public. This subsection shall not apply to tasting rooms of farm wineries where wine is offered in a quantity to only taste the product. This subsection shall also not apply to those persons or entities who are engaged in the business of refilling growlers who are allowed to provide samples to taste the product as set forth in section 6-111 of this chapter. 
(2)  Deliver more than two alcoholic beverages to one person at one time, or allow any patron to possess more than two alcoholic beverages at one time. 
(3)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons any alcoholic beverage at a price less than the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during any 24-hour period during which the price schedule required by this section is in effect, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(4)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver to any person or group of persons two or more or an unlimited number of alcoholic beverages during any set period of time at a fixed price, except at private functions not open to the public. 
(5)  Sell, offer to sell, or deliver alcoholic beverages, by the pitcher or carafe, except to two or more persons at any one time. 
(6)  Increase the volume of alcohol contained in a drink without increasing proportionately the price regularly charged for such alcoholic beverage during the same 24-hour period for which the price schedule required by this section is in effect. 
(7)  Encourage or permit on the licensed premises any game, event, competition, contest, or promotion that involves the drinking of alcoholic beverages or the awarding of alcoholic beverages as a prize. 
(8)  Sell two or more alcoholic beverages for a price per beverage that is less than that charged for the one such alcoholic beverage. 
(9)  Require or encourage the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased. 
(10)  Knowingly allow an alcoholic beverage purchased on the premises to be removed from the premises without having been consumed. "Premises," for the purchase of this section, shall be construed to mean the entire area under the supervision, management or control of the licensee, excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles; and, in the case of licensees whose licensed location is located on a portion of the premises of a club, organization, establishment or entity offering outdoor recreation (for instance, golf or tennis), the word "premises" shall extend to cover all areas operated as a part of the club or entity excluding areas for parking of motor vehicles. 
(11)  Sponsor, conduct or allow contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(c)  There shall be no advertisement or promotion in any way, whether within or without the licensed premises, of any of the practices prohibited under this section. 
(d)  No provision of this section shall be construed to prohibit licensees from offering free food or entertainment at any time, or to prohibit licensees from including an alcoholic beverage as a part of a meal package, or to prohibit the sale or delivery of wine or fortified wine by bottle or carafe when sold with meals to more than one person, or to prohibit any hotel or motel from offering room services to registered guests, or to prohibit the sale of more than two drinks at one time which are to be consumed by the purchaser out-of-doors on the premises of the licensee, as described in this section, in connection with the purchaser's participation as a player of games of golf or tennis; otherwise, no food and alcoholic beverage package may be offered by any licensee; however, nothing contained in this section shall be construed to allow a licensee to circumvent the intent of this section by offering meals which include an alcoholic beverage as a device or scheme to promote drink sales at a price per beverage less than the daily listed price. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-110. - Additional activities prohibited; rationale and findings; exception. 
(a)  Rationale and findings. 
Whereas, Article III, Section VI, Paragraph VII of the Constitution of the State of Georgia, delegates authority to counties and municipalities "for the purpose of regulating, restricting, or prohibiting the exhibition of nudity, partial nudity, or depictions of nudity in connection with the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages;" and, 
Whereas, the United States Court of Appeals for the Eleventh Circuit has upheld a municipal ordinance prohibiting the serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments; and, 
Whereas, the Supreme Court of Georgia has upheld a municipal ordinance prohibiting the serving or consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments; and, 
Whereas, among the undesirable community conditions identified with live nude entertainment and alcohol are depression of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for the allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order; increased burden on the judicial system as a consequence of the criminal behavior, and acceleration of community blight; Daytona Grand, Inc. v. City of Daytona Beach, 490 F.3d 860 (11th Cir. 2007); 5634 East Hillsborough Ave., Inc. v. Hillsborough County, 2007 WL 2936211 (M.D. Fla. Oct. 4, 2007), affd, 2008 WL 4279670 (11th Cir. Sept. 18, 2008) (per curium); California v. LaRue, 409 U.S. 109 (1972); N Y. State Liquor Authority v. Bellanca, 452 U.S. 714 (1981); and, 
Whereas, the Supreme Court of Georgia, in Chambers d/b/a Neon Cowboy v. Peach County, Georgia, 266 Ga. 318, 467 S.E.2d 519 (1996), held that local governments may adopt ordinances designed to combat the undesirable secondary effects of sexually explicit businesses, and further held that a governing authority seeking to regulate adult entertainment establishments must have evidence of a relationship between the proposed regulation and the undesirable secondary effects it seeks to control. The Georgia Supreme Court further held in the same opinion that in passing its regulations, a local government may rely on the experience of other counties and municipalities to demonstrate such a relationship; and, 
Whereas, the United States Supreme Court, in City of Renton v. Playtime Theatres, Inc., 475 U.S. 41 (1986), held that a local government may rely on the experience of other Cities in enacting legislation to regulate adult entertainment businesses; and, 
Whereas, Federal and State appellate courts, have previously held that before enacting an ordinance to combat undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment, a legislative body is required to consider specific evidence of the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment establishments that it reasonably believes relevant to the interests it seeks to address by passing the ordinance; and, 
Whereas, based on the experiences of other municipalities and counties including, but not limited to, Fulton County, Georgia; Adams County, Colorado; New York City, New York; Indianapolis, Indiana; Dallas, Texas; Sandy Springs, Georgia; Oklahoma City, Oklahoma; City of St. Mary's, Georgia; Hamilton County, Tennessee; Amarillo, Texas; Rome, Georgia; Gwinnett County, Georgia; Austin, Texas; Phoenix, Arizona; Manatee County, Florida; City of Garden Grove, California; Forth Worth, Texas; Houston, Texas; St. Cloud, Minnesota; Whittier, California; and the City of Los Angeles, California, which are found to be relevant to the problems faced by the City of Americus, the Mayor and City Council of the City of Americus note the documented negative economic, physical, and social impact adult entertainment businesses have on the community; and, 
Whereas, based upon the experience of other urban counties and municipalities, which experiences the mayor and city council of the city find are relevant to the problems faced by the city, and which do not vary greatly among generally comparable communities within this country, the mayor and city council of the city find that public nudity, under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages in adult entertainment establishments offering adult entertainment, begets criminal behavior and tends to create undesirable community conditions. Flanigan's Enterprises, Inc. of Georgia et al. v. Fulton County, Georgia, 596 F.3d 1265, 2010 WL 520542 (11th Cir. 2010); and, 
Whereas, the mayor and city council of the city find and declare that nudity and sexual conduct and depiction thereof, coupled with alcohol in public places, encourages undesirable behavior and is not in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare; and, 
Whereas, the mayor and city council of the city have chosen to avoid the disturbances associated with mixing alcohol and nude dancing by means of a reasonable restriction upon establishments which sell spirituous or vinous liquors or malt or brewed beverages; and, 
Whereas, the ordinance furthers important governmental interests of reducing crime and protecting property values which are unrelated to the suppression of speech; and, 
Whereas, it is the intent of the mayor and city council of the city to enact an ordinance, narrowly tailored, sufficient to combat the undesirable secondary effects of the serving and consumption of alcoholic beverages at adult entertainment facilities; and, 
Whereas, it is not the intent of the mayor and city council of the city, in enacting this article to deny to any person the right to speech or expression protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, nor it is the intent to deny or restrict the rights of any adult to obtain or view any sexually oriented performance or materials protected by the United States or Georgia Constitutions, but to adopt a content neutral ordinance to combat the undesirable secondary effects of adult entertainment where alcoholic beverages are served or consumed; and, 
Whereas, this section is enacted to further the health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city; 
Now, therefore, this section is hereby enacted to further such health, safety, and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(b)  Activities prohibited; minimum clothing requirements; exception. 
(1)  No person shall suffer or permit any person to engage in live conduct exposing to public view the person's genitals, pubic area, vulva, anus, anal cleft or cleavage or buttocks or any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola on the licensed premises. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of any licensee to consume alcoholic beverages on the premises of the licensee during such employees working hours. 
(3)  No drugs or illegal or controlled substances of any kind shall be allowed, permitted, used, possessed or sold upon the premises of any licensee, and no gambling shall be allowed or permitted therein. 
(4)  No licensee shall allow any person to engage in specified sexual activities on the licensed premises. 
(5)  No licensee shall use any person, in any capacity, in the sale or service of alcoholic beverages while such person is unclothed or in such attire, costume or clothing, as to expose to view any portion of the female breast below the top of the areola or of any portion of the male or female pubic hair, anus, cleft of the buttocks, vulva, and or genitals. 
(6)  No licensee shall allow the holding, promotion, or sponsoring of any contest, promotion, special night, event, or any other activity where patrons of the licensed establishment are allowed to engage in any of the conduct described in this section. 
(7)  Exception. Nothing contained in subsection (b) of this section shall apply to the premises of any theatre, concert hall, art center, museum, or similar establishment primarily devoted to the arts or theatrical performances, where the performances that are presented are expressing matters of serious literary, artistic, scientific, or political value. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-111. - Sale and refilling of growlers. 
(a)  The sale and refilling of growlers in compliance with this chapter is authorized for establishments holding a growler license issued pursuant to section 6-52(h) of this Code. 
(b)  The filling of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26 or any provision or section of this Code. 
(c)  Growlers may only be filled from kegs or containers procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. 
(d)  Growlers may only be filled with a malt beverage, craft beer, or hard cider. 
(e)  Only growlers that are properly sanitized may be filled and made available for retail sale. It shall be the responsibility of the entity filling the growler to sanitize such growler prior to filling it. 
(f)  Each growler must be securely sealed and removed from the premises in its original sealed condition. Each growler shall bear a twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug. At the time of the sale and/or refilling, a paper or plastic adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall be applied to the container or bottle and extend over the top of the twist-type closure, cork, stopper, or plug forming a seal that must be broken upon opening of the container or bottle. The adhesive band, strip, or sleeve shall bear the name and address of the business filling the growler. The containers or bottles shall be identified as a malt beverage or craft beer, contain the name of the malt beverage or craft beer, and bear the name, address and telephone number of the business selling the malt beverage or craft beer. 
(g)  Each growler filled with a malt beverage or craft beer must contain the following warning label: 
"GOVERNMENT WARNING: (1) According to the Surgeon General, women should not drink alcoholic beverages during pregnancy because of the risk of birth defects. (2) Consumption of alcoholic beverages impairs your ability to drive a car or operate machinery, and may cause health problems." 
    It shall be the responsibility of the entity filing the growler to assure each growler has, on its exterior, a warning label containing the language set forth in this subsection. 
(h)  Consumption of the contents of any growler on the premises where it was filled is strictly prohibited. However, the licensee may provide samples of any malt beverages or craft beer on tap. Each such sample shall not exceed one fluid ounce. The licensee shall not serve more than three samples to any individual within a 24-hour period. 
(i)  Sales of growlers shall be limited to the legal hours during which the licensee may sell such alcoholic beverages and must be removed from the premises before the applicable closing time. 
(j)  Any person filling a growler with a malt beverage or craft beer, or handling a growler after filled the growler is filled with either a malt beverage or craft beer must have a server license issued by the city in conformance with the provisions of Chapter 6, Alcoholic Beverages, of this Code. 
(k)  The refilling of growlers shall not be a violation of section 6-102 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-112. - Liability of licensee for acts or omissions of employees. 
    Because employees of licensee are able to sell alcoholic beverages only as a result of the city issuing a license to the licensee, the licensee shall be liable for all acts or omissions of those employees that amount to a violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Secs. 6-113-6-130. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SOCIAL HOSTING 

Sec. 6-131. - Findings and intent. 
    The mayor and the city council finds and declares as follows: 
(a)  In 2007, the U.S. Surgeon General issued a report entitled "The Surgeon General's Call to Action to Prevent and Reduce Underage Drinking," which can be found at http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/topics/underagedrinking/calltoaction.pdf. ("Surgeon General's Call to Action"). 
(b)  "Early alcohol consumption by some young people will result in an alcohol use disorder-that is, they will meet diagnostic criteria for either alcohol abuse or dependence." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page four. 
(c)  "A higher percentage of youth in 8th, 10th, and 12th grades used alcohol in the month prior to being surveyed than used tobacco or marijuana, the illicit drug most commonly used by adolescents." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 5. 
(d)  Various surveys have found that: approximately ten percent of children who are nine to ten years old have started drinking alcoholic beverages; nearly 33 percent of youth start drinking alcoholic beverages before the age of 13; more than ten percent of youth who are 12 to 13 years old and over 33 percent of youth who are 14 to 15 years old reported drinking a whole alcoholic beverage in the year before they were surveyed, and the peak years of alcohol initiation are when youth are in 7th and 8th grades. Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page six. 
(e)  While adolescents typically drink alcoholic beverages less often than adults, when they do drink alcoholic beverages, adolescents tend to drink more alcoholic beverages at each event than adults. Surgeon General's Call to Action, at pages 6-7. 
(f)  Persons who are less than the age of 21 often possess or consume alcoholic beverages at social parties or gatherings held at or on private residences and other private property under control of a person who either has provided the alcoholic beverages or who knows or reasonably should know of such conduct, but fails to take steps to prevent it. 
(g)  "Annually, about 5,000 people under age 21 die from alcohol-related injuries involving underage drinking." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page ten. 
(h)  Underage drinking "[plays a significant role in risky sexual behavior, including unwanted, unintended, and unprotected sexual activity, and sex with multiple partners. Such behavior increases the risk of unplanned pregnancy and for contracting sexually transmitted diseases (STDs), including infection with HIV, the virus that causes AIDS." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page ten. 
(i)  Underage drinking increases the risk of physical and sexual assault." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page ten. 
(j)  Underage drinking "can cause a range of physical consequences, from hangovers to death from alcohol poisoning." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. 
(k)  Underage drinking, "can cause alterations in the structure and function of the developing brain, which continues to mature into the mid-to late twenties and may have consequences reaching far beyond adolescence." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. 
(l)  Underage drinking, "creates secondhand effects that can put others at risk. Loud and unruly behavior, property destruction, unintentional injuries, violence, and even death because of underage alcohol use afflict innocent parties. For instance, about 45 percent of people who die in car crashes involving a drinking driver under the age of 21 are people other than the driver." Surgeon General's Call to Action, at page 11. 
(m)  Law enforcement agency responses to disturbances involving underage consumption of alcoholic beverages at parties or gatherings at or on private residences or other private property frequently require the use of extensive public resources. Further, when law enforcement personnel respond to such disturbances it limits their ability to respond to other service calls in the community, thereby placing the community at increased risk. Law enforcement is not currently reimbursed for their expenses when called to a party or gathering at or on a private residence or other private property. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-132. - Title. 
    This article shall be referred to as the "Americus Social Hosting Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-133. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, or as set forth in section 6-1 of this Code, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning. 
    Dwelling unit means, without limitations, any of the following: 
(1)  Any single and multi-family residence including, but not limited to, any apartment, cabin, condominium, duplex, house, or log cabin, and the land on which it is located, whether owned, leased, rented, or occupied for no compensation by the occupant or occupants; 
(2)  Any mobile home and the land upon which the mobile home is located, whether or not rent is paid for the mobile home, for the land upon which the mobile home is located, or for both; 
(3)  Any recreational vehicle, whether located on privately-owned or publicly-owned property, and whether rent or not is paid for the recreational vehicle, and the land upon the recreational vehicle is located. 
    Gathering means an assembled group of people for the purpose of a social occasion or activity. 
    Legal guardian is a person who is lawfully vested with the power and charged with the duty of taking care of an underage person. 
    Other private property . 
(1)  The term "other private property" includes the following locations: 
a.  A hotel or motel room; 
b.  An assembly hall or meeting room; 
c.  A common room of a dwelling unit used for a party (e.g., a recreation room of an apartment building or a common room of a condominium complex); 
d.  A site in a privately-owned campground; 
e.  A privately-owned vacant lot; or 
f.  Privately-owned land or real estate of any type. 
(2)  Such locations constitute "other private property" under all of the following conditions: 
a.  The location is occupied by one or more persons on a temporary or permanent basis; 
b.  The location is occupied as a dwelling, permanent residence, or temporary residence, for a party or for any other social function; 
c.  The location is owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation. 
    Parent means any person who is a natural parent, an adoptive parent, a foster parent, a step-parent, or who a person who stands in loco parentis. 
    Party means a gathering or event at which two or more persons assemble or gather for a social occasion or activity. 
    Person who has a right of possession means, with respect to a private residence or other private property, as follows: 
(1)  Owner of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; 
(2)  The record owner of the title to the property as of the time of the party regardless of where that person currently resides; 
(3)  Tenant or lessee of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; 
(4)  Landlord of another person who has a right of possession in the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; 
(5)  The person or persons who are in charge of the dwelling unit, private residence, or other private property; or 
(6)  Social host. 
    Private residence means the following: 
(1)  A dwelling unit, whether occupied on a temporary basis, whether occupied as a dwelling or for a party or other social function, and whether owned, leased, rented, or used with or without compensation, 
(2)  Any other item on the same land parcel as the dwelling unit, which includes, but is not limited to any of the following: an animal pen, an animal shed, a bam, a boat dock, a boat house, a cabana, an equipment shed, a free-standing office, a garage, a gazebo, a granary, a hot tub, a hunting cabin, a corn crib, a sauna, a stable, a studio, a swimming pool, a private office, a shed, a silo, a tent, a tool shed, a tree-house, a tractor, or a vehicle of any type or nature; 
(3)  Other items or areas accompanying or on the same land parcel as the dwelling unit, whether improved or unimproved, such as a yard (whether fenced or unfenced), patio, outdoor grilling or eating area, open fields, jetty, pier, dock, or lake shore; 
(4)  Water bodies contiguous to or on the same land parcel as a dwelling unit, such as a basin, bayou, brook, creek, dam, lagoon, lake, marsh, pond, river, stream, or swamp. 
    Reasonable steps means steps that include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Controlling access to alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  Controlling the quantity of alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Verifying the legal minimum drinking age of persons at the party or gathering by inspecting drivers licenses or other government-issued identification cards all of those persons in attendance; and 
(4)  Supervising and monitoring the activities of underage persons at the party or gathering. 
    Social host means: 
(1)  The person or persons who organize, supervise, officiate, conduct or control a party or gathering at or on or at a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by that person or those persons; 
(2)  The person or persons receiving money or any other type of consideration for granting access to a party or gathering at or on a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by that person. 
    Underage person means any person under the age of 21, 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-134. - Prohibition. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this article for any person who has a right of possession of a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property to knowingly host, permit, or allow a party or gathering to take place or continue at or on such private residence or other private property if any underage person at the party or gathering possesses or consumes any alcoholic beverage and the person knows or reasonably should know, after taking all reasonable steps to prevent alcoholic beverage possession or consumption by the underage person, that the underage person is possessing or consuming any alcoholic beverage at the party or gathering. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this article for a parent or legal guardian to allow any underage person under the care of that parent or legal guardian to allow to attend a party or other social gathering if that parent or legal guardian knows or reasonably should know that the underage person will possess or consume any alcoholic beverage at that party or social event. 
(c)  It is the duty of any person having a right of possession of a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property, who knowingly hosts, permits or allows a party or gathering at or on the dwelling unit, the private residence, or other private property, to take all reasonable steps to prevent the possession or consumption of alcoholic beverages by any underage person at the party or gathering. A breach of this duty shall be a violation of this article. 
(d)  Any violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended, shall also be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-135. - Protected activities. 
(a)  Nothing in this article should be interpreted to prohibit legally protected practices held at or on a dwelling unit, a private residence, or other private property that includes the possession and/or consumption of alcohol by persons under the age of 21: 
(1)  As part of religious practices on private property; or 
(2)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state and the consumption occurs on private property pursuant to and in accordance with that prescription; or 
(3)  When the parent or legal guardian of the underage person physically gives the alcohol to that underage person when in their own residence and while in their presence and as permitted under O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, as amended. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the exemptions for protected activities found in section 6-135(a) of this article, if an underage person leaves said private property intoxicated where he or she was provided the alcohol and is found in public, then said furnishers of alcoholic beverages to that underage person shall be held responsible in the same manner as furnishers of alcoholic beverages to underage persons at non-protected activities. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-136. - Separate violation for each incident. 
    Each incident in violation of section 6-134 shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-137. - Enforcement authority. 
    The city police department, the city attorney, and any other person designated by the city manager are authorized to administer and enforce the provisions of this article. The city police department, the city attorney, and any other person designated by the mayor and the city council may exercise any enforcement powers provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Sec. 6-138. - Enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Criminal penalties. 
(1)  Consistent with O.C.G.A. § 36-32-10(a), the first violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 shall also be a violation of this article. Any person who violates O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23 shall be punished by a fine of not more than the maximum fine for which the Georgia Statutes provide for a violation of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
(2)  Any parent who violates section 6-134(b) of this article may be assessed the maximum penalty for which the City Ordinances and Georgia Statutes provide for a misdemeanor. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  Any person who violates section 6-134(a), (b) and/or (c) of this article has committed a public nuisance constituting an immediate threat to public health, safety and welfare, warranting summary abatement and is guilty of a civil violation. 
(2)  On the violation of section 6-134(a), (b) and/or (c), the violator shall be assessed a civil penalty for each such violation of not more than the maximum allowed by the city ordinances and the Georgia State Statutes. 
(3)  Violations of section 6-134 of this article shall be noticed by citation, issued by the city police department. The citation shall also give notice of the right to request a hearing to challenge the validity of the citation, the time for requesting that hearing, and that the person has a right to appeal. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-4, 4-20-2017) 
Chapter 10 - ANIMALS AND FOWL[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Livestock running at large or straying, O.C.G.A. § 4-3-1 et seq.; permitting dogs in heat to roam or run free, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-6; Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq.; Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; liability of owner or keeper of vicious or dangerous animal for injuries caused by animal, O.C.G.A. § 51-2-6. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 10-1. - Bird sanctuary; constituted. 
    The city as now constituted or as may hereafter be constituted, together with all property belonging to it or under its jurisdiction, is hereby established as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1962, § 4-1; Code 1986, § 4-1) 
Sec. 10-2. - Injuring, molesting or killing wild fowl and other birds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person within the corporate limits of the city to trap, hunt, kill, shoot, or attempt to shoot, wound, injure, abuse or molest any wild fowl or other bird or to rob bird nests; provided, however, if starlings, English sparrows or any other kind of bird are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to the health or property of the citizens of the city in the opinion of the public health authorities, it shall be so declared by such authorities. Then such birds may be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as is deemed advisable by said health authorities. 
(Code 1962, § 4-6; Code 1986, § 4-2) 
Sec. 10-3. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to overload, cruelly treat, maim, bruise, abuse, mistreat, torture, deprive of necessary sustenance, ill use or otherwise wrongfully deal with any domestic animal or fowl or otherwise treat such domestic creatures in a harsh, inhumane or unreasonable manner. Shelter for horses, cattle or other domestic animals shall be provided to protect such creatures against inclement weather and extreme temperatures. 
(Code 1962, § 4-4; Code 1986, § 4-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4. 
Sec. 10-4. - Poisoning animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put out or cause to be put out any poison within the city for the killing of any domestic animal. 
(Code 1962, § 4-5; Code 1986, § 4-4) 
Sec. 10-5. - Livestock running at large; impounding; sale; redemption by owner; fees. 
(a)  No horse, mule, cow, hog, goat, or other animal used or fit either for food or labor, shall be permitted to run at large upon the streets, sidewalks, alleys or public grounds in the city. Any such animal found at large within the city shall be taken up and impounded by the impounding officer, or other officer of the city. 
(b)  Each animal so impounded shall be sold by the finance director or his designee, at public outcry, after an advertisement of at least five days in the newspaper in which the city printing is published, giving the time and place of sale. The proceeds of said sale, after paying all costs and expenses thereof, and of taking up and keeping such animal, shall be deposited in the city treasury for six months to await the claim of the owner; at the expiration of which time, if there is no claimant therefor, it shall be used for general city purposes. 
(c)  The owner of such animal may, at any time before the sale, reclaim such stock by paying all costs and expenses of impounding and keeping the same. The fee for taking up and impounding any such animal shall be as established by ordinance, and for keeping the same shall be as established by ordinance. 
(Code 1962, § 4-2; Code 1986, § 4-5) 
Sec. 10-6. - Swine prohibited. 
    No person shall keep any swine within the city. 
(Code 1962, § 4-3; Code 1986, § 4-6) 
Sec. 10-7. - Manner of keeping of animals and fowl-Sanitation of enclosures; nuisance. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep, maintain or possess any animal or fowl in the city in such manner as to create an unsanitary or obnoxious condition, or to become noisy, offensive or a nuisance to the neighbors or citizens of the city, or to disturb the peace of the city. 
(b)  Should a complaint arise from the causes referred to in subsection (a) of this section, the person involved will be properly notified and given adequate time to either dispose of the animal or fowl or eliminate the cause of the complaint. 
(Code 1962, § 4-7; Code 1986, § 4-7) 
Sec. 10-8. - Same-Pens or enclosures within 300 feet of building. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to build any pen, coop or enclosure for animals or fowl, or to permit any animal or fowl to be kept, maintained or grazed, within 300 feet of any house or other building where people reside or work. This section shall not apply to any house or other building on the same premises where such animal or fowl is kept or maintained, nor shall it apply to dogs or cats kept as household pets, but it shall apply to dog kennels, where more than one dog is kept. 
(Code 1962, § 4-11; Code 1986, § 4-8) 
Sec. 10-9. - Vicious animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or other person to maintain or harbor within the city a manifestly vicious animal unless the same is securely, but humanely, confined or restrained in such manner as to prevent such animal from attacking or biting a person or another animal. It shall be prima facie evidence of viciousness if an animal, without provocation, fiercely attacks or bites a person or animal not on the owner's premises. 
(Code 1962, § 4-8; Code 1986, § 4-9) 
Sec. 10-10. - Dead animals-Duty of owner to remove from public ways. 
    The owner of dead animals upon the public streets and ways shall remove the same so as not to constitute a nuisance. If the owner fails to do so the city shall remove and dispose of such carcass, and charge the cost of such removal and disposition to the owner of the carcass, if known. 
(Code 1962, § 4-9; Code 1986, § 4-10) 
Sec. 10-11. - Same-Removal from private property. 
    When any dead animal is found on private property, the owner of the dead animal or the owner of the premises upon which such animal is located shall remove the same immediately at such owner's own cost. Upon failure to do so within a reasonable time the city shall remove same, the cost to be collected from the offending party. 
(Code 1962, § 4-10; Code 1986, § 4-11) 
Sec. 10-12. - Nuisances prohibited and defined. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "nuisance" means an act or situation caused by or contributed to by an animal with or without the permission of the animal's owner or keeper, which act or situation substantially interferes with the rights of citizens to enjoyment of life or property or unreasonably annoys humans or endangers the life or health of persons or other animals. Such a nuisance shall include, but shall not be limited to the following acts by an animal: 
(1)  Molesting or threatening to molest pedestrians; 
(2)  Chasing vehicles; 
(3)  Causing loss or damage to the person or property of someone other than the owner or keeper of the animal; or 
(4)  Continually and repeatedly howling, barking, whining or otherwise making noises which cause unreasonable annoyance, disturbance or discomfort to neighbors or others. 
(b)  Where a nuisance is a public nuisance, an action or a proceeding to abate same, may be brought in the municipal court for the city by the appropriate city official or officials. 
(c)  Where such nuisance is a private nuisance, a proceeding to abate such nuisance may be brought in the municipal court for the city by the party or parties aggrieved thereby. Such court shall have all authority granted pursuant to city ordinances and state law to order abatement of such nuisance. 
(Code 1962, § 4-22; Code 1986, § 4-30; Ord. No. O-90-09-22, 9-24-1990) 
Sec. 10-13. - Control and removal of animal waste. 
(a)  The owner or custodian of any animal shall immediately remove any feces deposited by such animal upon the public sidewalks, public streets, public parks, or other public property in the City of Americus, or upon any private property within the City of Americus not under the use and control of said owner or custodian. The owner of any such animal, or the custodian of any such animal, shall be in possession of materials to remove feces left by such animal at any time during which the animal is not on property under the use and control of said owner or custodian. 
(b)  Violation of this section shall be punishable upon conviction by a fine of not less than $75.00, nor more than $500.00. Each act in violation of this section shall be considered a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-18, 5-20-2010) 
Secs. 10-14-10-42. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ANIMAL CONTROL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 10-43. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Animal control officer means an employee of the police department of the city whose duties specifically include enforcement of the provisions of this article. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog or breed of dog that, according to records of an appropriate authority: 
(1)  Inflicts a severe injury on a human being without provocation, on public or private property; or 
(2)  Aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of humans without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification; or 
(3)  Any dog breed which, notwithstanding the records of an appropriate authority with respect to any particular dog, has been determined, by proper resolution of the governing body of the city, to be a dangerous dog breed in accord with the provisions of section 10-67.1 of the City Code. 
    Dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breeds means a breed or breeds of dogs which the governing body of the City of Americus has determined, by resolution, to be a breed which consists primarily of dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs. 
    Dog control officer means the chief of police of the city, and such employees of the animal control division of the police department acting under his supervision and control. 
    Owner means any natural persons or any legal entity, including, but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust, owning, possessing, harboring, keeping, or having custody or control of a dog or cat within the territorial boundaries of the city. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means either: (1) any dog that has, without provocation, bitten a human being while on public or private property; or (2) any dog that has been determined, by proper resolution of the governing body of the city, to be a member of a dangerous dog breed or a potentially dangerous dog breed in accord with the provisions of section 10-67.1 of the City Code. 
    Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, while on the owner's property, securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and, if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
    Rabies control officer means an employee of the county board of health whose specific duties include enforcement of the rabies control rules and regulations of the county. 
    Records of an appropriate authority means records of any state, county or municipal law enforcement agency, records of any county or municipal animal control agency; records of any county board of health; records of any federal, state or local court; or records maintained by the dog control officer pursuant to this article. 
    Severe injury means any physical injury that results in broken bones or disfiguring lacerations requiring multiple sutures or cosmetic surgery or a physical injury that results in death. 
(Code 1986, § 4-20; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. O-09-07-22, 7-23-2009) 
Sec. 10-44. - Restraint of dogs and prohibition against nuisances. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any dog to allow the same to run upon the streets, sidewalks or alleys of the city, unless said dog is accompanied by its owner or other person having charge of said dog, in which event said dog must be tied with a cord or chain of sufficient strength to hold such dog. 
(b)  No person owning or having custody of any female dog shall permit such female dog off the premises of the owner or person having control of such dog when dog shall be in heat, unless the same is under control and attached to a leash, as herein provided. 
(c)  Whenever a dog is allowed to run free, in violation of this section, impoundment of the animal is authorized. Upon identification of the owner, citation shall be issued for violation of this section. 
(d)  The owner and keeper of each animal within the city shall keep it from becoming a nuisance and from endangering or injuring any person. As a consequence thereof, it shall be the duty of every owner or keeper of any animal to exercise reasonable care with respect to said animal, and to take all reasonable steps and precautions necessary to protect other persons, property and animals from injury, loss or damage which might be caused by or arise from such animal's behavior, regardless of whether such behavior is motivated by mischievousness, playfulness or ferocity. If the owner or keeper of any animal is a minor, the parent or guardian of such minor shall be responsible for ensuring compliance with this section. 
(e)  Whenever an animal is kept in such a manner as constitutes a nuisance as defined under either city ordinances or state law, a proceeding to abate the nuisance may be brought by the party aggrieved, pursuant to section 10-12. Such an action may also be brought by the city pursuant to said section. An animal found by the court to constitute a nuisance may be impounded by the city if the owner, after reasonable opportunity to do so, fails to abate the nuisance as ordered by the court. 
(Code 1986, § 4-21; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. O-90-09-22, 9-24-1990) 
Sec. 10-45. - Inoculation; registration; tagging of animals. 
(a)  All dogs and cats shall be inoculated against rabies in accordance with the procedures set forth in the rabies control rules and regulations of the county, as promulgated and from time to time amended by the county board of health, which by reference are expressly incorporated as part of this section as if fully set out herein. Violation of said rules and regulations may be enforced by the rabies control officer in the municipal court of the city, upon citation, as an offense against the city. 
(b)  The numbered vaccination tag, issued by a licensed veterinarian upon inoculation, shall be attached to a collar or harness and worn by the animal at all times. Every dog found roaming or running free, whether tagged or untagged, shall be impounded; every tagged or untagged cat found roaming or running free shall be impounded. If a tagged animal is impounded, and it is found not to be registered or its current registration has expired, the owner may be cited for violation of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 4-22; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-46. - Impoundment and actions related thereto. 
    All animals impounded by the city shall be held in a humane manner and in accord with an agreement between the city and the Sumter Humane Society, Inc., or some other entity as may from time to time be determined and established by action of the city council. 
(Code 1986, § 4-23; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. O-90-09-22, 9-24-1990) 
Secs. 10-47-10-65. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DANGEROUS DOGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. 

Sec. 10-66. - Penalties. 
    Violations of this division shall be punished by the issuance of a state warrant pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-28. 
(Code 1986, § 4-26; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-67. - Dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within the dog control officer's jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, the dog control officer shall make such investigations and inquiries with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. Whenever the dog control officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog, notice shall be given the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notices shall be deemed complete upon mailing. 
(b)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the dog control officer's finding that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog before the governing authority. 
(4)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the dog control officer's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this section on the day after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing. 
(c)  When the governing authority receives a request for a hearing it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The governing authority shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the governing authority shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the governing authority may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the dog control officer's classification of the dog. Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the governing authority shall notify the owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify it is effective on the third day following the date of receipt by the owner. 
(d)  Issuance of a certificate of registration shall be made pursuant to the following: 
(1)  Subject to the requirements of this section, the dog control officer shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog if the owner presents to the dog control officer or if the dog control officer finds sufficient evidence of: 
a.  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
b.  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the premises. The sign required to be posted must substantially conform to the design provided by the department of natural resources. 
c.  Payment to the city of a fee in the amount of $50.00, to defray the cost of administering and enforcing this section. 
(2)  In addition, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present evidence to the dog control officer of: 
a.  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00, issued by an insurer authorized to transact business within the state insuring the owner of the dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
b.  A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00, or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(e)  Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of an annual renewal of a certificate of registration, a dog control officer shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the local government does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in subsection (d) of this section are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog on a continuous basis following the date of the issuance of the initial certificate of registration or following the date of any annual renewal of such certificate. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, if unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold or donated. If the dog has been sold or donated, the owner shall also provide the name, address and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(h)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the dog control officer if the owner is moving from the dog control officer's jurisdiction. 
(i)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who is a new resident of the state shall register the dog in the manner provided by this article within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
(j)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who moves from one jurisdiction to another within the state shall register the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog in the manner provided by this article within 30 days after becoming a resident of the new jurisdiction. 
(k)  The fee to be paid to the city for a certificate of registration for a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25 shall be as established by ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 4-24; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990) 
Sec. 10-67.1. - Determination by city council of dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breeds. 
(a)  In making a determination that a particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed, the governing body shall undertake the following steps: 
(1)  In the event that the dog control officer receives a report or obtains other information which leads the dog control officer to believe that a particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed, such information shall be provided to the city manager of the city. 
(2)  The city manager shall review all evidence and other information submitted by the dog control officer regarding the particular dog breed involved and, in the event that the city manager determines that a particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed, the city manager shall report such fact, and the information and evidence supporting such fact, to the governing body of the city. 
(3)  Upon receipt of such report from the city manager, the governing body of the city shall, upon recommendation of the public safety committee, hold a public hearing on the issue of whether or not the particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed. Notice of such public hearing shall be published at least once per week for the two calendar weeks immediately prior to the date of the public hearing. Such published notice shall appear in the legal organ of the city, and the cost of such publication shall be paid by the city. 
(4)  At the public hearing, the findings and evidence that the dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed shall be presented to the governing body by the city manager or his or her designee. Upon presentation of such evidence, persons desiring to speak in favor of declaring the particular dog breed a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed shall have ten minutes to make their presentations to the governing body as to why such dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed. At the conclusion of such presentations, persons opposed to declaring the particular dog breed a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed shall have ten minutes to present evidence as to why such dog breed is not a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed. At the conclusion of the evidence, the governing body shall consider all evidence presented and shall determine whether the particular dog breed is a dangerous or potentially dangerous breed based upon the evidence and argument presented at the public hearing. Such determination shall be made by the governing body in the form of a resolution declaring that such breed is either a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog breed. 
(5)  For purposes of such a determination, the governing body of the city shall be required to establish that a particular breed is dangerous or potentially dangerous by reviewing evidence presented to the governing body regarding the dog breed in question, including the dog breed's propensity for inflicting severe injuries on humans without provocation or aggressively biting, attacking or endangering the safety of humans without provocation, or that the breed is likely, based upon the characteristics of the breed, to do so. The final determination as to whether a particular breed is a potentially dangerous dog breed or a dangerous dog breed shall be made by the governing body of the city based upon the evidence presented to the governing body at the public hearing required in accord with the Code section. 
(b)  In the event that the governing body of the city adopts a resolution declaring a particular dog breed as a dangerous dog breed, the provisions of section 10-67 and section 10-68 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Americus which are applicable to dangerous dogs shall be applicable to that particular dog breed. 
(c)  In the event that the governing body of the city adopts a resolution declaring a particular dog breed as a potentially dangerous dog breed, the provisions of section 10-67 and section 10-68 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Americus which are applicable to potentially dangerous dogs shall be applicable to that particular dog breed. 
(Ord. No. O-09-07-22, 7-23-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 10-68. - Possession without certification; keeping dog in violation of certification; failure to post clearly visible warning sign; confiscation and impoundment; destruction of animal. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with this article. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a potentially dangerous dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the restraint of a responsible person. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog to fail to post a warning sign on the premises where a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is housed or kept by its owner in accordance with this article. The warning sign shall give notice to the public of the housing or keeping of a dog or a breed of dog which has been declared to be a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog. 
(e)  It shall be the duty of the dog control officer, and any person under his employ, to impound the dog if: 
(1)  The owner does not secure a certificate of registration in accordance with this article. 
(2)  The owner does not secure liability insurance or meet the bond requirement of this article. 
(3)  The owner does not keep the dog within a proper enclosure or permits the dog to roam or run free. 
(f)  Any dog impounded under the provisions of this section shall be returned to the owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon payment of reasonable impoundment costs, as fixed by a schedule approved by the governing authority, as from time to time amended. Notice of impoundment under this section shall be given the owner, in writing, by certified mail, at his last known address. This notice shall state that if the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days from receipt of such notice, the dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner; provided, however, no dog shall have been destroyed under this section unless it has been held a full 20 days, exclusive of the date of giving notice. 
(g)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall be solely liable for any injury to or death of a person caused such dog. 
(h)  Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official of the city which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog: 
(1)  That has been identified as being a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog; 
(2)  Which the city has failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  Which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in this section; or 
(4)  Whose owner has not maintained insurance coverage or a surety bond as required in this section. 
(Code 1986, § 4-25; Ord. No. O-90-02-06, 2-26-1990; Ord. No. O-09-07-22, 7-23-2009) 
Sec. 10-69. - Penalty for violation of city ordinances related to dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breeds. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 10-66 of the City Code, any violation of the provisions of the City Code, related to dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breeds, shall be punished in accord with the provisions of section 1-8 of the City Code. In addition to the penalty provisions of section 1-8 of the City Code, any person owning a dog breed which has been declared as a dangerous or a potentially dangerous dog breed who violates the provisions of the City Code relative to dangerous dog breeds or potentially dangerous dog breeds shall have his or her dangerous or potentially dangerous dog breed immediately confiscated by the dog control officer or by a law enforcement officer or another person authorized by the dog control officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county board of health and, thereafter, the dog which is a member of the dangerous dog breed or a member of the potentially dangerous dog breed may be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. O-09-07-22, 7-23-2009) 
Chapter 14 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Advisory board for physically disabled access. 
(a)  There is hereby established an advisory board to review plans for major construction projects in the city in connection with access to such buildings by disabled individuals. Such advisory board shall consist of the following persons: 
(1)  Not less than three physically disabled residents of the city appointed by the city council who have an interest in providing information and in put regarding construction of buildings in such a manner so as to ensure, to the greatest extent reasonably possible, access to such buildings for physically disabled individuals; 
(2)  Two other persons appointed by the city council. 
(b)  The persons appointed to the board shall serve staggered term such that one person shall be appointed for an initial term of one year, two persons will be appointed for an initial term of two years, and two persons will be appointed for an initial term of three years. Thereafter, all persons shall be appointed for three-year terms. Persons appointed to the board may succeed themselves and shall serve until their successor is appointed and qualified. Each member of the board shall serve at the pleasure of the city council and may be removed at any time by the city council with or without cause. 
(c)  The members of the board shall elect one of their number as chairman and one of their number as vice-chairman. The board shall also elect a secretary of the board who may or may not be a member of the board. All meetings of the board shall be subject to the state's open meetings statutes. 
(d)  The board shall have the following duties and responsibilities: 
(1)  All major construction project plans within the city shall be referred to the board for review in connection with access for the disabled to the building or buildings that are the subject of such construction plans; 
(2)  The board shall make recommendations to the city building official 's office as to any suggested changes in major construction plans so as to increase or enhance disabled persons' access to and from such buildings; 
(3)  The board shall be authorized to make such other additional recommendations regarding disabled persons' access as it may deem appropriate. 
(e)  For the purpose of this section, the term "major construction" shall be deemed to include construction of commercial buildings to be undertaken within the limits of the city for which a certificate of occupancy is or will be acquired upon completion of such construction in accord with current ordinances. 
(f)  Nothing in this section shall require the building official nor any builder or owner of a building to comply with any recommendations made by the advisory board, but such recommendations of the advisory board should be taken into consideration by the city building official in connection with approval by the building official of major construction project plans in the city. All recommendations of the board shall be submitted to the city building official's office within five business days of the board's receipt of major construction project plans from the building official's office. 
(g)  Nothing herein shall be deemed to conflict with any provision of any code adopted within the city, as such codes may now exist or be hereafter amended. 
(Code 1986, § 5-8; Ord. No. O-97-11-38, 11-20-1997) 
Sec. 14-2. - Stormwater management. 
(a)  Plans required. Stormwater management plans shall be required for a development before any building permits may be issued. Those developments include: 
(1)  Any commercial, industrial, school, church or places of religious worship, recreational facilities, and private clubs and golf courses, where the development will disturb or alter more than 1.1 acres of land area. 
(2)  Any subdivision, multifamily, or group housing development where at least ten dwelling units are proposed. 
(3)  Any other development where the building official with consultation with the utilities director deems appropriate because of location, terrain, grade, or any other possible stormwater problem. 
(b)  Application procedure. Two copies of the stormwater management plans shall be submitted to the building risk management office. These plans shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. The building official will forward one copy to the city utilities director for review and approval, and the other copy shall be retained in the project construction files within the building official's office. The utilities director will notify the building official of approval or disapproval of the stormwater management plans as designed within seven working days. 
(c)  Standards for stormwater management. 
(1)  A combination of storage and controlled release of stormwater runoff shall be required when the proposed development shall increase the peak rate of runoff by more than one percent for a 25-year frequency storm; 
(2)  Should the peak rate of stormwater runoff from the site exceed the permitted peak release rate, then on-site retention or detention shall be required. All retention or detention facilities shall be designed for all intensities up to and including 25-year frequency for all duration of rainfall. The peak runoff rate from the site after the development shall not be greater than the permitted peak release rate; and 
(3)  The retention or detention storage to be provided shall be calculated on the basis of the 25-year frequency rainfall, as published by the National Weather Service for the affected site. The retention or detention volume required shall be that necessary to handle the runoff of the 25-year rainfall for any and all durations from the proposed development, less than that volume discharged during the same duration at the approved release rate as specified in subsection (c)(1) of this section. 
(d)  Inspection. Inspection of the site for plan compliance shall be made periodically by the utilities director of the city. Any plan variation noted by the utilities director shall be addressed in writing to the developer of the site or contractor in charge and a copy sent to the city building official for filing with the project documents. 
(e)  Permit. A stormwater management plan approved by the city utilities director shall constitute a permit that will satisfy the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 5-79.1; Ord. No. O-97-03-06, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-99-03-11, 3-18-1999) 
Sec. 14-3. - Site plans applicable to more than one city ordinance. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, in the event that a site plan must be submitted to the city council in connection with, or in compliance with, the requirements of the city's wetland protection ordinance, the city's flood damage prevention ordinance, the city's soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinance, or the city's groundwater recharge protection ordinance, and in the event that such site plan be deemed sufficient by the permitting officer to satisfy the requirements of more than one of said ordinances, then, at the request of the permit applicant, the permitting officer shall be authorized to waive the submission of additional site plans for such project and may use such site plan as submitted in connection with the granting or denying of permit applications as to any or all of such ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 5-9; Ord. No. O-99-11-42, 11-18-1999) 
Sec. 14-4. - Permit for construction of ponds. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to collect or pond, by the construction of any dam or otherwise, the waters of any branch, creek or stream, or any other waters within the city in any fish pond, mill pond, bathing pond, or for any other purpose, or cause the same to be so ponded and collected, or to maintain and keep any such pond after the same is constructed without first receiving a written permit for such construction and maintenance from the building official. 
(b)  Permit requests; procedure; fees. 
(1)  Filing with building official required. In order to acquire a permit for the construction and maintenance of a pond as aforesaid, the applicant must file a request in writing with the building official consisting of an original and four copies setting out in detail the location of the pond, the waters to be impounded, the purpose for which the impoundment is requested, the size of the pond, and the method of preparation to be used on the pond site before impoundment of waters. 
(2)  Engineer's plat of survey to be filed with request. There shall be attached to each copy of the request an engineer's plat of survey showing the height, length, and width of the proposed dam, its relative location to the nearest street or highway affected thereby, also a topographic survey of the area that is to be covered by the impoundment. 
(3)  Filing fee. There shall be filed with each request a fee in the amount established by ordinance by check made payable to the city. 
(4)  Building official to forward request to health department within certain time. The building official shall within five days submit the all three copies to the county health department, which shall in turn review the request and the attached plans and specifications, and enter a recommendation regarding construction of the proposed pond. 
(5)  Recommendation of health department to building official; time limit. The county health department shall within ten days from receiving the request, return two copy to the building official with the recommendation stamped on the face thereof, one copy of which will remain on file with the building official. 
(6)  Issuance by building official. Upon direction of the city council the requested permit shall be issued by the building official. 
(Code 1962, § 12-5; Code 1986, § 5-5) 
Sec. 14-5. - Permit for diverting natural flow of water. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place any obstruction in any stream or drain in the city in such a manner as to divert the natural flow of the water therein, without first obtaining a permit therefor from the city council. 
(Code 1962, § 12-4; Code 1986, § 5-6) 
Secs. 14-6-14-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TECHNICAL CODES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- State building code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 14-29. - Codes adopted. 
(a)  (1)  In accord with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, all of the codes referenced in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)-(9)(B)(i)(VIII), as modified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20(9)(B)(ii), or as amended or revised as provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-23, are hereby adopted by reference. The codes adopted pursuant to this subsection include the following: 
a.  International Building Code, with Georgia amendments; 
b.  National Electrical Code (NFPA), with Georgia amendments; 
c.  International Fuel Gas Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; 
d.  International Mechanical Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; 
e.  International Plumbing Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; 
f.  International Residential Code for One- and Two-Family Dwellings (ICC), with Georgia amendments; 
g.  International Energy Conservation Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; 
h.  International Fire Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments. 
(2)  In accord with O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25, the following codes are also adopted and shall be applicable within the corporate limits of the city: 
a.  International Property Maintenance Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments, and as amended; 
b.  International Existing Building Code (ICC), with Georgia amendments; 
c.  National Green Building Standard Code, with Georgia amendments. 
(b)  The building official of the city shall maintain current copies of such codes on file in his office and such codes shall be available for inspection and review by the public during regular business hours of the building official. Such codes are hereby adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein, and from the date on which this section shall take effect, the provisions of such codes shall be controlling within the city. 
(c)  The following shall be applicable to such codes: 
(1)  Such codes shall be enforced by the building official and, where applicable, the chief of the fire department, or his designee. 
(2)  Any reference to the term "board of adjustments and appeals" in said codes shall mean the zoning board of appeals of the city as established by section 94-86, and such zoning board of appeals shall have the same powers, duties and authority given to the board of adjustments and appeals in such incorporated codes. 
(3)  In hearing and deciding appeals from decision of the building official or the chief of the fire department made pursuant to their authority under the state minimum codes, the rules of procedure of the adopted codes shall apply; provided, however, that the rules for appointment and terms of office for the appeals board in said adopted codes shall not be applicable to the zoning board of appeals. 
(4)  The building official shall have the authority to render interpretations of the City's Code of Ordinances and the adopted state codes and to adopt policies and procedures in order to clarify the applications of the provisions thereof. 
(d)  Any person charged with the violation of any provision of any of such codes, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(e)  Permit and inspection fees. There are hereby established certain permit and inspection fees to be charged by the city for building permits, electrical permits, plumbing permits, mechanical (heating and air conditioning) permits, for moving of buildings or structures within the city limits, and for demolition of buildings or structures within the city limits. Such permit and inspection fees shall be paid to the city in accord with the various provisions of this chapter and the various codes previously adopted by reference in accord with the provisions of this chapter. 
(f)  Building permit and inspection fees. 
(1)  A building permit and inspection fee shall be computed based upon the value of all structures and buildings being built, and such valuation shall be based upon the building valuation data as issued by the Southern Building Code Congress International as of the time of application for said permit. The valuation data actually used in computing the valuation of the structures and buildings shall be 75 percent of the total valuation computed using the building valuation data as issued by the Southern Building Code Congress International. Once the valuation of said structures and buildings is computed, such valuation shall be used in determining the actual building permit and inspection fees. 
(2)  The building permit and inspection fees for the city are as established by ordinance. 
(3)  The building permit and inspection fee for the moving of any building or structure into, out of or within the city shall be as established by ordinance. 
(4)  The building permit and inspection fee for the demolition of a building or structure within the city shall be as established by ordinance. 
(5)  The building permit and inspection fee for the installation of any tent for public gatherings within the city shall be as established by ordinance. 
(g)  Electrical permit fees and inspection fees. There are hereby established electrical permit fees and inspection fees to be paid for work done within the city pursuant to division 2 of this article, and the fees for such electrical permits and inspections are as established by ordinance. 
(h)  Plumbing permit and inspection fees. There are hereby established plumbing permit fees and inspection fees to be paid for work done within the city pursuant to division 3 of this article, and the fees for such plumbing permits and inspections are as established by ordinance. 
(i)  Mechanical permit and inspection fees. There are hereby established mechanical permit and inspection fees for permits and inspections in the amounts established by ordinance. 
(j)  The building official of the city shall be authorized to carry out such inspections and issue such permits as may be required by this Code, but he may only issue such permits upon the payment of the fees as herein provided. Such building official may make such inspections and investigations, notwithstanding any other provisions of this Code providing for any other person or entity to make such inspections. Pursuant to the authority contained in 1996 Georgia Laws (Act No. 1046), page 1632, § 3, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), relating to self-inspection of water and sewer projects by master plumbers or utility contractors, shall not be applicable within the city. 
(k)  Permit and inspection fees required by this Code shall be paid for prior to obtaining the permits provided for in this Code. Where work for which a permit is required by this Code is begun or initiated prior to obtaining the required permit, the fees required by this Code shall be paid and, as a penalty for the failure to secure a permit, an additional amount equal to the original fee required shall be paid to the city; however, the payment of such penalty shall not relieve any person from otherwise complying with the requirements of this Code in carrying out the work for which the permit is required, nor shall the payment of any such penalty relieve such person from any other penalties prescribed in this Code relating to the work performed. 
(Code 1962, §§ 5-1-5-1.3, 8-1, 11-1, 11-6, 17-1; Code 1986, § 5-1; Ord. No. O-88-03-10, 3-28-1988; Ord. No. O-92-01-05, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-92-03-13, 3-23-1992; Ord. No. O-93-02-06, 2-22-1993; Ord. No. O-94-07-26, 7-21-1994; Ord. No. O-94-10-36, 10-27-1994; Ord. No. O-94-11-38, 11-28-1994; Ord. No. O-95-11-36, 11-30-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-40, 9-19-1996; Ord. No. O-97-03-07, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-98-06-24, 6-18-1998; Ord. No. O-05-01-04, 1-20-2005; Ord. No. O-2013-31, 11-21-2013) 
Sec. 14-30. - Building permits. 
(a)  Work plan prerequisite to issuance. No building or other structure or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, enlarged or altered until a plan of the proposed work, together with a statement of the materials to be used, shall have been submitted to the building official and fire department representative. If in accordance with the provisions herein contained, the building official shall issue a permit for the proposed construction. 
(b)  Removal of nonpermitted, nonconforming structures. Structures hereafter erected without permit, or not in conformity with this chapter, shall be removed and the violator prosecuted. 
(c)  Permit to precede work; compliance with technical codes required. No building shall be constructed, enlarged, altered or moved until a building permit has been obtained from the building official, and such official shall not issue such permit if the proposed construction, enlargement, alteration or moving would in any manner violate the housing, building, fire, plumbing, electrical, heating and air conditioning, zoning, or subdivision codes or regulations or any other codes or ordinances now or hereafter adopted by the city. 
(d)  Application. All applications for building permits shall be made in duplicate upon forms provided for this purpose by the office of the building official with payment in the amount necessary to cover the cost of such building permit, together with all other exhibits and information as provided and set forth in section 94-28. 
(e)  Persons responsible. The persons responsible for obtaining permits called for herein shall be the person actually doing the construction work or the person in charge of the construction work regardless of whether such person doing the actual construction work or in charge of the actual construction work is the owner, lessee or contractor. 
(f)  Display. All building permits called for in this section shall be displayed in a manner on the property under construction or on which repairs are being made so as to be visible from the public street closest to such construction site. 
(g)  Penalty for violation. All persons violating any provision of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1962, § 5-2; Code 1986, § 5-2; Ord. No. O-88-03-10, 3-28-1988) 
Sec. 14-31. - Water conservation restrictions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
    Residential means any building or unit or a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling built shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(b)  Residential buildings. On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 psi of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
(c)  Commercial buildings. On or after July 1, 1992, there shall be no construction of any commercial building initiated within the city for any commercial building of any type that does not meet the requirements of subsection (b) of this section. 
(d)  Repair, renovation, addition to existing buildings. The requirements of subsection (b) of this section shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(e)  Exemptions. 
(1)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of subsections (b)-(d) of this section when: 
a.  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
b.  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this section were installed; 
c.  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; 
d.  Units to be installed are: 
1.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
2.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
3.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(2)  The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (e)(1) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the building official for the city. A fee in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(f)  Enforcement. This section shall be enforced by the office of the building official of the city. Citations for violations may be issued by the chief building official of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-7; Ord. No. O-91-02-04, 2-25-1991) 
Sec. 14-32. - State license required. 
    The building official shall be authorized to cause charges to be brought for violations of this chapter against any person found to be installing, or known to have installed, electrical, plumbing, mechanical, gas, or other facilities that require a person to have a State of Georgia license in order to undertake such installation. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-31, 11-21-2013) 
Secs. 14-33-14-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ELECTRICITY 

Sec. 14-51. - Electrical inspector-Generally. 
(a)  Position designated. The building official for the city shall perform the duties of electrical inspector. 
(b)  Authority. The electrical inspector shall be the enforcing officer, supervising the enforcement of the provisions of the electrical code. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail or refuse to obey any order of the electrical inspector issued under the provisions of this article and such person shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(c)  Assistants. The electrical inspector, with the approval of the chief appointing authority of the city, may appoint such number of officers, inspectors, assistants and other employees as shall be authorized from time to time. 
(d)  Records. The electrical inspector shall keep, or cause to be kept, a record of the business of the office. Such records shall be open to the inspection of the public at all times. 
(e)  Duty. The electrical inspector is hereby authorized, empowered and directed to regulate the placing of electrical wiring and equipment for electric light, heat or power within the scope of the electrical code and to cause all such wiring and equipment to be so placed to accomplish the purpose of the electrical code. 
(f)  Right of entry. The electrical inspector shall have the right in the discharge of such inspector's duties to enter any building, manhole, or subway, or to climb any pole for the purpose of examining and testing the electrical wiring and equipment therein or thereon. For this purpose, such inspector shall be given prompt access to such places on application to the person owning or in charge of same. It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse entry to the electrical inspector when such inspector is performing the duties prescribed in this article. 
(g)  Permit application forms. The electrical inspector shall prescribe the manner and form of application for a permit for the installation and maintenance of electrical wiring and equipment subject to approval by the city council. Such inspector shall maintain or cause to be maintained, a supply of application forms, with all necessary instructions, available to the public during the normal business hours of such office. 
(h)  Receipt of and action on application. The electrical inspector shall receive and consider all applications for permits and shall request such additional information as may be required in connection with same. The electrical inspector shall act upon an application for a permit as filed or amended without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. 
(i)  Notice of fee. The electrical inspector shall determine the application fee as required by ordinance, and notify the applicant of said fee. 
(j)  Charge of violations. The electrical inspector shall bring charges against any person who, after due notice of violation of the electrical code, shall fail or refuse to make the necessary corrections as provided in this chapter. 
(k)  Warrant for violators. The electrical inspector shall cause charges to be brought for violation of this division against any person found to be installing, or known to have installed, electrical work or equipment when such person does not hold the certificate and permit required by this article. 
(l)  Other duties. The electrical inspector shall perform such other duties as may be specified or implied to such inspector in other sections of this Code. 
(m)  Liability. The electrical inspector, or any employee acting under such inspector's instructions and authority, in the discharge of such inspector's duties, as required by this article, shall not thereby be rendered liable personally and such inspector and employees are hereby relieved from all personal liability for any damage that may occur to persons or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of official duties. 
(Code 1962, §§ 8-4, 8-5, 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-23) 
Sec. 14-52. - Same-Conflict of interests of officers and employees. 
    No officer or employee connected with the electrical inspector's office shall be financially interested in the furnishing of labor, material or appliances or the construction, alteration or maintenance of electrical installations or in the making of plans or specifications therefor, unless such person is the owner of such building. No employee shall engage in any work which is inconsistent with such employee's duties or with the interest of the inspector's office. 
(Code 1962, § 8-10; Code 1986, § 5-24) 
Sec. 14-53. - Permit. 
(a)  Required. No person shall install or repair any electrical wiring or equipment, except repairs that do not alter or change the original wiring or equipment, nor shall the load be increased, until a permit therefor has been secured from the electrical inspector. 
(b)  Application. It shall be the duty of master electricians to apply for permits to install or alter electrical wiring or equipment within the scope of this article and the electrical code. Before applying for said permit, such electrician shall determine that the work or equipment contemplated is in compliance with the provisions of this article and the electrical code and shall furnish with the application all information requested by the electrical inspector. All applications for permits shall be written on forms supplied by the electrical inspector's office and shall be dealt with as provided elsewhere in this chapter. 
(c)  Required to obtain before work commences. If any person commences any electrical installation or maintenance within the scope of this code before obtaining the necessary permit, such person shall be subject to the penalties prescribed herein. 
(d)  Penalty for failure to obtain permit. Any person who shall commence any work within the scope of this article or the electrical code without first having obtained a proper permit therefor shall pay a penalty in the amount established as a penalty pursuant to section 14-29 in addition to the regular inspection fee for said work. In the event of repair work requiring a permit, the party shall notify the inspector and get a permit by the end of the next working day. 
(e)  Issuance of permit. When and if satisfied that the application is in order and that the work described therein complies with this article and the electrical code, the inspector shall issue a permit to proceed with the work described in the application. 
(f)  Refusal to issue. The inspector shall refuse to issue a permit if such inspector's examination of the application and all information pertaining thereto indicate that the work or equipment described or contemplated therein does not conform to the requirements of this article or the electrical code. The inspector shall return the application to the applicant with the refusal to issue a permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons therefor. The inspector shall also refuse to issue a permit to any applicant who has failed or refused to comply with this article or the electrical code or any order of the city. 
(g)  Permit granted in violation. Except as provided in this article, the electrical inspector shall not grant a permit to any person unless such person has fully qualified under all the terms of this article. Any permit granted in violation of this article shall be null and void. 
(h)  Failure to correct defects within time limit. Any person certified as prescribed in this article, who fails to correct any defect in the work after having been duly notified for a period of ten days, shall receive no further permit until such defects have been corrected. 
(i)  Revocation of permit or approval. The electrical inspector shall revoke any permit or approval issued by such inspector's office when, in such inspector's opinion, said permit was obtained by misrepresentation of the material fact or by false statement in the application or the plans. 
(Code 1962, §§ 8-5-8-8; Code 1986, § 5-31; Ord. No. O-88-03-10, 3-28-1988) 
Sec. 14-54. - Inspections. 
(a)  Required. All new electrical work and equipment and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work, shall be inspected to ensure compliance with all the requirements of this article and the electrical code and to assure that the installation of the electrical system and equipment is in accordance with approved plans. It shall be the duty of the electrical inspector, either personally or by assistants, to inspect all electrical work and equipment within the scope of this article and the electrical code during the progress of such work, as well as when it is completed. Such inspection is to be made from time to time and must be thorough and complete. 
(b)  Fees. Inspection fees shall be on a cash basis. Said inspection fee shall include a second inspection where defects or a violation are noted in the first inspection. 
(c)  Notice of readiness. The master electrician shall determine when work, as required by the electrical inspector, is ready for inspection and shall notify the electrical inspector's office of same. The master electrician shall further notify the electrical inspector's office at the completion of any electrical installation within the scope of this article and the electrical code. Any person who shall fail to notify the inspector's office of readiness for inspection as required herein shall pay, in addition to the regular inspection fee, an additional fee in the amount established by ordinance. 
(d)  Roughing-in inspection and approval. The inspector shall make roughing-in inspection within 24 hours after notice by a permit holder that such work is ready for inspection. Upon satisfactory completion of the roughing-in inspection, approval shall be noted on a label or card of suitable design showing the date and name of the inspector. Said notice shall be displayed in a prominent place at the site of the work. 
(e)  Covering work. No part of the electrical system shall be covered until it has been inspected and approved as prescribed in this article. 
(f)  Uncovering required upon order. If any part of the electrical system has been covered in violation of this article, it shall be uncovered upon order from the electrical inspector at the expense of the party so violating this article. 
(g)  Final inspection. At the completion of any electrical installation of any work or equipment within the scope of this article or the electrical code, the electrical inspector shall make a final inspection to determine compliance. If such final inspection proves satisfactory to the electrical inspector, such inspector shall issue and attach inside the main electrical disconnecting means a suitable label of approval, showing the date, the inspector's name and the name of the person responsible for the work, and notify the electric distribution company. 
(h)  Reinspection. The inspector shall make reinspections when necessitated by unsatisfactory work or equipment and shall charge therefor the fees provided. 
(i)  Temporary installations. The inspector shall inspect temporary electrical installations and shall have authority to cause the same to be installed in accordance with this article and the electrical code. 
(j)  Damaging inspection notice. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove, deface or damage any inspection notice posted as required by this article. 
(Code 1962, §§ 8-5, 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-32) 
Sec. 14-55. - Defective work; dangerous condition; connection; disconnection. 
(a)  Notice, compliance. Upon notice from the electrical inspector to any owner, agent or person responsible for any wiring or equipment that is in violation of the provisions of this article or the electrical code, or has become unsafe, said owner, agent or person, shall cease to use the wiring or equipment until such person has completed such changes as may be ordered by the electrical inspector and same have been approved by the inspector. Upon notice from the electrical inspector that any part of the wiring or equipment inspected is not acceptable under the provision of this article or the electrical code, the master electrician in charge, or the owner or agent, shall make the necessary changes, and so notify the inspector. 
(b)  Stop work orders. The electrical inspector shall have the power to issue stop work orders on any work within the scope of this article or the electrical code when such work is being done contrary to the provisions thereof or in a dangerous or unsafe manner. Such order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of such property or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where any emergency exists, oral notice, given by the electrical inspector, shall be sufficient. 
(c)  Disconnect orders. The electrical inspector shall have the power to order disconnection of any electrical installation or equipment within the scope of this article or the electrical code when such installation of equipment has been installed, or through use has become contrary to the provision thereof or is dangerous or unsafe. Such order shall be given to the owner of such installation or the owner's agent and shall state the conditions under which connection may be resumed. Where any emergency exists, oral notice, given by the electrical inspector, shall be sufficient. In any case of failure to comply, the electrical inspector shall, after due notice, order discontinuance of electrical service to the locality or building concerned and shall enforce said discontinuance until compliance with the requirements. 
(d)  Notice of violation. In case of violations that, in the opinion of the electrical inspector do not require stop work or disconnect orders, such inspector shall notify the person responsible. Such notice shall state the violation and corrections required, and shall if required, be in writing. 
(e)  Temporary connection. The electrical inspector may permit temporary connection during the course of construction for temporary light, heat or power, when in such inspector's opinion, such connection is required. The inspector shall determine the period of such requirement and shall at the end of that period, cause the temporary connection to be discontinued. 
(f)  Refusal of connection. The electrical inspector may refuse to authorize a connection so long as, in such inspector's opinion, any violation of this article or the electrical code exists. 
(Code 1962, §§ 8-5-8-8; Code 1986, § 5-33) 
Sec. 14-56. - Ordering illegal work. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to order any wiring or equipment installed which violates any provision of this article or the electrical code. 
(b)  In the event an owner, employer, or any person of authority over a master electrician shall order work done or equipment installed that violates the provisions of this article or the electrical code, it shall be the duty of the master electrician to immediately notify, in writing, the electrical inspector of all particulars concerning same. 
(Code 1962, §§ 8-7, 8-8; Code 1986, § 5-34) 
Sec. 14-57. - Maintenance of system, etc. 
    All electrical systems, both existing and new, and all devices, appliances and equipment attached therein shall be maintained in a safe manner. All devices and safeguards that are required by this article or the electrical code shall be maintained in good working order. The owner or owner's agent shall be responsible for the maintenance of such system, devices, appliances and equipment. 
(Code 1962, § 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-35) 
Sec. 14-58. - Maintaining clearance of service drops. 
    No person shall build, alter or erect any building or other structure that will affect the clearance required for service drops and point of attachment of same. Upon discovery of a violation of this provision, the person responsible shall be required to remove said building or other structure or to bear all expense involved in altering the service drop to obtain the necessary safe clearances. 
(Code 1962, § 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-36) 
Sec. 14-59. - Standards for materials. 
    All wires, devices, appliances and apparatus installed, used, sold or offered for sale within the city shall conform to the rules and regulations of this article and the electrical code, and, for the purpose hereof, they shall bear the label of Underwriter's Laboratories, Inc., or shall be approved by the authority enforcing the code. Such label or listing shall be prima facie evidence that said item conforms to this article and the electrical code. 
(Code 1962, § 8-7; Code 1986, § 5-37) 
Secs. 14-60-14-76. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PLUMBING 

Sec. 14-77. - Inspector's right-of-entry. 
    The plumbing inspector shall have the authority to enter any building at reasonable hours for the purpose of inspecting the plumbing. Any person attempting to prevent such inspection, whether owner, lessee, or agent, shall be in violation of this article. 
(Code 1962, § 17-18; Code 1986, § 5-106) 
Sec. 14-78. - Permit-Required. 
    No person shall install or repair any plumbing except repairs not involving the removing or alteration of soil, waste-vent pipes or traps, until a permit has been secured from the plumbing inspector. No less than four hours before any plumbing work is started, including drainage, sewage, extensions, or alterations, except as noted in this section, a permit must be secured from the plumbing inspector for such work to be done. 
(Code 1962, § 17-9; Code 1986, § 5-108) 
Sec. 14-79. - Same-Restriction. 
    No person engaged in the plumbing business shall allow such person's name to be used, directly or indirectly, by any other person for the purpose of securing a permit, sending in notices or returns or doing work under the license of any other person. 
(Code 1962, § 17-15; Code 1986, § 5-110) 
Sec. 14-80. - Inspections-Required. 
    It shall be the duty of the plumbing inspector, either personally or by assistants, to inspect all plumbing work during the progress of the work and upon completion. 
(Code 1962, § 71-10; Code 1986, § 5-112) 
Sec. 14-81. - Same-Notices. 
    Inspection notices upon blanks furnished by the plumbing inspector shall be filed in the office of the plumbing inspector by each person doing plumbing work, giving notice of the location, kind of work and the time for inspection, and the work will be inspected as soon as possible thereafter. When the work has been completed, the plumber must immediately notify the inspector. At the time the final inspection is made, the plumber or the plumber's designated representative shall be present. No plumbing work may be covered until the inspection is made. It shall be unlawful for any person to fail to comply with this procedure. Upon final inspection, if the inspector determines that the plumbing and material are in accordance with this article, a final inspection certificate shall be issued. If the inspector finds that any plumbing has not been properly installed or does not comply with this article, the inspector shall notify the owner of such property and, upon notice so to do, the owner shall make such changes and corrections in the plumbing as may be ordered by the inspector; failure to make such changes within five days after notice shall subject the owner, agent or lessee to punishment, as prescribed in section 1-8. Also, if the necessary correction is not made, the city may refuse to furnish water to the premises. 
(Code 1962, § 17-11; Code 1986, § 5-113) 
Secs. 14-82-14-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - GAS 

Sec. 14-106. - Enforcement. 
(a)  The building official shall be charged with the responsibility of supervising and conducting all requirements of the gas code and this article, unless such responsibility is charged by the city to some other person or agency of the government. 
(b)  It is the intent of this article to promulgate such rules, regulations and requirements as may be necessary to protect the life, limb, safety and property of all users and citizens. It is also the intent of this article to vest in the building official the discretion of varying such rules, regulations or requirements provided such discretion shall not violate the intent and purpose of this article. 
(Code 1962, § 11-5; Code 1986, § 5-120) 
Sec. 14-107. - Bond of gasfitters. 
    No person shall act as a gasfitter in the city unless such person files a copy with the building official of the bond filed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-14-12. 
(Code 1962, § 11-2; Code 1986, § 5-123) 
Sec. 14-108. - Permit required, fee; meter required. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to make any installation for service of any such gas until a permit is secured from the building official may appoint for such purposes. 
(b)  The applicant for any installation shall make a written request to the building official for a permit, which request shall state the proposed location of the installation, and shall be accompanied by a sketch of the proposed location and a fee in the amount established by ordinance to cover inspection costs. In the event the permit is not granted the fee shall not be returned to the applicant. 
(c)  Each installation shall be equipped with an accurate and appropriate measuring device, meter or gauge, depending upon the type of system, so as to enable the building official and the consumer to clearly determine the amount of pressure or quantity of material being received. 
(Code 1962, § 11-11; Code 1986, § 5-124) 
Sec. 14-109. - Meter installation. 
    One gas meter shall be installed for each dwelling unit, which shall specifically include but not be limited to one meter for each unit in an apartment-type building. 
(Code 1962, § 11-3; Code 1986, § 5-125) 
Sec. 14-110. - Gas not to be turned on unless owner or occupant is present. 
    The gas supply to any building using gas appliances or to which gas piping has been constructed or installed shall not be turned on unless the owner or occupant of said building or premises is physically present at the time. 
(Code 1962, § 11-4; Code 1986, § 5-126) 
Secs. 14-111-14-133. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LANDSCAPING 

Sec. 14-134. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessway means a way of approaching, entering, or leaving a property. 
    Board means the zoning board of appeals, as specified in section 94-86. 
    Crown means the main point of branching of foliage of a tree or plant, or the upper portion of a tree or plant. 
    Crown spread means the distance measured across the greatest diameter of a plant. 
    Development area means the portion of a plot or parcel of land, excluding public right-of-way, upon which a building, structure, pavement, landscape material, or other improvements have been placed. 
    Encroachment means the protrusion of a vehicle outside of a parking space, display area, storage area, accessway, or access aisle into a landscaped area. 
    Ground cover means natural mulch or low growing plants other than deciduous varieties installed to form a continuous cover over the ground. 
    Interior area means the entire parcel to be developed exclusive of the front, rear and side perimeter landscape area. 
    Outdoor storage areas means an area located on business premises within the city where there is located one or more trash dumpsters or dumpster-like containers used for the purpose of holding garbage, trash and refuse pending pickup by the city or other authorized entity. 
    Shade tree means any self-supporting woody plant of a species that is well shaped, well branched and well foliated which normally grows to an overall height of at least 35 feet and normally develops an average mature spread of crown greater than 30 feet in the city. 
    Shrubs means a woody plant normally characterized by persistent woody stems, low stature and branching near its base. For purpose of this article, the term "shrub" also includes all woody plants of all species which have developed or which, under normal conditions in the county, will develop trunks of a caliper diameter of less than two inches at a height of six inches above ground level. 
    Sight triangle means the area of property on both sides of an accessway formed by the intersection of each side of the accessway and public right-of-way with the two sides of each triangle being not less than ten feet in length from the point of intersection and the third side being a straight line connecting the ends of the two other sides. 
    Tree means any self-supporting, woody plant of a species, which normally grows to an overall height of at least 20 feet and normally develops an average mature spread of crown greater than 20 feet in the city and county. (A listing of suggested trees shall be maintained in the city building official's office.) 
    Utility service area means an area, which contains any surface-mounted HVAC equipment or freestanding aboveground devices, such as utility boxes, booster boxes, switchboxes, and transformers that are part of an underground utilities system. 
    Vehicular use area means any ground surfaces area, excepting public right-of-way, used by any type of vehicle whether moving or at rest for the purpose of, including but not limited to, driving, parking, loading, unloading, storage, or display, such as, but not limited to, new and used car lots; activities of a drive-in nature in connection with banks, restaurants, and other vehicular uses under, on, or within building. 
    Visual screen means a barrier of living or nonliving landscape material or other inert material established for the purpose of separating and obscuring from view those areas so screened. Noncreditable species for screening-No species of deciduous shrub shall be credited for purposes of the visual screening requirements. 
(Code 1986, § 5-190; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 1, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-20, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 14-135. - Applicability. 
    The requirements and standards for the installation and maintenance of the landscape planting areas for the following: off-street parking facilities and other vehicular use areas. This shall apply to all new development and all redevelopment in the city except single- and two-family dwelling units and agricultural uses. 
(Code 1986, § 5-191; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 2, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-136. - Landscape development standards. 
(a)  Purpose . To ensure the attainment of the objectives of this article, the design and installation of required landscaping shall be consistent with the standards in this section, unless it can be demonstrated that alternative design and installation plans will meet the objectives of this article. The landscape development standards contained herein shall apply whenever a landscape permit and plan are required. 
(b)  Off-street parking; vehicle use areas. Off-street parking facilities and other ground level vehicle use areas over 2,000 square feet, excepting permitted accessways, shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  Perimeter requirements. 
a.  Front perimeter landscape area. A five-foot strip from the property line to the vehicular use area shall be landscaped where an off-street parking facility and other ground level vehicular use areas are in excess of 2,000 square feet in size, but less than 12,000 square feet in size. Any off-street parking facility area or vehicular use area, which contains 12,000 square feet or more shall contain a ten-foot front perimeter landscape area. The width of sidewalks shall not be included within the five-foot or ten-foot wide front setback perimeter landscape areas required herein; provided, however, that if the landscaped area is located within the street right-of-way with the permission of the city, then such portion as is located within such right-of-way shall be included in calculating the five-foot or ten-foot landscaped areas. 
b.  Side and rear perimeter landscaped area. A three-foot-wide strip of land located between the side or rear property lines and the vehicular use area shall be landscaped, where the off-street parking facilities or other ground level vehicular use areas are in excess of 2,000 square feet in size. If the landscaped area is located within the street right-of-way with the permission of the city, then such portion as is located within such right-of-way shall be included in calculating the required landscaped width. 
c.  Other areas. Landscape requirements as to the front perimeter landscaped area shall be followed with respect to any off-street parking facility or ground level vehicular use area located on a corner lot as to the boundary of such property fronting each street bounding the corner lot. 
(2)  Material requirements in perimeter area. 
a.  Ground cover. Grass or other ground cover shall be placed on all areas within the front side and rear setback perimeter landscape area not occupied by other landscape material, or permitted accessways. A list of plant materials shall be maintained in the city building official's office. 
b.  Height of landscaping materials. The owner shall have the discretion to vary the height of landscaping materials used in perimeter setback landscaped areas from certain heights or to a densely planted barrier or hedge; however, within at least one year from the date of planting, a portion of the planted material used for landscaping, no less than 15 percent thereof, excluding trees, of the linear footage of the landscaped area shall be at least 24 inches in height. Such requirement shall not be applicable to permitted accessways. 
c.  Trees. Trees shall be placed in the off-street parking and vehicular use areas in accord with the provisions of this subsection. The total tree requirement within the perimeter landscape areas shall be determined by using a ratio of one tree for each 30 linear feet of required perimeter landscaped area, or any fraction thereof. In interior planting areas, one tree shall be planted for each 480 square feet of required interior landscaped area or any fraction thereof. This provision is not intended to require that trees be equally spaced 30 feet apart. Creative design and spacing shall be permitted. All trees planted pursuant to this subsection shall be at least five feet in height at the time of planting. 
(3)  Visual screen in perimeter area. 
a.  Perimeter setback landscape areas. A visual screen shall be placed within the perimeter setback landscaped area and shall run the entire length of such abutting property line, except at permitted accessways. 
b.  Light penetration and height. A visual screen shall be installed not lower than 30 inches except as permitted accessways. 
(4)  Use of perimeter landscape areas. Vehicles may overhang no more than two feet into perimeter landscape areas. 
(5)  Cross-visibility standards of setback areas. A sight triangle shall be provided at those points where an accessway intersects a public right-of-way. The area within the sight triangle shall be provided at those points where an accessway intersects a public right-of-way. The area within the sight triangle shall be maintained in accordance within this section. 
a.  Cross-visibility level. An unobstructed cross-visibility between two and ten feet above the level of the centerline of the public right-of-way shall be maintained in accordance within the sight triangle. 
b.  Trees. Trees having limbs and foliage trimmed so that the cross-visibility is not obscured, shall be allowed to overhang within the sight triangle, provided the location of the tree itself does not create a traffic hazard. 
(c)  Outdoor storage area screening standards. Any outdoor storage area which is not screened by a building or other approved structure shall be screened as required herein. Such screening, at a minimum, shall be as follows: 
(1)  A fence or wall of the minimum height of six feet, opaque and constructed of masonry, stone, wood or some other material approved in the permitting process provided under this article. 
(2)  Natural evergreen plant materials at a minimum height of six feet at planting spaced at least five feet apart and planted in staggered double rows. 
(3)  This subsection shall apply to all existing outdoor storage areas as herein defined and as existed on the official date of the adoption of the ordinance from which this article is derived, which was September 28, 1992. In addition, any property owner where an outdoor storage area is located shall meet the requirements of this section no later than December 28, 1993. 
(4)  The dimensions for an outdoor storage area screen shall be not less than 12 feet long by 12 feet wide. Where more than one dumpster or dumpster-like container are to be located in the same outdoor storage area, there shall be a minimum three-foot separation between each dumpster or dumpster-like container. 
(5)  Nothing shall be installed or planted in connection with such outdoor storage areas so as to interfere with the removal of the contents of the dumpsters by the city or other authorized entity. 
(d)  Utility service areas. All utility service areas having vertical dimensions exceeding three feet or horizontal dimensions exceeding five feet and located within 100 yards of any street right-of-way shall be screened. Screening shall be done by planting of locally adapted evergreen species or constructed of an opaque fence or wall. 
(1)  Planting shall have a minimum installation height of 18 inches, spaced edge to edge and be expected to reach a mature height equal to or greater than the utility service structure to be screened. 
(2)  Fences or walls shall be constructed of opaque material of masonry, stone or wood and of a height and width equal to or greater than the utility service structure to be screened. 
(3)  No screening shall be installed which would impair the safe operation, maintenance or function of the utility equipment. 
(e)  Interior planting areas . 
(1)  Size. In vehicular use areas within the interior of a site, a planting area shall be required which will be equal to four percent of the paved area. Shade trees and other landscaping material shall be planted within such planting area. Interior planting areas shall be located to most effectively relieve the monotony of large expanses of paving and contribute to orderly circulation of vehicular and pedestrian traffic. All development having paved areas of 12,000 square feet or less shall be exempt from the interior planting requirements. 
(2)  Overhang. Vehicles shall not overhang more than two feet into any interior planting area. 
(3)  Interior landscaping functional waiver. In vehicular use areas, when the city has determined that the strict application of this section will interfere with the function of the vehicle use area, the required interior landscaping may be located near the perimeter of the paved area, including such perimeters which may be adjacent to a building site. 
(Code 1986, § 5-192; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 3, 9-28-1992; Ord. No. O-92-12-109, 12-28-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-20, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-93-11-36, 11-22-1993; Ord. No. O-95-12-45, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 14-137. - Maintenance, preservation and use standards. 
(a)  Maintenance. 
(1)  All required plant material shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
(2)  Structural elements related to nonliving landscape material shall be maintained in good condition at all times. 
(b)  Replacement. Dead plant material shall be replaced in accordance with the provision of this article and within a time period appropriate to the growing season of the species in question, not exceeding 90 days. 
(c)  Protection of landscape material. All required landscape areas shall be protected from unpermitted vehicular encroachment by the use of wheel stops, curbing or other suitable methods. 
(d)  Use of landscape area. No required landscape area shall be used for parking except encroachment as provided in this article, or for accessway structures, garbage or trash collection or any functional uses contrary to the intent and purposes of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 5-193; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 4, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-138. - Permit procedure. 
    Whenever the provisions of this article are applicable, a landscape permit shall be required. 
(1)  Plan required. A landscape plan shall be submitted upon application for a landscape permit. The landscape plan shall include sufficient information for the city building official to determine whether the proposed landscape improvements are in conformance with the landscape standards and other requirements of this article. 
(2)  Contents. The landscape plan shall be submitted to the city and shall include at a minimum a description of the species, size, quantity and location of all trees, shrubs and landscape material and a depiction of the site including proposed structures, vehicle use areas and relationships of the site to adjacent public or private streets and properties. 
(3)  Application procedure. The following procedures and requirements, shall be adhered to by the applicant and the city: 
a.  Applications for approval of landscape plans shall be made to the city. Upon approval of an application, the city shall issue a landscape permit. 
b.  The city shall have 15 working days after receipt of a completed application filed pursuant to this section in which to approve or deny the application. If the city disapproves the application, the city shall specify to the applicant in writing, the reason for the city's action. If no final action with regard to a completed application is taken within the required 15 working days, the application for approval of a landscape plan, shall be deemed to be approved. 
c.  No building permit, if required, shall be issued unless and until the city has approved the application for a landscape plan. 
d.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the city has determined after final inspection that required site improvements have been installed according to the approved application and plan. The city may require a performance bond or other security in the amount of no more than 110 percent of the cost of the required improvements in lieu of withholding a certificate of occupancy, and may further require that improvements be satisfactorily installed within a specified length of time. 
e.  Any applicant aggrieved by the action of any official charged with the enforcement of this article shall have the right to appeal the action to the zoning board of appeals. The appeal shall be filed with the city building official, in writing, and be heard at the next scheduled meeting of the board. A meeting of the board will be scheduled no later than 15 days from the date when the appeal is filed with the building official. It will not be necessary to place a notice in the local newspaper for an appeal made concerning this section. The decision by the board will be final. 
f.  A copy of the approved permit and plan shall be available on site during installation of landscape improvements. 
(Code 1986, § 5-194; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 5, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-139. - Variances. 
(a)  The zoning board of appeals upon written application by the developer, may grant a written variance from any requirement of this article using the following criteria: 
(1)  Where granting of the variance will not impair the attainment of the objectives of this article; or 
(2)  Where literal enforcement of this article would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
(b)  Applications for variances shall be filed with the city building official and heard at the next scheduled meeting of the board. 
(c)  A meeting of the board will be scheduled no later than 15 days from the date the application for a variance is received by the city building official. It will not be necessary to place a notice in the local newspaper for an application for a variance to this section. 
(d)  The decision by the board will be final. 
(Code 1986, § 5-195; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 6, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-140. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Written notice required . Whenever the city determines that a violation of this article exists, the city shall give written notice of the violation to the occupant, applicant and the owner shown on the most recent tax roll of the city. A copy of such written notice shall be transmitted to the city attorney. 
(b)  Content. The notice shall include but not be limited to: 
(1)  A description of the location of the property involved, either by street address or by legal description. 
(2)  A statement indicating the nature of the violation. 
(3)  A statement showing the time within which all necessary remedial action must be accomplished which time may not be less than ten days nor more than 90 days from the date of such written notice. 
(4)  The name of the person upon whom the notice of violation is served. 
(5)  A statement advising that upon the failure to comply with the requirements of the notice, the city shall take such enforcement procedures as may be required under this article. 
(c)  Service. The written notice required in subsection (a) of this section shall be served upon the person violating this article and the person owning the land by either personal delivery or certified mail. 
(d)  Compliance. If such notice is not complied with within the time specified in the notice, then the city shall use all available means of enforcement in order to secure compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 5-196; Ord. No. O-92-09-28, § 7, 9-28-1992) 
Sec. 14-141. - Applicability of existing areas. 
(a)  In accord with section 14-135, the provisions of this article are applicable to all off-street parking areas and all vehicular use areas constructed within the city after the date of approval by the city council of Ord. No. O-95-12-45. With respect to such areas existing within the city as of the effective date of Ord. No. O-95-12-45, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  This article shall apply only to those off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas which have in excess of 150 existing parking spaces, where the major paved parking surface and vehicular use area is situated in one contiguous area, is not separated by medians, existing nonconforming landscaping, buildings, walls or fences, and which area exceeds 50,000 square feet in size. 
(2)  This article shall apply only to those off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas located in an industrial "I" district of the city where the off-street parking areas or vehicular use areas are adjacent to a major street as defined in section 94-214 and, in such event, landscaping as required hereunder would only be required in the front perimeter landscape area. 
(3)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a)(1) and (2) of this section, no landowner shall be required to reduce the number of parking spaces located in such off-street parking area or vehicular use area existing on such effective date, by more than seven percent, in order to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(4)  As to those off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas existing within the city on such effective date that are subject to Ord. No. 95-12-45, pursuant to this section, the owners of such off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas shall have until January 1, 1999, to comply with the requirements of this article; provided, however, that unless a variance is granted by the city's zoning board of appeals in accord with section 94-88(3), at least one-third of the off-street parking area and vehicular use area must be landscaped in accord with this article on or before January 1, 1997, and at least two-thirds shall be landscaped in accord with this on or before January 1, 1998. 
(b)  As to the business locations where compliance with the landscape ordinance is required, the finance director shall not be authorized to issue a city business license to any occupant or tenant of such business location until proof of compliance with the landscape requirements applicable to such business location has been submitted to the finance director. 
(c)  All costs of compliance with this article shall be the responsibility of the owner of the area to be landscaped, but nothing herein shall prohibit such owner from sharing such costs of compliance with such owner's tenants or others. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, off-street parking areas and vehicular use areas of churches, and synagogues, public, private and parochial schools, and federal, state or other governmental entities shall not be required to comply with the terms of this article. 
(e)  All off-street parking areas and all vehicular use areas, which are associated with real property annexed into the city shall only be required to comply with the landscape ordinance if such property is annexed into the city with an effective date for ad valorem tax purposes on or after December 31, 1997. The owner of such property shall have a period of six months after the effective date of such annexation for ad valorem tax purposes to fully comply with the terms of this subsection, unless a variance with respect to such time limitation is granted by the city zoning board of appeals in accord with section 94-88(3), before the expiration of such six-month period. 
(Code 1986, § 5-197; Ord. No. O-95-12-45, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-97-08-30, 8-21-1997; Ord. No. O-97-08-31, 8-21-1997) 
Secs. 14-142-14-165. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - CITY DERELICT PROPERTY ORDINANCE[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, adopted Sept. 18, 2014, repealed the former art. IV, §§ 14-166-14-180, and enacted a new art. IV as set out herein. The former art. IV was entitled "Unfit Buildings and Structures" and derived from Code 1986, §§ 5-80-5-94; Ord. No. O-02-04-14, adopted Apr. 18, 2002; and Ord. No. O-10-04-11, Apr. 22, 2010. 
State Law reference- Dangerous buildings, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 et seq. 

Sec. 14-166. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "City Derelict Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-167. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term: 
(a)  Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code, as provided for in O.C.G.A. title 25, ch. 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. title 8, ch. 2 after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those building or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
(b)  Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
(c)  Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-2-13, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act". 
(d)  Dwellings, buildings or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
(e)  Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. 
(f)  Governing authority means the City Council of the City of Americus, Georgia. 
(g)  Interested party means: 
(1)  The "owner;" 
(2)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(3)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(4)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and 
(5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, interested party shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected. 
(h)  Municipality means the City of Americus, Georgia. 
(i)  Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
(j)  Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
(k)  Public officer means the planning and inspection director, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he delegates such authority. 
(l)  Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
(m)  Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-168. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
    It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on private property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use private property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-169. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    Every dwelling, building or structure within the city which: 
(1)  Is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes in force within the city; 
(2)  Is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; 
(3)  Poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; 
(4)  Is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; 
(5)  Is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; 
(6)  Is abandoned; or 
(7)  Otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, is hereby declared a public nuisance. Every private property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of this city, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. Property which may be deemed esthetically substandard or deteriorating shall not meet the definition of a public nuisance unless the overall condition or use of the property results in impaired health, safety, transmission of disease, infant mortality or crime. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-170. - Powers of planning and inspection director or his designee. 
(a)  In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the planning and inspection director or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists; 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants and attorneys; 
(3)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the planning and inspection director or his designee(s) may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance, and to seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by other summary proceedings. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-171. - Defects constitution an unfit dwelling, building or structure. 
(a)  The public officer may determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; or of other residents in the city. Such conditions may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; 
(7)  Exclusive of the foundation, if 33 percent or more of damage or deterioration of the supporting members or 50 percent of the damage or deterioration of the nonsupporting enclosing or outside walls or coverings is present; 
(8)  Improperly distributed loads upon the floors or roofs in which the same are overloaded, or which have insufficient strength to be reasonably safe; 
(9)  Previous damage by fire, wind, vandalism, or other cause; 
(10)  Decayed, unsafe, unsanitary, or other such conditions likely to cause sickness or disease to occupants of such dwelling, building or structure, or to the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures; 
(11)  Inadequate means of ingress and egress, such as insufficient stairways, elevators, or fire escapes, so as to cause a danger to occupants or residents; 
(12)  Conditions that are otherwise unsafe, unsanitary, or dangerous to the health, morals, safety or general welfare of the occupants or occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings or structures, or other residents of the city; 
(13)  Dilapidation or disrepair to such an extent that portions of the dwelling, building or structure may fall or cave in; 
(14)  Buildings existing in violation of any provision of any code previously adopted by the city, including but not limited to, any building code and any fire prevention code, previously adopted; 
(15)  The presence of graffiti which is visible from adjoining public or private property. 
(b)  The public officer shall also be authorized to determine, under existing ordinances, that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation by the public officer or upon the report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed at the location of such dwelling, building or structure. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-172. - Procedures and requirements to secure structures for up to two years. 
    The following procedures and requirements must be met in order to secure structures pending repairs: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for a building owner to secure, or cause to be secured, a building without first obtaining a secured structure permit from the public officer. The owner must apply for and be approved for a secured structure permit and pay the required fees in the amount established by the governing body of the city, and the public officer and/or building official shall then inspect such structure. 
(2)  To qualify for secured status, the building must be structurally sound (walls and roof); otherwise, the secured structure permit shall be denied. 
(3)  The repairs needed to bring the structure to compliance with city ordinances must not represent a cost that exceeds one-half of the fair market value of the structure as determined in the manner provided in section 14-175. The property owner must provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a cost estimate for repair of the structure to the public officer for review and approval. 
(4)  The property owner shall provide, along with the application for a secured structure permit, a schedule of repairs subject to the review and approval of the public officer. 
(5)  If a building is structurally sound, nonstructural interior portions (electrical wiring, plumbing, and similar systems) need not be brought into compliance with applicable building codes while in secured status. 
(6)  The building or structure must remain vacant while in secured status. 
(7)  The secured structure permit shall be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in secured status. 
(8)  All utilities must remain turned off while in secured status unless otherwise approved by the public officer. 
(9)  The building must be secured, and the windows and doors of the building must be covered and secured. 
(10)  The public officer shall notify the chief of police and the chief of fire and emergency services as to any building that has been approved for secured status by the issuance of a secured structure permit, and the public officer shall also provide notification when the secured structure permit has expired or has otherwise been revoked. 
(11)  It shall be unlawful for any person to enter or be inside a secured building or structure, except for the owner, a duly authorized agent of the owner, or the public officer once a secured structure permit has been issued. Any person violating the provisions of this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(12)  All secured structures shall be maintained in a manner which minimizes the appearance of vacancy, including the prompt removal of graffiti. 
(13)  All secured structures shall be maintained in a manner which does not create an unreasonable risk of fire, including the removal of weeds and the proper maintenance of grass areas which may constitute a fire hazard. No secure structure, or any portion thereof, may be used for the storage of flammable liquids or other materials which would constitute a safety or fire hazard. 
(14)  All secured structures, including all adjoining yard areas, shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter and garbage. 
(15)  All exterior surfaces shall be applied with sufficient paint, stucco, or other finishes in the same or a similar color as the adjoining areas, in order to weatherproof the vacant structure and to create a sufficient appearance of repair to deter unauthorized occupation. 
(16)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remove securing material on a secured building or structure. Any person violating any provision of this subsection shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(17)  The secured structure permit shall be valid for a period of 12 months from the date of issuance. The owner may make application for a secured structure permit for an additional 12 months. However, the owner must provide the documentation listed in subsections (3) and (4) of this section, along with the application and fee, with the application for renewal. The application for renewal shall be made no later than 30 calendar days prior to the expiration of the current secured structure permit. Renewal of the permit is subject to the approval of the public officer and, upon denial of the application to renew, the property will be subject to immediate abatement action. The secured structure permit may only be renewed once for a total of 24 months subject to the approval of the public officer. 
(18)  Periodic inspections of the structure and property shall be performed by the public officer and/or a building official. A report detailing the inspector's findings shall be included in the case file. If compliance with all the requirements of this chapter is not evident at the time of the inspection, enforcement action may be taken. In addition, the secured structure permit may be revoked by the public officer and abatement action initiated. 
(19)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a secured structure permit during the term of the permit to violate any of the provisions of subsections (1) through (18) above. Any person violating any provisions of these subsections shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-173. - Procedures and requirements for temporarily securing structures for up to 60 calendar days pending compliance by demolition or repair. 
    The following procedures and requirements must be met in order to temporarily secure structures or temporarily restrict access to a property prior to demolition of a structure or obtaining a building permit for the reconstruction of the structure: 
(1)  The public officer or the owner must have determined that the structure represents a hazard to life or a hazard to the safety of the public and that such risk cannot be eliminated by affordable repairs as provided in section 14-175. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for a building owner to secure or cause to be secured such a building without first obtaining a temporary secured structure permit from the public officer. 
(3)  A temporary secured structure permit may be issued by the public officer for a maximum period of 60 calendar days prior to the repair or demolition of a structure which has been identified by the public officer as violating the city's unsafe building abatement code or as a nuisance. This temporary, short-term permit is for the purpose of restricting access to a structure or site that poses or may pose an immediate hazard to life, safety or health. 
(4)  The owner must obtain a temporary secured structure permit from the public officer for any structure that has been identified as a nuisance by the public officer so that the structure will remain secure until a building permit or demolition permit is issued and work has commenced on the repairs or demolition. Along with an application for a temporary secured structure permit pending demolition or repair, the owner must provide to the public officer a schedule for repair or demolition and payment of the required fees as established by the governing body of the city. 
(5)  The building must be secured, with windows and doors covered and secured. If the condition of the building prevents securing of the windows and doors, the site must be fenced in order to deter unauthorized entry to the property. 
(6)  All secured structures, including all adjoining yard areas shall be maintained free of debris, combustible materials, litter and garbage. 
(7)  A temporary secured structure permit must be posted on the front of the building in a clearly visible location while the structure remains in a temporary secured status. 
(8)  It shall be unlawful for the holder of a temporary secured structure permit issued by the public officer, pending compliance by demolition or repair, to violate any of the provisions of subsections (1) through (7) above. Any person violating any provisions of these subsections shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-174. - Reoccupying a secured building or structure. 
    Before a secured building or structure can be reoccupied, the following conditions must be met: 
(1)  The building or structure must be fully returned to compliance with all building, fire, and other applicable codes. 
(2)  The building or structure must be reinspected by the public officer and/or building official. 
(3)  The following approvals must be obtained: 
a.  Approval of required plans, if applicable; 
b.  Approval by the historic preservation commission, if applicable; and 
c.  Request and purchase of all required building permits must be completed. 
(4)  No utilities shall be turned on until full compliance with construction codes; provided, however, that temporary utility service shall be permitted if necessary for construction work in order to bring the building back into compliance with all applicable codes. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-175. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions as more particularly established in section 14-171. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days, nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter or improve such dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration or improvement of the said dwelling, building or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the dwelling, building or structure shall not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within 270 days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the city, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in subsection (e) shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the Clerk of Superior Court in Sumter County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (a). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within 90 days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the city finance director. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the city finance director to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-5; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply; provided, further, that redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. The city finance director may initiate enforcement of liens imposed under this section at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs from the public officer, and such enforcement shall be undertaken by the city finance director in any such manner as may be authorized by Georgia law for the collection of city ad valorem taxes. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. In the event that the Sumter County Tax Commissioner shall have a contract with the city to collect ad valorem taxes for the city, such tax commissioner shall collect and enforce city liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The amount collected shall be remitted to the general fund of the city. 
(i)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(j)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-176. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  Summons and copies of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(2)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint and summons by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are readily ascertainable. Copies of the complaint and summons shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any; 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriffs advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; and 
(4)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in which the dwelling, building, structure or property is located at the time of filing the complaint in municipal court. 
(b)  The public officer shall cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. Such affidavit shall constitute a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and shall constitute sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-177. - Temporary injunction restraining public officer from carrying out provisions. 
    As authorized by O.C.G.A. § 31-2-13, any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court of the county for an injunction restraining the public officer from carrying out the provisions of the order, and the superior court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer, pending the final disposition of the matter; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be conducted by the superior court on petitions within 20 days of the filing thereof, the superior court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-178. - Eminent domain. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of this state, nor is permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of this state. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-14. 
Sec. 14-179. - Limitation of liability for code enforcement; no special duty created. 
    It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional(s), and contractor(s) to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-180. - General cleanliness of premises. 
    The owner and occupant of property within the city shall each be independently responsible for keeping the premises, including all buildings thereon and the full yard thereof, clean and free from all garbage, refuse, filth, dirt, ashes, trash, rubbish and other offensive materials. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-181. - Disorderly house. 
(a)  Any person who keeps and maintains, either by himself or others, a common, ill-governed and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, illicit drug activity, or other misbehavior, to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, before any person is charged under this subsection, written notice shall be given the owner of the property and the person in possession thereof by the chief of police stating the general, customary and common habits of the house, giving fair notice of this subsection and the conduct proscribed thereby. 
(b)  Any person who shall allow any boisterous, noisy, drunken or riotous persons to assemble or remain in their house, apartment or upon their property, after receiving oral notice from a police officer that boisterous, noisy, drunken or carousing activities have caused complaint and annoyance to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, shall be guilty of an offense against the city; provided, however, no person shall be charged under this subsection unless the owner or person in possession of the premises has been afforded an opportunity to disburse the assembly or offending person from the premises. This subsection shall not preclude a police officer from arresting any individual for criminal trespass where such individual knowingly and without authority remains on private property after being notified by the owner or lawful occupant to depart. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-182. - Violations; enforcement penalties. 
    Any person who willfully refuses to comply with the provisions of this article shall be cited to appear before the municipal court and, upon conviction, shall be fined not less than $200.00; each day of continued violation, after citation, shall constitute a separate offense. In addition to the foregoing fines, upon conviction, the director shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross-connection, auxiliary intake, by-pass, or inter-connection, and service shall not be restored until such cross-connection, auxiliary, by-pass, or inter-connection has been discontinued. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-183. - Property subject to article located in historic district. 
    The provisions of this article shall also apply to all properties located within the historic district established by ordinance of the city council; provided, however, that as to any properties located within the historic district as established by the city, no certificate of appropriateness which might otherwise be required in article VII, chapter 14, shall be required for repair, alteration, improvement, removal or demolition of such property. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-184. - Applicability of article. 
    The powers and authority granted hereunder shall be in addition to and supplemental of any other powers and authority granted to the city council of the city and its agents by any state statute or city ordinance; provided, however, that in the event of a conflict between this article and the International Property Maintenance Code, the provisions of this article shall apply. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 1, 9-18-2014) 
State Law reference- Ordinance supplemental, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-16. 
Secs. 14-185-14-198. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BED AND BREAKFAST INNS 

Sec. 14-199. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bed and breakfast inn means a residential dwelling containing not more than eight guestrooms or suites, designed and operated to provide for overnight accommodations of guests who limit their stay to not more than seven consecutive nights, with adequate off-street parking of one off-street parking place for each guestroom, and adequate off-street parking for the owner, operator and staff of the inn. 
    Building permits means all permits required to be obtained from the city in accord with the provisions of this Code or other relevant ordinance or statute. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of the building or other structure including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the building structure. 
    License means all licenses, whether business license, building license or other documents, which must be obtained by the owner or operator of a business as required by the various provisions of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 5-151; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, § 1, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 14-200. - Establishment, maintenance and operation of bed and breakfast inn. 
    Any bed and breakfast inn established, maintained or operated within the city shall at all times comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  The building in which the bed and breakfast inn is located shall comply with all requirements for residential buildings contained in the city building code as it now exists or as it is hereafter amended. 
(2)  There shall be no building or buildings located upon the lot where the bed and breakfast inn is located, except the principal building and any accessory building or buildings as may be required; provided that such accessory building or buildings shall comply with the other requirements contained in this Code regarding such accessory buildings. 
(3)  The owner or operator of the bed and breakfast inn shall maintain a current guest register, which shall include the names, addresses and dates of occupancy of all guests at the inn. 
(4)  The inn may serve its guests only breakfast (morning meal) and dinner (evening meal) at the inn, and no other meal shall be served, except that the owner/occupant of the inn shall not be subject to this requirement for their own meals. 
(5)  The owner or operator of the bed and breakfast inn shall comply with all business license, building permit requirements and revenue collection ordinances of the city and the state. 
(Code 1986, § 5-152; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, § 2, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 14-201. - Architectural design. 
    The exterior architectural features and architectural design of the building used as a bed and breakfast inn must be maintained and must be in keeping with the general architectural design and general appearance of the neighborhood. No exterior alterations, other than those necessary to ensure the safety of the structure, shall be made to the dwelling for the purpose of providing a bed and breakfast inn. 
(Code 1986, § 5-153; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, § 3, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 14-202. - Planning commission approval of plans. 
    As a condition precedent to any building permit being issued under this article, or before any building under this article is used for a bed and breakfast inn, the city planning commission shall approve any plans, specifications or other building itself to see that the architectural design, the exterior architectural features, and the general appearance of the building is in keeping with the architectural design and general appearance of the neighborhood. 
(Code 1986, § 5-154; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, § 4, 10-19-1987) 
Sec. 14-203. - Violation of article. 
    Any violation of the provisions of this article regarding bed and breakfast inns, or any other violation of any ordinance contained in this Code relating to bed and breakfast inns shall be a misdemeanor and shall subject the offender to punishment as provided in section 1-8. In addition thereto, any such violation shall be cause for revocation or nonrenewal of the city business license of the owner or operator of the bed and breakfast inn by the finance director. 
(Code 1986, § 5-156; Ord. No. O-87-10-19, 10-19-1987) 
Secs. 14-204-14-229. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - TELECOMMUNICATIONS ANTENNAS AND TOWERS 

Sec. 14-230. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alternative tower structure means manmade trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles, and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
    Antenna means any exterior apparatus designed for telephonic, radio, or television communication through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
    FAA means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Height means, when referring to a tower or other structure, the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
    Planning commission means the City of Americus Planning Commission as set forth in section 70-21. 
    Preexisting towers and antennas shall have the meaning set forth in section 14-231(d). 
    Public officer, as used in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8-41-2-17, means the community development department of the city. 
    Tower means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term "tower" includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
(Code 1986, § 5-251; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 1, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-231. - Applicability. 
(a)  District height limitations. The requirements set forth in this article shall govern the location of towers that exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, the height limitations specified for each zoning district. The height limitations applicable to buildings and structures shall not apply to towers and antennas. 
(b)  Public property. Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the city shall be exempt from the requirements of this article, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the city. 
(c)  Amateur radio receive-only antennas. This article shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under 70 feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
(d)  Preexisting towers and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived shall not be required to meet the requirements of this article, other than the requirements of section 14-232(e) and (f). Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this article as "preexisting towers" or "preexisting antennas." 
(Code 1986, § 5-252; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 2, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-232. - General guidelines and requirements. 
(a)  Purpose; goals. The purpose of this article is to establish guidelines for the siting of towers and antennas. The goals of this article are to: 
(1)  Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas and minimize the total number of towers throughout the community; 
(2)  Encourage strongly the joint use of new and existing tower sites; 
(3)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to locate them, to the extent possible, in areas where the adverse impact on the community is minimal; 
(4)  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; and 
(5)  Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to provide such services to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently. 
(b)  Principal or accessory use. Antennas and towers may be considered either principal or accessory uses. A different existing use or an existing structure on the same lot shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or tower on such lot. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a tower or antenna complies with district development regulations, including but not limited to setback requirements, lot coverage requirements, and other such requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot shall control, even though the antennas or towers may be located on leased parcels within such lots. Towers that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this article shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
(c)  Inventory of existing sites. Each applicant for an antenna and or tower shall provide to the community development department an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the city or within one-quarter mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The community development department may share such information with other applicants applying for special exception approval under this article or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the city, provided, however, that the community development department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. 
(d)  Aesthetics; lighting. The guidelines set forth in this subsection (d) shall govern the location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this article; provided, however, that the planning commission may waive these requirements if it determines that the goals of this article are better served thereby. 
(1)  Towers shall either maintain a galvanized steel finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, are painted a neutral color, so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
(2)  At a tower site, the design of the buildings and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. 
(3)  If an antenna is installed on a structure other than a tower, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment must be of a neutral color that is identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. 
(4)  Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If lighting is required, the planning commission may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
(e)  Federal requirements. All towers must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate towers and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the towers and antennas governed by this article shall bring such towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations, unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring towers and antennas into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the tower or antenna at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the city shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8-41-2-17. 
(f)  Building codes; safety standards. To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for towers that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the planning commission concludes that a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the owner of the tower, the owner shall have 30 days to bring such tower into compliance with such codes and standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said 30 days, the city may remove such tower at the owner's expense. Any such removal by the city shall be in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8-41-2-17. 
(Code 1986, § 5-253; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 3, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-233. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Generally. The uses listed in this section are deemed to be permitted uses and shall not require a special exception permit. Nevertheless, all such uses shall comply with section 14-232(d), (e), and (f) and all other applicable ordinances. 
(b)  Specific permitted uses. The following uses are specifically permitted in any industrial and agricultural zoning district: 
(1)  Locating a tower or antenna, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said tower or antenna provided, however, that such tower shall be set back from any existing off-site residence a distance of not less than 500 feet; 
(2)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower, such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure, that is 50 feet in height or greater, so long as said additional antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing structure; and 
(3)  Installing an antenna on any existing tower of any height, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower and said existing tower is not a preexisting tower; provided, however, that such specific permitted use shall not include the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna. 
(Code 1986, § 5-254; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 4, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-234. - Special exception approvals as specified in section 94-32. 
(a)  Generally. 
(1)  The planning commission may approve the locations of antennas and towers in any other zoning district of the city. 
(2)  Each applicant for special exception approval shall apply to the planning commission, providing the information set forth in section 14-235(b) and (d). Application shall be received at least 20 days prior to the planning commission meeting. The hearing notice shall be advertised in the approved legal gazette and posted on the property 15 days prior to the planning commission meeting. A fee in the amount established by ordinance is to accompany the application. 
(3)  The planning commission shall respond to each such application within 45 days after receiving it by either approving or denying the application. If the planning commission fails to respond to the applicant within said 45 days, then the application, shall be deemed to be approved. 
(4)  If special exception approval is denied the applicant may appeal said denial to the city council upon written notice. Notice of appeal must be made within ten days of denial of the request. 
(b)  Special exception approved uses. The following uses, may be approved by the planning commission after conducting a public hearing: 
(1)  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower, such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other freestanding nonresidential structure, that is less than 50 in height, so long as such addition does not add more than 20 feet to the height of the existing structure; 
(2)  Installing an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a preexisting tower and further including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than 20 feet to the height of said existing tower; 
(3)  Locating any alternative tower structure in a zoning district other than industrial or agricultural that in the judgment of the planning and zoning commission is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 14-232(a); 
(4)  Locating any tower in a zoning district other than industrial or agricultural, provided a licensed professional engineer certifies the tower can structurally accommodate the number of shared users proposed by the applicant; the planning commission concludes the tower is in conformity with the goals set forth in section 14-232(a) and the requirements of section 14-232(d), (e), and (f); the tower is to be set back from any existing off-site residence a distance equal to the height of the tower; and the tower meets the following height and usage criteria: 
a.  For a single user, up to 90 feet in height; 
b.  For two users, up to 120 feet in height; and 
c.  For three or more users, up to 150 feet in height. 
(Code 1986, § 5-255; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 4, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-235. - Special exception permits. 
(a)  Generally. The following provisions shall govern the issuance of special exception permits: 
(1)  If the tower or antenna is not a permitted use under section 14-233, then a special exception permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all zoning districts. 
(2)  In granting a special exception permit, the planning commission may impose conditions to the extent that they conclude such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
(3)  Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
(b)  Information required. Each applicant requesting a special exception permit under this article shall submit a scaled site plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professional engineers, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the planning commission to be necessary to assess compliance with this article. 
(c)  Factors considered in granting special exception permits. The planning commission shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a special exception permit, although they may waive or reduce the burden on the applicant of one or more of these criteria, if they conclude that the goals of this article are better served thereby: 
(1)  Height of the proposed tower; 
(2)  Proximity of the tower to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
(3)  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
(4)  Surrounding topography; 
(5)  Surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
(6)  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
(7)  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
(8)  Availability of suitable existing towers and other structures as discussed in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the planning commission that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
(1)  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(2)  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
(3)  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
(4)  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
(5)  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable. 
(6)  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
(e)  Setback and separation requirements. The following setback and separation requirements shall apply to all towers and antennas for which a special exception permit is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may reduce the standard setback and separation requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby: 
(1)  Towers must be set back a distance equal to the height of the tower from any off-site residential structure. 
(2)  Towers, guys, and accessory facilities must satisfy the minimum zoning district setback requirements. 
(3)  In zoning districts other than industrial or agricultural zoning districts, towers over 90 feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter of a mile from any existing tower that is over 90 feet in height. 
(f)  Security fencing. Towers shall be enclosed by security fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the city may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate. 
(g)  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern the landscaping surrounding towers for which a special exception permit is required; provided, however, that the planning commission may waive such requirements if the goals of this article would be better served thereby: 
(1)  Tower facilities shall be landscaped with a buffer of plant materials that effectively screens the view of the tower compound from adjacent residential property. The standard buffer shall comply with buffer requirements as noted in section 94-194(a)(2). 
(2)  In locations where the visual impact of the tower would be minimal, the landscaping requirement may be reduced or waived altogether. 
(3)  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. In some cases, such as towers sited on large, wooded lots, natural growth around the property perimeter may be a sufficient buffer. 
(Code 1986, § 5-256; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 6, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-236. - Removal of abandoned antennas and towers. 
    Any antenna or tower that is not operated for a continuous period of 12 months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or tower shall remove same within 90 days of receipt of notice from the city notifying the owner of such abandonment. If such antenna or tower is not removed within said 90 days, the city may, in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8-41-2-17, remove such antenna or tower at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single tower, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease using the tower. 
(Code 1986, § 5-257; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 5, 8-19-1999) 
Sec. 14-237. - Variances. 
(a)  Where a person or entity which desires to construct a telecommunications antenna or tower pursuant to this article can show that a provision of this article would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, or where, because of conditions peculiar to the site, or other unusual circumstances beyond the control of such person or entity, in the opinion of the planning commission, a departure from strict adherence to this article may be made without violating the intent of this article, the planning commission may, in its sole discretion, authorize a variance. Any such variance request shall be submitted in writing to the planning commission, and the minutes of the planning commission shall reflect the action taken by the planning commission as to such variance request, and such minutes shall also include the reason or reasons for granting such variance request. 
(b)  With respect to the variance request authorized in subsection (a) of this section, the right to submit such a variance request shall be waived unless the request is submitted to the planning commission at the time the antenna permit is requested, or at the time the request for a special exception pursuant to section 14-234 is submitted. 
(c)  The decision of the planning commission as to the approval or disapproval of variances requested under this article shall be final and not subject to appeal. 
(Code 1986, § 5-258; Ord. No. O-99-08-35, § 8, 8-19-1999) 
Secs. 14-238-14-267. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 

Sec. 14-268. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property within a designated historic district. 
    Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the building or structure. 
    Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site that affect the historical character of the property. 
    Historic district means a geographically defined area designated by the city council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 14-271(b). 
    Historic property or landmark means an individual building, structure, site, object or work of art including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the city council as a historic property or landmark pursuant to the criteria established in section 14-271(c). 
    Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation or a change in advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(4)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district; including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
(Code 1986, § 5-130; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 2) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-22. 
Sec. 14-269. - Purpose. 
    In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural, and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal and state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal and state law; and in order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation, and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts, and to participate in federal and state programs to do the same; the city council hereby declares it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 5-131; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 1) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-21. 
Sec. 14-270. - Historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation. There is hereby created a commission, the title of which shall be the "City of Americus Historic Preservation Commission" (hereinafter called the "commission"). 
(b)  Position within city. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Members, appointment, terms, compensation. 
(1)  The commission shall consist of seven members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related disciplines. 
(3)  Members shall serve three-year terms or until their successors are appointed by the mayor and such appointments are ratified as herein provided. Members shall be allowed to succeed themselves. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: two members for one year; two members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Powers generally. The commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as a historic property or landmark; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, or works of art to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this article; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any place, district, site, building, structure, objects, or work of art as a historic property or landmark or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Facade and Conservation Easements Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-1 et seq.); 
(6)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties or landmarks located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(7)  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation including consultation with historic preservation experts, as the city council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(8)  Seek out local, state, federal, and private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the city council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(9)  Consult with historic preservation experts in the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources or its successor and the Georgia Trust for Historic Preservation, Inc.; 
(10)  Submit to the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources a list of historic properties or landmarks or historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; 
(12)  Review and make comments to the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(13)  Participate in private, state, and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council to enter into agreement to do the same. 
(e)  Power to adopt rules and standards, setting meeting times, selecting officers. The commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of applications for designations and certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provisions, and design guidelines and criteria. The commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this article. The commission shall provide for a time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers, as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. At any time the commission reviews a project in which a member of the commission has ownership or other vested interest, that member will be forbidden from presenting, voting or discussing the project, other than answering a direct question. 
(g)  Records of meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. 
(Code 1986, § 5-132; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 3; Ord. No. O-88-08-30, 8-22-1988) 
State Law reference- Historic preservation commissions, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-24, 44-10-26. 
Sec. 14-271. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts, properties and landmarks. 
(a)  Preliminary research by commission. 
(1)  Survey of local historical resources . The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Recommend districts and buildings to the city council for designation . The commission shall present to the city council recommendations for historic districts, properties, and local landmarks. 
(3)  Documentation of proposed designation . Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property or landmark to the city council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classifications, i.e. historic, nonhistoric or intrusive, of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties or landmarks; 
d.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
e.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Have special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, county, state or region; and 
c.  Cause such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city or county. 
(2)  Boundaries. The boundaries of the historic district for the city are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within boundaries . Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Historic, contributes to the district. 
b.  Nonhistoric, does not contribute but does not detract from the district as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
c.  Intrusive, detracts from the district as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section. 
(c)  Designation of a historic property or landmark. 
(1)  Criteria for selection . A historic property or landmark is a building, structure, site, object, work of art, tree; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, state, or local region, for one of the following reasons: 
a.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
b.  It is one of the few remaining examples of past architectural style; 
c.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or 
d.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, county, state or region. 
(2)  Boundary description . Boundaries shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such properties and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties and landmarks. 
(1)  Application. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts, by a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties and landmarks, by a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components . Any ordinance designating any property, landmark or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property or landmark; 
b.  Set forth the names of the owners of the designated property or properties or landmarks; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property or landmark; and 
d.  Require that the property or landmark or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city. 
(3)  Required public hearings . The commission and the city shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property or landmark. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten, nor more than 20 days, prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(4)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(5)  City council action on commission recommendation . Following receipt of the commission's recommendation the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(6)  Report submission. Not less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or landmark or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection (a)(3) of this section to the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources. 
(7)  Adoption of ordinance for designation . Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property or landmark, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site, or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax roll and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this article. 
(8)  Other agencies regarding designation . The commission shall notify all appropriate local governmental agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation, including the local historical organization. 
(9)  Moratorium on alteration or demolition while pending . If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Code 1986, § 5-133; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 4; Ord. No. O-05-11-39, 11-17-2005) 
State Law reference- Designation of historic properties or historic districts, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-26. 
Sec. 14-272. - Certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of alterations or new construction in historic districts or involving historic properties or landmarks. After designation by ordinance of a historic property or landmark or of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property or landmark, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. In the event that a material change in the appearance of such historic property or landmark, or a material change in the appearance of as structure, site, object, or work of art within such historic district is undertaken without obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the commission, the commission may direct the city building inspector, or his designee, to issue a stop work order, and all such work shall cease. No person, firm or corporation shall undertake any work on such project so along as such stop work order shall continue in effect. The owner of the subject property shall submit an application for a certificate of appropriateness within seven days of the issuance of a stop work order. At the next regular meeting of the commission, the commission shall review such application without prejudice as if no work had been undertaken or completed. 
(b)  Approval of new construction within designated districts. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the commission. 
(c)  Guidelines and criteria for certificates of appropriateness. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings. The secretary of the interior's "Standards for Historic Preservation Projects" including the secretary's "Standards for Rehabilitation" shall be used as a guideline along with any other criteria adopted by the commission. 
(d)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
(e)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications. 
(1)  The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or landmark or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design arrangement, texture and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(2)  The commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material changes in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
(f)  Public hearings, notices and right to be heard. At least seven days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
(g)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(h)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(i)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant on an historic property, or landmark, or of a structure, site, object, or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(j)  Necessary actions to be taken by commission upon rejection. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternate courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if the applicant so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building official or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such cases, no building permit shall be issued. 
(k)  Undue hardship. Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this article would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property or landmark, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this article. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(l)  Requirement of conformance. 
(1)  A certificate of appropriateness shall be limited to those elements presented to and approved by the commission. Approval of other elements, whether related or unrelated to the project presented shall not be implied by the issuance of the certificate of appropriateness. All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The city council or the commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or landmark or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provision of this article or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or landmark or historic district. 
(3)  After issuance of a certificate of appropriateness, changes in the work or changes to approve a plan must be submitted to and approved by the commission prior to beginning work on any aspect of such changes. Any such amendment or modification to the original plan must be submitted to the commission and approved by the commission in the same manner as an original certificate of appropriateness application is considered. 
(m)  Certificate to become void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and are renewable. A renewal for a period of up to six months may be obtained upon submission of a written request by the applicant and issuance of a written approval of such renewal by the commission. 
(n)  Recording of applications. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and of all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(o)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property or landmark, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein. 
(p)  Appeals. Any person who has submitted an application for a certificate of appropriateness that has been denied by the commission may appeal such denial to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the notice of denial of the application for the certificate of appropriateness is mailed to the applicant. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission, but may only modify or reject the determination if the city council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision denying the application. Appeals from the decision of the city council on the appeal may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from convictions for violations of the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-134; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 5; Ord. No. O-95-09-31, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-06-09-35, 9-21-2006) 
Sec. 14-273. - Demolition or relocation of a historic property or landmark or properties within a historic district. 
(a)  Applications for certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. The commission shall have the authority to deny certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(b)  Public hearing. A public hearing shall be scheduled for each application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(c)  Consideration of post-demolition or post-relocation plans. The commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post-demolition or post-relocation plans for site. 
(d)  Demolition or relocation criteria. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the commission shall use the criteria described in section 14-272(e) to determine whether to deny the application or issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
(Code 1986, § 5-135; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 6) 
State Law reference- Certificate of appropriateness, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-27 et seq. 
Sec. 14-274. - Maintenance of historic properties; building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property or landmark to correct deterioration, decay, or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or other appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance and repair. Property owners of historic properties or landmarks or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties, landmarks, and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings that allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps that need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 and, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform or cause to be performed such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
(1)  Nothing in this article shall be construed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of such owner's property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
(2)  Nothing in this article shall be construed so as to prevent any utility company from trimming trees or keeping the rights-of-way in accordance with existing franchise agreements between the utilities and the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-136; Ord. of 3-26-1986, § 7) 
State Law reference- Maintenance allowed, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-29. 
Sec. 14-275. - Filing fees for certificates of appropriateness. 
    At the time of filing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, which requires a public hearing pursuant to this chapter, the applicant shall pay to the finance director a filing fee in the amount established by ordinance. Said fee is to be used to defray the cost to the city of processing the application and providing the required notices to the public and other interested parties of hearings and other matters with respect to the application. Said funds may be deposited into the city general fund for such purposes. A fee in the amount established by ordinance will be charged each applicant filing an application for a certificate of appropriateness that does not have the necessary photographs for processing attached. 
(Code 1986, § 5-137; Ord. No. O-94-05-15, 5-19-1994; Ord. No. O-01-12-40, 12-20-2001) 
Sec. 14-276. - Violations. 
    In addition to the authority provided to the city council and the historic preservation commission in subsection 14-272(l)(2), a violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day that the work does not comply with an issued certificate of appropriateness, or each day that work is not initiated to remedy a lack of minimum maintenance and repair, shall constitute a separate offense and is subject to the penalties set forth in section 1-8. 
(Ord. No. O-06-09-35, § 5-138, 9-21-2006) 
Secs. 14-277-14-299. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CITY BLIGHTED PROPERTY ORDINANCE 

Sec. 14-300. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "City Blighted Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-301. - Purpose. 
(a)  The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to, social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
(b)  In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, this mayor and council, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at Chapter 61, Urban Redevelopment, of O.C.G.A. title 36, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
(c)  In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII(d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-302. - Definitions. 
(a)  "Blighted property," "blighted," or "blight" means any urbanized or developed property which: 
(1)  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe or abandoned structure; 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air or sanitation; 
c.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.  A site identified by the federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601 et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner. 
(2)  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of esthetic conditions. 
(b)  "Building inspector" means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(c)  "Community redevelopment" means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough local ordinances relating to the repair, closing and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
(d)  "Governing authority" means the City Council of the City of Americus, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
(e)  "Millage" or "millage rate" means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
(f)  "Person" means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
(g)  "Public officer" means the city administrator or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city administrator to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-303. - Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven (7.0) to the city ad valorem tax millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city administrator and used only for defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-304. - Identification of blighted property. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed: 
a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in ordinance; or 
b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (1) above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Sumter County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(c)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the municipal court shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days' notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the Americus Times Recorder, or other designated legal organ in Sumter County, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the judge of municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. If the court's determination is that the designation of the property as blighted property should be affirmed, then the court shall include in its order a provision granting the public official the authority to lift the blighted property designation in accord with the procedures established in section 14-305 of this article. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the finance director, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Sumter County for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the municipal court's written determination. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-305. - Remediation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to article IV, City Derelict Property Ordinance, of this chapter 14 of the Code of Americus, Georgia. 
(b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the finance director. Upon receipt of such notice, the finance director shall provide notice to the appropriate taxing authority that the additional ad valorem tax imposed in accord with subsection 14-303(a) has been terminated. Thereafter, the property shall be taxed for ad valorem taxes as if such property had never been determined to be blighted as defined herein, except with respect to any ad valorem tax reductions that may be applied in accord with section 14-306. 
(c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and inspection department, and contain the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal state-wide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-306. - Decrease of tax rate. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 14-305, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $25,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. 
(b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Sec. 14-307. - Notice to finance director. 
    It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the finance director in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the Sumter County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the finance director to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-2014-16, § 2, 9-18-2014) 
Secs. 14-308-14-330. - Reserved. 
Chapter 18 - CEMETERIES 

Sec. 18-1. - Sale of lots. 
    The selling of all lots in the cemeteries shall be done by the cemetery clerk, who shall make out and deliver to the purchaser, upon receipt of the purchase money, a certificate of ownership to the same, which shall be signed by the mayor and the city clerk in behalf of the city. The price of all lots shall be as prescribed by the city council. 
(Code 1962, § 6-1; Code 1986, § 6-1; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 18-2. - Perpetual care areas-Establishment, designation. 
    The cemetery clerk in charge of cemeteries, under the direction and control of the city council, shall be authorized to designate, by appropriate plat areas in such cemeteries, areas to be designated as perpetual care areas. 
(Code 1962, § 6-10; Code 1986, § 6-2) 
Sec. 18-3. - Same-Platting; sale of spaces. 
    The spaces specified as those designated for burial rights shall be platted by adequate and proper plat and shall be sold to the general public at prices to be established by ordinance of the city council. 
(Code 1962, § 6-12; Code 1986, § 6-4) 
Sec. 18-4. - Same-Responsibility for maintenance; erection of markers. 
    Maintenance of the designated areas shall remain the responsibility of the city council. Markers that are erected on such burial spaces by the owners of interment rights shall be erected in accordance with rules and regulations as promulgated and adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1962, § 6-13; Code 1986, § 6-5) 
Sec. 18-5. - Same-Maintenance. 
    The cemetery clerk, in charge of cemeteries, is further charged with the responsibility of maintaining perpetual care in the designated areas. 
(Code 1962, § 6-14; Code 1986, § 6-6) 
Sec. 18-6. - Burials outside public cemeteries, permission required. 
    No person shall bury or cause to be buried, any dead person in any other place in the city than the public cemeteries, without permission of the city council. 
(Code 1962, § 6-5; Code 1986, § 6-7) 
Sec. 18-7. - Disinterment-Application. 
    Any person desiring to disinter a body which is buried in any cemetery located in the city shall make an application in writing to the city and county health authorities giving the name of the person buried in said grave, if known, and the reason that such applicant desires to disinter said body. This application shall be signed by the person, who desires to disinter, said body and the health authorities shall act on such application at their next meeting. The application shall contain the relationship of the applicant to the deceased person. 
(Code 1962, §§ 6-6, 6-7; Code 1986, § 6-8) 
Sec. 18-8. - Same-Permit discretionary. 
    The health authorities may issue a permit to remove said body from the cemetery if in their discretion it is desirable. 
(Code 1962, § 6-8; Code 1986, § 6-9) 
Sec. 18-9. - Defacing of tombstones, etc. 
    No person shall willfully mutilate, or in any manner damage or deface any monument, tombstone, gate, fence, railing, or other enclosure in or around the cemeteries, or structures, or break down, damage, destroy or pluck, without consent of the owner, any wild or cultivated flower, shrub, plant or tree therein. Any person convicted of violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1962, § 6-4; Code 1986, § 6-10) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 18-10. - Building materials, etc.; removal required. 
    All piles of earth, rubbish or building materials, of any kind, shall be removed by the person placing the same in the cemeteries, within 24 hours after the completion of the work for which they were used. 
(Code 1962, § 6-3; Code 1986, § 6-11) 
Sec. 18-11. - Motor vehicles, entering cemetery. 
    Motor vehicles may be allowed to enter any cemetery under the following restrictions: 
(1)  All motor vehicles so entering a cemetery shall be for business only. 
(2)  All motor vehicles so entering a cemetery shall not be driven at a rate of speed in excess of that permitted in section 86-76. 
(Code 1962, § 6-2; Code 1986, § 6-12) 
Chapter 22 - COMMUNITY DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS IMPROVEMENT DISTRICT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- City Business Improvement District Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq. 

Sec. 22-19. - Established. 
(a)  There is hereby established a central city business improvement district in the downtown development authority area of the city, effective January 1, 2003, said city business improvement district being established pursuant to the provisions of the City Business Improvement District Act (O.C.G.A. § 36-43-1 et seq.). 
(b)  The legal boundaries of the city business improvement district hereby established are more particularly described as follows: 
Start at the intersection of the north right-of-way line of West Church Street with the east right-of-way line of Hampton Street in the City of Americus as the point of beginning of the boundary description described herein; thence run in an easterly direction along the north right-of-way line of Church Street to the west right-of-way line of Prince Street; thence run in a northerly and westerly direction along the west right-of-way line of Prince Street to the west right-of-way line of North Jackson Street; thence run along the west right-of-way line of North Jackson Street in a southerly direction to the north right-of-way-line of West Jefferson Street; thence run in a westerly direction along the north right-of-way line of West Jefferson Street to the east right-of-way line of North Hampton Street; thence run in a southerly direction along the east right-of-way line of North Hampton Street to the north right-of-way line of West Church Street and the point of beginning of the boundary description herein. 
There is excluded from the boundary of said district any property on which is located a telephone central office and switching facilities which serve an area exceeding the boundaries of the district. 
(Code 1986, § 14-80; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-20. - Adoption of district plan. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-43-4, the district plan for the provisions of supplemental services to the district presented to the city council on December 9, 2002, is hereby approved until amended by the city council. A copy of such district plan as adopted, and as hereafter amended, may be obtained from the office of the clerk of the city during reasonable business hours. 
(b)  The city council shall have the right to amend the district plan adopted at such time or times, as the city council may deem appropriate. 
(Code 1986, § 14-81; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-21. - Establishment of ad valorem tax rates. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-43-4, there is hereby established an annual millage rate of one mill upon all real and personal property located within the district, which millage rate is in addition to all millage rates upon real and personal property previously established for property located in the city. 
(b)  The millage rate authorized pursuant to this section shall be subject to change annually by the city council at the time that the city approves its annual operating and capital improvements budgets, and at such other times as may be deemed appropriate by the city council; provided, however, that in no event shall the millage rate authorized in this section exceed five mills. 
(c)  The taxes established or authorized pursuant to this section shall be assessed against the real and personal property, shall be liens upon that property until paid, and the city shall be authorized to enforce such liens in the same manner as other city tax liens are enforced. 
(Code 1986, § 14-82; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-22. - Business license and occupation tax surcharge. 
(a)  The city shall also collect a surcharge on business license and occupation taxes upon businesses and occupations located within said district and such business license and occupation taxes shall be considered tax liens and may be collected in the same manner as other city taxes. 
(b)  All surtaxes are to be paid during the occupational license tax period annually from January 1 to March 15 of each year. There will be no prorated city business improvement district surtaxes. 
(c)  The business license surtax and occupation surtax shall equal 50 percent of the existing business license and occupation tax. 
(d)  No business license or occupation license shall be issued by the city until all business license and occupational taxes for such business or occupation has been paid, including the surtax authorized by this section. 
(Code 1986, § 14-83; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-23. - Design and rehabilitation standards. 
    The design and rehabilitation standards set out in article VII, of chapter 14 shall remain in effect and be fully enforceable in the city business improvement district. 
(Code 1986, § 14-84; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-24. - Contracts with downtown development authority. 
(a)  The city shall be authorized to approve a contract, on an annual basis, with the city downtown development authority established pursuant to the Downtown Development Authorities Law (O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq.) in connection with the special services to be provided to the city business improvement district. Such contract may include provisions authorizing the downtown development authority to expend funds collected by the city pursuant to this article for the provision of supplemental services to said district and may further authorize the downtown development authority to enter into a contract with third parties, including for profit and nonprofit corporations, for the provision of such supplemental services. 
(b)  There shall be established in the city budget a line item for the receipt and expenditure of the funds collected pursuant to this article, and no such funds may be expended without such budget authorization. 
(c)  In the event that the city council enter into a contract with the downtown development authority in connection with the administration of the city business improvement district and the expenditure of funds collected pursuant to this article in connection therewith, the city council shall be required to review and approve, on an annual basis, the budget of the downtown development authority for the expenditure of such funds. 
(Code 1986, § 14-85; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Sec. 22-25. - Collection and expenditure of funds. 
    All funds collected pursuant to this article may only be expended for supplemental services provided in the city business improvement district plan adopted by the city council. 
(Code 1986, § 14-86; Ord. No. O-02-12-33, 12-19-2002) 
Chapter 26 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 26-1. - Residence requirements. 
    In the event a member of the council moves such member's residence to without the district from which such member was elected, such office will become vacant immediately. There shall be no durational residency requirement as a condition to qualifying as a candidate for the council from a particular district other than what is already expressed in the city charter or general law of the state, except that all candidates for the council must attain their residency in the district they seek to represent at least by the time they qualify themselves as candidates. 
(Code 1986, § 9-7; Court Order, § 8) 
Sec. 26-2. - Nonpartisan elections. 
    Political parties shall not conduct primaries for city offices, and all names of candidates for city offices shall be listed without party designated. 
(Code 1986, § 9-9; Court Order, § 10; Ord. No. O-94-06-17, 6-23-1994) 
Sec. 26-3. - Charter and state law govern elections. 
    The city Charter and the state law will continue to govern elections for the city and the powers and duties of the officers of the city. This chapter shall not affect in any way the validity of any action taken by the city or by an officer or agent thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 9-10; Court Order, § 11) 
Sec. 26-4. - Voting machines. 
    Voting machines are authorized and directed to be used for recording and computing the vote at all municipal elections held by this city. 
(Code 1986, § 9-13; Court Order, § 7A-7) 
State Law reference- Voting machines, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-310 et seq. 
Chapter 30 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AND SERVICES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - False alarms. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to turn in an alarm of fire except in the case of actual or threatened fire. 
(b)  The term "accidental false alarm" shall be defined as the transmission of an audible or electronic message or signal by a residence or business or is caused by accidental activation by the owner, resident, manager, or employee of a residence or business, is caused by a malfunction or other reason where the responding public safety personnel find no evidence of entry, attempted entry, or indication of smoke or a fire. Personal security devices activated manually, weather-related activations due to severe weather, and power outages resulting in the transmission of false alarms shall not be considered accidental false alarms for the purpose of this section. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for a person or business to allow, cause, or fail to repair or maintain any alarm which transmits a false alarm more than three times in a single calendar month. Such false alarms shall be deemed a nuisance alarm. 
(d)  A penalty of $25.00 shall be assessed for each nuisance alarm transmitted after the third nuisance alarm in any calendar month. A penalty of $25.00 shall be assessed for each accidental false alarm after the third such accidental false alarm in any calendar month. Such fines may be assessed by the municipal court upon the issuance of a citation therefor and a finding of guilt by said court. 
(Code 1962, § 9-6; Code 1986, § 11-3; Ord. No. O-02-03-08, 3-21-2002) 
State Law reference- False alarms, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27. 
Secs. 30-2-30-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Emergency management, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 30-21. - Emergency management organization and plan. 
    The city participates in the countywide emergency management organization and plan. 
Sec. 30-22. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful during an emergency: 
(1)  To willfully obstruct, hinder, or delay any member of the emergency management organization in enforcement of a lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this chapter or in the performances of any duties imposed by virtue of this chapter. 
(2)  To do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this chapter, if such act is of such nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil or delay operations hereunder. 
(3)  To wear or carry or display, without authority, any mark or identification specified by the emergency management organization. 
(Code 1962, § 7-8; Code 1986, § 7-8) 
Chapter 34 - ENVIRONMENT AND NATURAL RESOURCES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 34-1. - Permit required to dig well within city. 
(a)  No person shall dig or cause to be dug any well within the city without a written permit from the city. The city shall only be authorized to grant such a permit under the following circumstances: 
(1)  If the city finds that city water service is not available or will not be available within 12 months from the date of application for the permit to the particular location sought to be served by the proposed well; 
(2)  If the city finds that an existing or proposed business facility for which access to a water well is sought by the owner thereof, or is the type of business which requires regular access to nontreated water to the extent that the business would not be able to carry out its business if it were required to connect to the existing water service; 
(3)  If the city finds that the person requesting a permit to dig a well within the city intends to use the well water solely for the purpose of filling and maintaining a pond or ponds located in the city which the owner thereof intends to stock with fish for his own personal use, and not for commercial purposes. Any such well shall not be utilized to provide drinking water to any person, residence or business. 
(b)  Any person desiring to dig a well within the city shall first apply in writing to the city, setting forth in the application information concerning the location of the proposed well, the anticipated depth of proposed well and the proposed uses of the well. No person shall dig, or shall hire, employ or contract with another to dig a well within the city without such permit as herein provided. 
(c)  Each application for a permit shall be submitted to the city manager, or his or her designee, for review. If, after review, it is determined that a well permit is authorized under the terms of this section, then such well permit may be issued by the city manager, or his or her designee, as an administrative matter. In the event that the application for a water well permit is administratively denied, then the applicant shall be authorized to appeal such denial to the governing body of the city, and such appeal shall be heard by the governing body of the city at a date and time established by the governing body which is not more than 30 calendar days after the date that the applicant's written appeal has been received by the city manager. The governing body of the city shall hear such appeal and base its decision upon the facts, testimony, and other evidence presented at the appeal hearing. 
(Code 1962, § 12-3; Code 1986, § 12-1; Ord. No. O-94-07-23, 7-21-1994; Ord. No. O-11-08-15, 8-18-2011; Ord. No. O-2014-26, 11-20-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 34-2-34-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION 

Sec. 34-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter loadbearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this article or a request for a variance. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Elevated building means a nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before December 16, 1988. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before December 16, 1988. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means the general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used, with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with national geodetic vertical datum (NGVD). 
    National geodetic vertical datum (NGVD) means as corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the start of construction commenced after December 16, 1988, and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after December 16, 1988. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle that is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any article requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the improvement. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
The term "substantial improvement" includes structures that have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. For the purpose of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include those improvements of a building required to comply with existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions, which have been pre-identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article that permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 5-50; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-22. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation that results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Code 1986, § 5-51; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-23. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities that serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development that may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers that are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Code 1986, § 5-52; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-24. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To protect human life and health; 
(2)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(3)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Code 1986, § 5-53; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-25. - Lands to which this article applies. 
    This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-54; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-26. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the federal emergency management agency in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated December 16, 1988, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 5-55; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-27. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Code 1986, § 5-56; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-28. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 5-57; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-29. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Code 1986, § 5-58; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-30. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this article all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the city council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Code 1986, § 5-59; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-31. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Code 1986, § 5-60; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-32. - Penalties for violation. 
    Violation of the provisions of this article or failure to comply with any of its requirements, including violation of conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a misdemeanor. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses incurred by the city in the case. Each day such violation continues, shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation hereof. 
(Code 1986, § 5-61; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-33. - Permit procedures. 
(a)  Required. A development permit shall be obtained in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(b)  Forms furnished; plans to scale. Application for a development permit shall be made to the building official on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Plans, in duplicate, drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question; and 
(2)  The nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
(c)  Application stage. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
(3)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in section 34-36(2); 
(4)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(d)  Construction stage. 
(1)  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. 
(2)  Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
(3)  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
(4)  The building official shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. 
(5)  Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop work order for the project. 
(Code 1986, § 5-62; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-34. - Designation of article administrator; duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
(a)  The building official is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Duties of the building official shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(1)  Review all development permits to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-26, then the building official shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of sections 34-35-34-40. 
(4)  Verify and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level or highest adjacent grade of the lowest floor, including the basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 34-33(d). 
(5)  Verify and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 34-33(d). 
(6)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the building official shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with sections 34-36(2) or 34-38(3). 
(7)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(8)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Ensure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(9)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard, for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions, the building official shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(10)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this article shall be maintained in the office of the building official and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Code 1986, § 5-63; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-35. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction; 
b.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area; and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components, all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure that is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Code 1986, § 5-64; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-36. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-35(4), elevated buildings. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 34-34(b)(6). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes are placed or substantially improved on: 
1.  Individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength, of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (See subsection 34-35(6).) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick-disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions. 
2.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a.-c. of this section. 
3.  The recreational vehicle must be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-26, are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a. is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of sections 34-35-34-40. 
(Code 1986, § 5-65; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000; Ord. No. O-09-08-28, 8-20-2009) 
Sec. 34-37. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations, floodway, A-zones. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-26, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 34-26, then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other source, in order to administer the provisions of sections 34-35-34-40. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the provisions of subsections (2) and (3) of this section shall apply. 
(2)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(3)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-36(4), elevated buildings. 
(4)  The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Code 1986, § 5-66; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-38. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding, AO zones. 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in section 34-26, may include designated AO shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 34-35(4), elevated buildings. 
(2)  The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(3)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this section and as required in subsections 34-33(c)(3) and (d). 
(4)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Code 1986, § 5-67; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-39. - Standards for subdivisions. 
    Following are the standards for subdivisions: 
(1)  All subdivision proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(2)  All subdivision proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(3)  All subdivision proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards; and 
(4)  Base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision proposals and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions, greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less. 
(Code 1986, § 5-68; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-40. - Variance procedures. 
(a)  The board, as established by the city, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board may appeal such decision as provided in other cases for appeal of said board's decisions. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the board shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this article, the board may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 5-69; Ord. No. O-00-11-47, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 34-41. - Adoption of flood insurance study and flood insurance rate map. 
(a)  The flood insurance study (FIS) report submitted to the City of Americus by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as of September 11, 2009, is hereby adopted for the city. 
(b)  The flood insurance rate map (FIRM), prepared by the Federal Emergency Management Agency as of September 11, 2009, is hereby adopted for the city. 
(c)  The city hereby adopts, and authorizes the city building official to enforce, all of the provisions of Title 44, Part 60, sub-part A, section 60.3(d) of the Code of Federal Regulations; provided, however, that where the city's existing ordinances are more stringent than such regulations, the more stringent provisions of the city ordinance shall control. 
(Ord. No. O-09-06-19, 6-18-2009; Ord. No. O-09-08-28, 8-20-2009) 
Secs. 34-42-34-68. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-10-02-04, adopted Feb. 19, 2010, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III was entitled "Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control", §§ 34-69-34-77, and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 5-70-5-78; Ord. No. O-90-05-14, adopted Feb. 26, 1990; Ord. No. O-95-09-31, adopted Sept. 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-00-12-48, §§ 1-10, adopted Dec. 21, 2000; and Ord. No. O-04-09-19, adopted Sept. 23, 2004. 
State Law reference- Soil erosion and sedimentation control, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; local soil erosion and sedimentation control ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-4. 

Sec. 34-69. - Title. 
    This article will be known as the "City of Americus Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-70. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    Best management practices (BMPs): These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
    Board: The board of natural resources. 
    Buffer: The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Certified personnel: A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    Commission: The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
    CPESC: Certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    Cut: A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
    Department: The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
    Design professional: A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: Engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
    Director: The director of the environmental protection division or an authorized representative. 
    District: The Lower Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Division: The environmental protection division (EPD) of the department of natural resources. 
    Drainage structure: A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion: The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan: A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as a minimum protections at least as stringent as the state general permit, best management practices, and requirements in subsection 34-72(c) of this article. 
    Fill: A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
    Final stabilization: All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100 percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70 percent or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: Planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    Finished grade: The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading: Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground elevation: The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Land-disturbing activity: Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 34-71(5). 
    Larger common plan of development or sale: A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    Local issuing authority: The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA): A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et. seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural ground surface: The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU): Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
    NOI: A notice of intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the state general permit. 
    NOT: A notice of termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
    Operator: The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Outfall: The location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on-site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    Permit: The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Phase or phased: Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    Project: The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Property designed: Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the manual as approved by the commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
    Roadway drainage structure: A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment: Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation: The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and water conservation district approved plan: An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the Lower Chattahoochee River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Stabilization: The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State general permit: The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or re-issued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
    State waters: Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
    Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices: Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout streams: All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the Rules and Regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures: Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; or 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Watercourse: Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands: Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-71. - Exemptions. 
    This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the "Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b) and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the local issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 34-72(c)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)-(7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or the state road and tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the federal energy regulatory commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-72. - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES general permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES general permit. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices as set forth in subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm-water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(5)  The LIA may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subsections (c)(15) and (16) of this section, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
(c)  The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq., for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regarding and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut-face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term "ephemeral stream" means a stream; that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the groundwater table year-round; for which groundwater is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow, Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to part 6 of Article 5, Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 60-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of Title 12, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et. seq., shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-73. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The local issuing authority shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Americus without first obtaining a permit from the building official or designee to perform such activity and providing a copy of notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the building official and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land-disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsections 34-72(b) and (c) of this article will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-10. 
(3)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the local issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 34-72(c)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(6) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the local issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the local issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
(5)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(6)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsections 34-72(b) and (c) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission and in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(2)  Data required for site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by subsections 34-72(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this article, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
(4)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(5)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(6)  The LIA may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-74. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The building official or designee will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The local issuing authority must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within 12 months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
(c)  The building official or designee shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(d)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the local issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(e)  The districts or the commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The district or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The district or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(f)  The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-75. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If any person commences and land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his or her designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 34-73(b)(6). The local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this article, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any City Charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-76. - Education and certification. 
(a)  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(b)  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on-site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
(c)  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on-site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this article. 
(d)  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said section. 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-77. - Administrative appeal judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the local issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and city council within ten days after receipt by the local issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the local issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Superior Court of Sumter County. 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Sec. 34-78. - Effectivity, validity and liability. 
(a)  Effectivity. This article shall become effective on the 19th day of February 2010. 
(b)  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this article shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this article. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law, nor impose any liability upon the local issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of, nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(3)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. No. O-10-02-04, 2-19-2010) 
Secs. 34-79-34-97. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - TREES 

Sec. 34-98. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Park trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and all other woody vegetation in public parks having individual names, and all areas owned by the city or to which the public has free access as a park. 
    Shade trees means trees which provide or will eventually provide shaded areas within the city and will help increase the overall canopy to assist in shading and cooling city areas. 
    Street trees means trees, shrubs, bushes, and other woody vegetation on land lying between property lines on either side of all street, avenues, or ways within the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-210; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-99. - Street tree species; excluded and suggested. 
    Instead of compiling a list of trees that may be planted as street trees on publicly owned properties in the city, there will be two lists provided by this article. The first list will include trees that may not be planted as street trees or a list of trees that are excluded from being planted as street trees by this article. Any tree that is not on the "excluded" list may be planted. 
(1)  Trees that may not be planted as street trees. The following trees are excluded as street trees: 
Birch, Paper Oak, Laurel Chinaberry Pine, Eastern White Cottonwood Poplar, Lombardy Crabapple, Flowering Poplar, Tulip Eucalyptus Poplar, White Hemlock, Eastern Royal Paulownia Maple, Silver Sycamore Mulberry Tree of Heaven  
(2)  Trees recommended for planting as street trees. The following lists of trees that are recommended for planting and are known to thrive in the city climate under conditions to which street trees are often subjected. They are intended only as a suggestion of trees and residents are not limited to the trees included on it: 
a.  Large Trees. Trees reaching a mature height of greater than 30 feet: 
Ash Green Maple, Florida Beech, American Oak, Sawtooth Birch, River Oak, Scarlet Blackgum Oak, Shumard Catalpa, Southern Oak, Southern Red Cedar, Deodar Oak, Swamp Chestnut Cedar, Red Oak, Water Cryptomeria Oak, White Cypress, Bald Oak, Willow Cypress, Leyland Pear, Bradford Elm, Chinese Pine, Loblolly Elm, Winged Pine, Longleaf Ginkgo Pine, Slash Hickories Pine, Spruce Japanese Zelkova Pine, Virginia Magnolia, Southern Pistache, Chinese Magnolia, Sweetbay Redwood, Dawn Maple, Red Tallowtree, Chinese  
b.  Small Trees. Trees reaching a mature height of 30 feet or less: 
Chaste Tree Maple, Japanese Cherry, Kwanzan Maple, Trident Cherry, Yoshino Possumhaw Crepe Myrtle Red Buckeye Devilwood Redbud Dogwood Sassafras Eastern Hophornbean Serviceberry Fringetree (Greybeard) Silverbell Hawthorne Sourwood Holly, Nellie R. Stevens Viburnum Holly, Yaupon Willow, Contorted Loquat Windmill Palm Magnolia, Japanese Witch Hazel Magnolia, Star  
(Code 1986, § 5-211; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-100. - Spacing. 
    The spacing of street trees will be in accordance with the two size classes listed in section 34-99. No trees may be planted closer together than the following: 
(1)  Small trees may be planted no closer than 30 feet apart. 
(2)  Large trees may be planted no closer than 50 feet apart. 
(3)  There will be an exception to the above in special plantings designed or submitted by a landscape architect and approved by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-212; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-101. - Distance-From curb and sidewalk. 
    The distance trees may be planted from curbs or curblines and sidewalks will be in accordance with tree size classes listed in section 34-99. No tree may be planted closer to any curb or sidewalk than the following: 
(1)  Small trees may be planted no closer than two feet; 
(2)  Large trees may be planted no closer than four feet. 
(Code 1986, § 5-213; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-102. - Same-From street corner and fire hydrant. 
    No street tree shall be planted closer than 30 feet to any street corner, measured from the point of the nearest intersecting curbs or curblines. No street tree may be planted closer than ten feet to any fire hydrant. 
(Code 1986, § 5-214; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-103. - Utilities. 
    No street trees other than those defined as small trees in section 34-99 may be planted under or within ten lateral feet of any overhead utility wire or over or within five lateral feet of any underground water line, sewer line, transmission line, or other utility. 
(Code 1986, § 5-215; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-104. - Public tree maintenance; approval to plant. 
(a)  The city shall have the right to plant, prune, maintain, and remove trees, plants, or shrubs within the lines of all streets, alleys, avenues, lanes, squares, and public grounds, as may be necessary to ensure public safety or to preserve or enhance the symmetry and beauty of such public grounds. 
(b)  The city may remove or cause or order to be removed, any tree, or part thereof, which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its nature injurious to sewers, electric power lines, gas lines, water lines, or other public improvements, or is affected by any injurious fungus, insects, or other pests. This section does not prohibit the planting of street trees by adjacent property owners on the public right-of-way, providing that the selection of said streets is in accordance with sections 34-99-34-103. 
(c)  Any person, firm, company, corporation, or other legal entity which desires to plant or have planted any tree or shrub for any purpose within the boundaries of any public park or similar public property shall be required to first obtain permission from the community development department of the city for such planting. A written request to the community development department of the city shall be made prior to any such planting. The community development department shall only be authorized to approve such planting if such planting is determined to be consistent with the present landscaping or any future landscape plan for the particular area involved. Any such written request shall state the purpose for the planting, the species of the tree or shrub proposed to be planted, and the exact desired location for such planting. Any plaque, sign, or monument that is placed or installed in connection with any such approved planting shall be approved by the community development department of the city under the same criteria as is required for the approval of such planting under this section. Nothing herein shall prevent or be construed to prevent the city council from planting, or causing to be planted, such trees, shrubs, or other plants as the city council or its designated agencies may deem appropriate on any publicly owned property within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 5-216; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003; Ord. No. O-05-04-11, 4-21-2005) 
Sec. 34-105. - Pruning-Tree topping; severely damaged trees; terms of franchise agreement. 
    It shall be unlawful as a normal practice for any person, firm, or city department to top any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. The term "topping" is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under utility wires or other obstructions where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this article at the determination of the city. Pruning allowed pursuant to the time of any franchise agreement between the city and a public utility shall continue to be authorized in accord with the terms of such franchise agreement. 
(Code 1986, § 5-217; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-106. - Same-Obstruction of intersections and sidewalks. 
    Every owner of any tree overhanging any right-of-way within the city shall prune the branches so that such branches shall not obstruct the light from any street lamp or obstruct the view of any street intersection and so that there shall be a clear space of eight feet above the surface of the street or sidewalk. Said owners shall remove all dead, diseased, or dangerous trees, or broken or decayed limbs which constitute a menace to the safety of the public. The city shall have the right to prune any tree or shrub of private property when it interferes with the proper spread of light along the street from a streetlight or interferes with the visibility of any traffic control device or sign. 
(Code 1986, § 5-218; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-107. - Dead or diseased tree removal on private property. 
    The city shall have the right to cause the removal of any dead or diseased trees on private property within the city when such trees constitute a hazard to life and property, or harbor insects or disease which constitute a potential threat to other trees within the city. The city will notify in writing the owners of such trees. Removal shall be done by said owners at their own expense within 60 days after the date of service of notice. In the event of failure of owners to comply with such provisions, the city shall have the authority to remove such trees and charge the cost of removal on the owner's property tax notice. Nothing herein shall be construed to establish any legal obligation or liability on the part of the city for the removal or trimming of dead or diseased trees on either public or private property. 
(Code 1986, § 5-219; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Sec. 34-108. - Removal of stumps. 
    All stumps of street and park trees shall be removed below the surface of the ground so that the top of the stump shall not project above the surface of the ground. 
(Code 1986, § 5-220; Ord. No. O-03-10-33, 10-23-2003) 
Secs. 34-109-34-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - WETLAND PROTECTION 

Sec. 34-130. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Generalized wetland map means a map showing the general locations of wetlands within the county and the city. The generalized wetland map used at the time this article is adopted is the National Wetlands Inventory as published by the United States Department of Interior. 
    Hydric soils means soils that form as a result of saturated soils conditions. A list of these soils is maintained by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly the Soil Conservation Service). 
    Hydrophytic vegetation means macrophytic plants tolerant of or dependent on saturated soil conditions. 
    Jurisdictional determination means an official statement or map signed by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, stating whether a certain specified site is a wetland or is in a wetland. 
    Jurisdictional wetland means a wetland area that meets the definitional requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
    Temporary emergency permit means a temporary permit that may be issued in certain circumstances specified in subsection 34-133(c). 
    Wetland means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and distribution sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances does support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
    Wetland delineation means the establishment of wetland boundaries by a representative of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers or an authority designated by the corps. 
    Wetland protection district means all wetlands within the city and shown on the generalized wetland map. 
(Code 1986, § 5-279; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 9, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-131. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  Findings of fact. Wetlands are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soils limitations. In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control, erosion control; natural resource education, scientific study; and open space and recreational opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well-being of many communities within the state. 
(b)  Necessity to protect. Nationally, a considerable number of wetland resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. It is, therefore, necessary to discourage development activities that may adversely affect wetlands by ensuring maximum protection for wetlands located in the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Purpose. The purpose of this article is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreational and aesthetic values. Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practicable as determined through a permitting process. The objective of this article is to protect wetlands from alterations that will significantly affect or reduce their primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic nature and wildlife habitat. 
(Code 1986, § 5-271; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 1, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-132. - Districts and boundaries. 
(a)  This article shall apply to all lands within wetlands located in the corporate limits of the city. The generalized wetland map, adopted as part of this article, shows the general location of wetlands and should be consulted by persons contemplating activities in or near wetlands. The generalized wetland map, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be part of this article. The generalized wetland map shall be on file in the office of building risk management. 
(b)  The generalized wetland map is a general reference document, and wetland boundaries indicated on the map are approximations. The purpose of the generalized wetland map is to alert developers/landowners that a subject site may be in a jurisdictional wetland or in proximity to a jurisdictional wetland, requiring the developer/landowner to seek U.S. Army Corps of Engineers guidance as to whether a section 404 permit will be required prior to initiation of any development activity on the subject site. The generalized wetland map does not represent precise boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the county and the city, and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. Any local government action under this article does not relieve the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
(Code 1986, § 5-272; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 2, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-133. - Local development permits. 
(a)  Required. No regulated activity will be allowed within the wetland protection district without written permission from the permitting officer in the form of a local development permit. Issuance of a local development permit is contingent on full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. All activities that are not identified in subsection (b) of this section or by other local development ordinances, shall be prohibited without prior issuance of a local development permit. If the area proposed for development appears to be located within 50 feet of the wetland protection district boundary, as determined by the permitting officer from review of the generalized wetland map, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. If the corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, a local development permit will be issued only following receipt by the local permitting officer of a copy of the section 404 permit or letter of permission issued by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
(b)  Permissible uses; uses as of right. The following uses shall be allowed as of right within a wetland to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law, including laws of trespass, and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein: 
(1)  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish and other wildlife, provided they do not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual section 404 permit. 
(2)  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, birdwatching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
(3)  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
(4)  The continued cultivation of agricultural crops. Agricultural activities shall, however, be subject to best management practices approved by the state department of agriculture. 
(5)  The pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that approved agricultural best management practices are followed. 
(6)  Education, scientific research and nature trails. 
(c)  Temporary emergency permit. A temporary, emergency permit can be issued by the permitting officer for the following reasons: 
(1)  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged, and written notice prior to the commencement of work has been given to the permitting officer, and provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns and chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland are not impaired, and that any adverse affect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
(2)  Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with ongoing silvicultural operations. 
(3)  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use under the terms and provisions of subsection (b)(4) of this section. 
(4)  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses or other similar water-related structures, provided such facilities and structures are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
(d)  Site plans. Applications for a local development permit within the generalized wetland protection district shall include a site plan, drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet. 
(1)  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved with cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings. 
(2)  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site must be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
(3)  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
(4)  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the subject site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
(5)  Elevation of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
(6)  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing hazardous or toxic materials released accidently. 
(7)  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
(e)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. The site plan may be amended only with approval of the permitting officer. The permitting officer may require additional information deemed necessary to verify compliance with the provisions of this article or to evaluate the proposed use in terms of the purposes of this article. 
(f)  Subdivision approval in the wetland protection district. Any application for subdivision approval shall include a jurisdictional determination approved by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. If the corps determines that wetlands are present and that a section 404 permit or letter of permission is required, subdivision approval will be issued only following issuance of the section 404 permit or letter of permission. 
(g)  Subdivision design options in the wetland protection district. Any subdivision that includes jurisdictional wetlands shall be allowed and encouraged to use the following options: 
(1)  Lot size averaging. Lot size averaging is encouraged in single-family detached subdivisions as a means to work around wetland areas. The planning commission may allow a reduction in lot size provided the same number of lots in the same subdivision are oversized by an equal or greater area. The maximum permissible reduction shall not exceed 25 percent of the minimum required lot area. The number of lots with areas reduced shall not exceed 25 percent of the total number of lots in the subdivision. The permitting officer shall allow no more than a 25 percent adjustment of rear, side and front setbacks for each affected lot. 
(2)  Cluster development. Clustering of residential development is encouraged. When considering subdivision approval, the planning commission may allow incorporation of wetland or other significant natural areas as open space in the subdivision plan. Such plans should designate at least 25 percent of the gross land area as open space. Density shall be calculated by subtracting from the total acreage of a parcel all land dedicated or in use for private or public roads, including all vehicular rights-of-way. The resultant acreage will then be divided by the minimum allowed lot size of the district to derive the number of lots permissible. 
(h)  Filing fee. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a filing fee specified by the permitting officer. Filing fees in the amount established by ordinance shall be required to evaluate the application. However, if after review of the initial application it is determined that expert consultants are necessary to provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determination, those fees will be in excess of the filing fee. 
(i)  Enforcement authority. The permitting officer is the department, office or individual assigned the responsibility of administering this article. At the time this article is adopted, the administrative authority is vested in the office of building risk management. 
(j)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the permitting officer and will be reviewed within seven days. The review period shall begin upon the permitting officer's determination that the application submitted is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings; approval, conditional approval or disapproval, by the permitting officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the permitting officer. If outside consultants are required, the process will be completed in a timely fashion, but may exceed the seven day review period established herein. 
(k)  Appeals. Decisions on permit applications made by the permitting officer may be appealed to the board. The appeal must be submitted in writing with fee attached in the amount established by ordinance to the community development director within ten days of the decision rendered by the permitting officer. A public hearing shall be held by the board. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the board shall be final and may be issued up to 15 days following the public hearing. 
(l)  Permit expiration. 
(1)  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
(2)  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date work ceased. 
(3)  Written notice of the pending expiration of the development permit may be issued by the permitting officer, but no such notification is required. 
(Code 1986, § 5-273; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 3, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-134. - Monitoring and enforcement. 
(a)  The permitting officer shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing duties required under this article, and may take or cause to be made such examination, survey or sampling as the permitting officer deems necessary. 
(1)  The permitting officer shall have authority to enter the subject site to monitor development and to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder, and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
(2)  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers in the jurisdiction shall have authority to assist the permitting officer with enforcement. 
(3)  The permitting officer shall have authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified herein. 
(b)  The permitting officer may require a bond with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of any condition of any such bond, the permitting officer may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. 
(c)  When the permitting officer determines a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may, at the discretion of the permitting officer, be required to remove the structure. 
(d)  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may, at the discretion of the permitting officer and as far as practicable, be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation. 
(e)  If the permitting officer discovers a violation of this article that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act as amended, the permitting officer shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
(f)  Suspension, revocation. The permitting officer may suspend or revoke a permit if he finds the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. The permitting officer shall cause notice of denial, issuance, conditional issuance, revocation or suspension of a permit to be published in a daily newspaper having a broad circulation in the areas where the wetland is located. 
(Code 1986, § 5-274; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 4, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 34-135. - Assessment relief. 
    The county board of tax assessors shall consider wetland regulations in determining the fair market value of land. Any owner of an undeveloped wetland who has dedicated an easement or entered into a conservation program with the government or a nonprofit organization restricting activities in a wetland shall have that portion of land assessed consistent with those restrictions. Such landowner shall also be exempted from special assessment on the wetland to defray the cost of municipal improvements such as sanitary sewers, storm sewers and water mains. 
(Code 1986, § 5-277; Ord. No. O-99-10-40, § 7, 10-21-1999) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4. 
Secs. 34-136-34-153. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREA PROTECTION 

Sec. 34-154. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aquifer means any stratum (rock layer) or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
    Groundwater recharge area or aquifer recharge area means an area of the earth's surface where water infiltrates the ground, thereby replenishing the groundwater supplies within an aquifer. 
    Pollution susceptibility means the relative vulnerability of groundwater to pollution from chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations or pollution generated by other human activities. 
    Pollution susceptibility maps means the maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas of high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
    Significant groundwater recharge areas means areas mapped by DNR in the Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and form of rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density of lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of karst topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other carbonate rocks) and potentiometric surfaces. 
(Code 1986, § 5-341; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 11, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 11, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-155. - Findings and objectives. 
(a)  Findings of fact. In order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and to promote a healthy economic climate in the city and surrounding communities, it is essential that public drinking water resources of high quality be ensured. For this reason, it is necessary to protect the subsurface water resources the city and surrounding communities rely on as sources of public water. 
(b)  Necessity to manage. Groundwater resources are contained within aquifers, which are permeable, rock strata occupying vast regions of the subsurface. These aquifers are replenished by infiltration of surface water runoff in zones of the surface known as groundwater recharge areas. Groundwater is susceptible to contamination when unrestricted development occurs within significant groundwater recharge areas. It is, therefore, necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas to ensure that pollution threats to water resources are minimized. 
(c)  Objectives. The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect groundwater quality by restricting land uses that generate, use, or store dangerous pollutants in recharge areas; 
(2)  Protect groundwater quality by limiting density of development; and 
(3)  Protect groundwater quality by ensuring that any development that occurs within the recharge area shall have no adverse effect on groundwater quality. 
(Code 1986, § 5-331; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 1, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 1, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-156. - Establishment of a groundwater recharge area district. 
    A groundwater recharge area district is hereby established which shall correspond to all lands in the corporate limits of the city, that are mapped and designated as significant recharge areas by the state department of natural resources in the Hydrologic Atlas 18, 1989 edition. 
(Code 1986, § 5-332; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 2, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 2, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-157. - Determination of pollution susceptibility. 
    Each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium or low based on the groundwater pollution susceptibility map prepared by the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1986, § 5-333; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 3, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 3, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-158. - Permit requirements and enforcement. 
    No building permit, rezoning request or subdivision plan will be approved by the permitting officer unless the permit, request and/or plan is in compliance with the groundwater protection standards listed herein. 
(1)  Enforcement. The permitting officer, his agent, officers and employees shall have authority to enter upon privately owned land for the purpose of performing their assigned duties and responsibilities under this article, and may take or cause to be made such examinations, surveys or sampling as the permitting officer deems necessary. 
a.  The permitting officer may require a bond with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this article. In the event of a breach of any condition of any such bond, the permitting officer may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. 
b.  The permitting officer shall have authority to enforce this article; issue permits hereunder; and address violations or threatened violations hereof by issuance of violation notices, administrative orders and civil and criminal actions. All costs, fees and expenses in connection with such actions may be recovered as damages against the violator. 
c.  Law enforcement officials or other officials having police powers in the jurisdiction shall have authority to assist the permitting officer in enforcement. 
d.  The permitting officer shall have the authority to issue cease and desist orders in the event of any violation of this article. Cease and desist orders may be appealed to a court of competent jurisdiction, as identified herein. 
e.  When the permitting officer determines that a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this article, the violator may, at the discretion of the permitting officer, be required to remove the structure. 
f.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this article, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable. 
(2)  Development permit review and site plan requirement. With the exception of certain exempted activities identified in subsection (4) of this section, applications for a development permit within the groundwater recharge area district shall include a site plan providing the following information: 
a.  A map drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet showing all planned improvements including the width, depth and length of all existing and proposed structures, roads, watercourses and drainageways, water lines, wastewater and stormwater facilities, and utility installations. 
b.  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site. 
c.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
d.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than five feet. 
e.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing hazardous or toxic materials which may be released accidentally. 
f.  Calculations of the amount of cut and fill proposed and cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades in areas of fill or excavation. Elevations, horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on cross sectional drawings. 
(3)  Activities to comply with site plan. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform with the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site, increase the amount of impervious surface within the development, alter the overall density of development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of vegetation during construction or otherwise result in an alteration of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the permitting officer. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are exempted from this requirement. 
(4)  Exemptions to site plan requirements. The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans: 
a.  Any subdivision, multifamily, or group housing development where less than ten dwelling units are proposed. 
b.  Repair to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
c.  Construction of minor structures, such as sheds or additions to single-family residences. 
(5)  Review procedures. The application shall be made to the permitting officer and shall be reviewed within seven days. The review period shall begin with the permitting officer's determination that the application is complete. The review period shall include the preparation of findings; approval, conditional approval or disapproval, by the permitting officer. The applicant will receive written notification of the findings of the permitting officer. 
(6)  Permit expiration. 
a.  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within six months from the date of permit issuance, the permit shall expire. 
b.  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six months after the date work ceased. 
(Code 1986, § 5-334; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 4, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 4, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-159. - Groundwater protection standards. 
(a)  For all pollution susceptibility areas, new waste disposal facilities must have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
(b)  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
(1)  A high pollution susceptibility area; 
(2)  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 15 acre-feet; or 
(3)  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 50 acre-feet. 
(c)  At a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot, and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the U. S. Department of Agriculture Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(d)  No land disposal of hazardous waste shall be permitted within any significant groundwater recharge area. 
(e)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas the handling, storage and disposal of hazardous materials, as identified in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, as amended, excluding underground storage tanks, and in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall take place on an impermeable surface having spill and leak protection approved by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division (EPD), and in conformance with local fire prevention code requirements. 
(f)  For all significant groundwater recharge areas new, above ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks larger than 650 gallons must have secondary containment for 110 percent of tank volume, or 110 percent of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt from this requirement, provided they comply with applicable federal regulations. 
(g)  For high pollution susceptibility areas, new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner approved by EPD. 
(h)  For high pollution susceptibility areas no new stormwater infiltration basins may be constructed. 
(i)  For high pollution susceptibility areas the use of wastewater spray irrigation systems and the land application of wastewater sludge shall be practiced in accordance with department of natural resources criteria for slow rate land treatment. An application for a development permit for activities involving wastewater spray irrigation or land application of wastewater sludge must be accompanied by proof that the applicant has received a land application system permit from EPD. 
(j)  Minimum lot sizes and septic systems. Construction shall not proceed on any building or structure to be served by an on-site sewage management system until the county health department approves the proposed sewage management system as meeting requirements outlined in section M of the department of human resources (DHR) manual for on-site sewage management systems, incorporated herein by reference, and the required building permits have been issued. (See appendix to Ordinance No. O-00-06-24 for section M requirements.) 
(Code 1986, § 5-336; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 6, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 6, 6-22-2000) 
Editor's note- The Appendix to Ordinance No. O-00-06-24, adopted June 22, 2000, referred to in subsection (j) of section 5-336 above, has not been included within this Code, but may be found attached to Ordinance No. O-00-06-24, on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Sec. 34-160. - Appeals. 
    Decisions on permit applications made by the permitting officer may be appealed to the board. The appeal must be submitted in writing with fee attached in the amount established by ordinance the community development director within ten days of the decision rendered by the permitting officer. A public hearing shall be held by the board. Public announcement of the hearing shall be printed in a local newspaper of general circulation at least 15 days, but not more than 45 days prior to the hearing. Any person may offer testimony at the hearing. The decision of the board shall be final and may be issued up to 15 days following the public hearing. 
(Code 1986, § 5-337; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 7, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 7, 6-22-2000) 
Sec. 34-161. - Assessment relief. 
    The county board of tax assessors shall consider the requirements of these regulations in determining the fair market value of land. 
(Code 1986, § 5-339; Ord. No. O-00-01-02, § 9, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-06-24, § 9, 6-22-2000) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-7.4. 
Secs. 34-162-34-199. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 

Sec. 34-200. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "wellhead protection ordinance". 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to insure the provision of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the City of Americus by the establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells and springs which are the supply sources for the City of Americus water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. No. O-09-05-17, 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 34-201. - Establishment of a wellhead protection zone. 
    There is hereby established a use district to be known as a "wellhead protection zone", as identified and described within the State of Georgia, approved wellhead protection plan the official copy of which is maintained on file in the office of the city public services director. 
(Ord. No. O-09-05-17, 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 34-202. - Prohibited uses. 
    Land use and activities in the wellhead protection zones, as identified and described as potential pollution sources in the State of Georgia approved wellhead protection plan, will be prohibited as stated in the plan. 
(Ord. No. O-09-05-17, 5-21-2009) 
Sec. 34-203. - Administration. 
    The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under the ordinance from which this article derives, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the City of Americus, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. No. O-09-05-17, 5-21-2009) 
Chapter 38 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 38-1. - Interference with equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person willfully to damage, destroy or in any way interfere with any cistern, engine, hose, hose cart, truck, hooks, ladders or other apparatus, implement, fire hydrant or material of any kind connected with or belonging to the fire department for the extinguishment of fires. 
(Code 1962, § 9-5; Code 1986, § 11-2) 
State Law reference- Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq. 
Sec. 38-2. - Fire-In public areas. 
    No person shall kindle or build a fire upon any sidewalk, or in any street or public square of this city without permission of the fire department. 
(Code 1962, § 9-8; Code 1986, § 11-4) 
Sec. 38-3. - Same-On private lots. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to burn trash, lumber, leaves, straw or any other combustible material on any private lot within the city without permission of the fire department. 
(Code 1962, § 9-8; Code 1986, § 11-5) 
Sec. 38-4. - Motor vehicles parking in fire lanes. 
(a)  The marking of fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, shall be approved by the fire chief and the police chief. 
(b)  Parking of motor vehicles or otherwise obstructing fire lanes on private property, devoted to public use, so marked and approved, is prohibited at all times. 
(c)  Any owner or user of a motor vehicle in violation of this section who pleads guilty, is found guilty, or pleads nolo contendere in the municipal court of the city shall be subject to punishment in accord with the provisions of section 1-8 of the City Code. 
(Code 1962, § 9-10; Code 1986, § 11-6; Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Sec. 38-5. - Color combinations required for fire hydrants. 
    All city fire hydrants shall be color coded as follows: 
(1)  Barrels of all fire hydrants shall be painted yellow. 
(2)  Bonnets and nozzle caps of all fire hydrants shall be painted as follows: 
Class Flow Color A 1,000 gpm or greater Green B 500 to 1,000 gpm Yellow C Less than 500 gpm Red  
(Code 1962, § 9-11; Code 1986, § 11-7) 
Sec. 38-6. - Fireworks; explosives. 
(a)  The term "fireworks," as used in this section, shall mean and include any combustible or explosive composition, or any substance or combination of substances, or article, prepared for the purpose of producing a visible or an audible effect by combustion, explosion, deflagration, or detonation, and shall include blank cartridges, toy pistols, toy cannons, toy canes, or toy guns in which explosives are used, firecrackers, torpedoes, sky rockets, Roman candles, daygo bombs, sparklers, or other fireworks of like construction, any fireworks containing any explosive or flammable compound, or any tablets or other device containing any explosive substance. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to burn or shoot rockets or crackers or any kind of fireworks or to explode dynamite cartridges, or torpedoes within the city, without first having written permission from the city council. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, dispense, give away or, in any other manner, dispose of any rockets, firecrackers, dynamite caps, torpedoes, or any kind of fireworks within the city, unless the intended purchaser first displays to said seller an authorization of the city council allowing said items to be used or discharged within the city, or said intended purchaser furnishes the seller, before any of the items are delivered, an affidavit duly sworn to before one authorized to administer oaths to the effect that said items will be shipped to persons and places outside the city. 
(d)  The city council shall give its consent for the sale of the items referred to in this section when the same is authorized under the statutes of the state. 
(Code 1962, § 15-13; Code 1986, § 11-8) 
State Law reference- Fireworks control, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq. 
Secs. 38-7-38-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 38-31-38-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE CALLS OUTSIDE CITY LIMITS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-10-07-23, adopted July 22, 2010, amended div. 2 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former div. 2, §§ 38-49-38-55, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1962, §§ 9-13-9-19; Code 1986, §§ 11-20-11-26; Ord. No. O-87-10-18, adopted Oct. 19, 1987; Ord. No. O-90-12-33, adopted Dec. 26, 1990; Ord. No. O-91-11-40, adopted Nov. 25, 1991; Ord. No. O-93-11-37, Nov. 22, 1993; Ord. No. O-95-09-30, adopted Sept. 21, 1995; Ord. No. O-00-05-22, adopted May 18, 2000; and Ord. No. O-04-12-33, adoptd Dec. 16, 2004. 

Sec. 38-49. - Authorized. 
    The fire department is hereby permitted to answer calls to property lying outside the corporate limits of the city only in the event that there is in existence, at the time of the call, either: (i) an intergovernmental agreement between the governing body of the city and the governing body of the jurisdiction from which such fire call originates providing for the city fire department to answer such calls in such jurisdiction; or (ii) a mutual aid agreement between the governing body of the city and the governing body of the jurisdiction from which such fire call originates. 
(Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Sec. 38-50. - Discretion of fire chief preserved. 
    This article shall not impair the discretion of the chief of the fire department to answer calls on account of fire to the property of citizens adjacent to the corporate limits where such calls are necessary for the protection of property lying within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Sec. 38-51. - Right of refusal. 
    Except where the city fire department is obligated by contract as provided in section 38-49, the permission given to the fire department to answer calls outside the city shall not be considered as obligatory or mandatory, nor shall any person have any right to compel the fire department to answer such fire call, but whenever, in the opinion of the chief of the fire department, the use of equipment and personnel to answer such calls would jeopardize the safety or welfare of property within the corporate limits, the fire department may refuse to make such calls. 
(Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Sec. 38-52. - Exception. 
    None of the provisions of this article shall affect contracts that the city has, or may hereafter have, with industrial and commercial plants whereby such property owners pay certain stipulated amounts to cover sprinkler connections, extensions or water mains, fire protection, etc. 
(Ord. No. O-10-07-23, 7-22-2010) 
Secs. 38-53-38-75. - Reserved. 
Chapter 42 - HEALTH AND SANITATION 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 42-1-42-18. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - SMOKING AND CITY OWNED BUILDINGS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Smoking in public, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-1; local smoking ordinances, O.C.G.A. § 31-12A-12. 

Sec. 42-19. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The city council does hereby find: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major source of the contributor to indoor air pollution. 
(2)  Reliable studies, including those published by the Surgeon General of the United States, have shown that the inhalation of the smoke injected into the atmosphere by the use of tobacco products by others is a cause of and contributing factor of disease, including, without limitation, lung cancer in healthy nonsmokers. 
(3)  It is the obligation of all employers to use their best efforts in furnishing a safe workplace for their employees. 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to protect the health of nonsmokers in public city-owned buildings. 
(Code 1986, § 12-70; Ord. No. O-92-10-105, 10-26-1992) 
Sec. 42-20. - Smoking prohibited in certain buildings. 
    No person shall smoke or carry a lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, or match, or use any spark, flame, or fire-producing device for the purpose of smoking in any building owned or operated by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 12-71; Ord. No. O-92-10-105, 10-26-1992) 
Sec. 42-21. - Posting of signs required. 
    There shall be conspicuously posted, in every building owned or operated by the city, signs notifying all persons that no smoking is allowed in the building. Such signs shall contain letters of not less than two inches in height indicating "No Smoking" in the premises or, in the alternative, shall contain the international symbol for "No Smoking," which consists of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle, with a red bar bisecting the circle. 
(Code 1986, § 12-72; Ord. No. O-92-10-105, 10-26-1992) 
Sec. 42-22. - Violation of article. 
    No person shall smoke in any properly placarded place, nor shall any person remove any placard or sign required to be erected by or under the authority of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 12-73; Ord. No. O-92-10-105, 10-26-1992) 
Chapter 46 - LICENSES, TAXATION AND MISCELLANEOUS BUSINESS REGULATIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 46-1. - Levy on companies and agents; filing return. 
(a)  Insurers' license fees. There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount as established by ordinance. For each separate business location in excess of one, not covered by subsection (b) of this section, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount as established by ordinance. For the purposes of this section, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(b)  License fees for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee as established by ordinance, per location for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter. 
(c)  Insurers' agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by subsection (a) of this section, in the amount as established by ordinance, for each such location within the city. 
(d)  Gross premiums tax-Imposed on life insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(e)  Same-All other insurers. There is hereby levied for the year 1995 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(2), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  Due date for license fees. License fees imposed in subsections (a) and (b) of this section shall be due and payable on the first day of 1995 and on the first date of each subsequent year. Those not paid by March 15 will be considered delinquent and will be collected by such action as provided for hereinafter. 
(g)  Filing and reporting requirements. Every insurance company doing business in the city and subject to the fees and taxes herein imposed shall file with the finance director, on forms prescribed by the finance director, a report showing the names and addresses of its agents representing such company in the city; the location and person in charge of each business location within the city operated and maintained by such company; the classes of insurance written; and such other reasonable information as may be required, and, in addition, shall furnish complete information regarding the premium received, by class, from policies written on risks residing or located within the city. Such report shall be made over affidavit of an officer of such company. It is hereby declared to be a violation of this section for any person, or the agent of any person to knowingly give false or incomplete information on any such report. Said report shall be filed at the time of paying the license fee and premium tax. 
(h)  Confidentiality of information. All reports required to be filed under this section shall be confidential and the information contained therein shall be solely for the use of the officers of the city responsible for administering this section. 
(i)  Penalties. The fees and taxes levied by this section may be enforced by execution in the same manner as other taxes of the city. A violation of this section shall be grounds for refusing or revoking a license, and the person responsible may be punished as for violations of other city ordinances. 
(j)  Administrative provisions. The finance director is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of this section to the insurance commissioner of the state within 45 days of its enactment. 
(Code 1986, § 14-40; Ord. No. O-94-12-41, 12-22-1994; Ord. No. O-97-12-39, 12-18-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
State Law reference- Insurance license fees and taxes, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
Sec. 46-2. - Junk dealers. 
    All houses or places of business where a junk shop is conducted shall at all times be subject to visitation and inspection by the police of the city; shall keep books showing daily transactions, giving the name and address of all persons making sales to such place of business, and shall describe the articles of merchandise purchased, together with the date of purchase, which books shall be subject to inspection by the police at any time a police officer desires the same. If any person who conducts such a business shall, at any time, refuse to submit to such visitation or inspection, or fails or refuses to keep such books, or fails or refuses to permit the police to make inspection of the same, the mayor shall immediately close the place of business of such person so refusing. In case any machinery or any part thereof or any appliance of any railroad shop or gas company, or waterworks, or sample waste or loose cotton, grates or any part thereof, or gas or waterworks fixtures shall be found in any junk shop, without a sufficient explanation of the same, or anyone who violates any of the terms of this section, it shall subject the owner or person conducting such shop, upon conviction, to punishment prescribed in section 1-8, and conviction of a second offense shall be a just and conclusive cause for the revocation of the license of such business. 
(Code 1962, § 15-17; Code 1986, § 14-70) 
Sec. 46-3. - Yard sales. 
(a)  For the purpose of this Code, a "yard sale," which may also be known as a "garage sale" or a "rummage sale," is defined as an informal, irregularly scheduled marketplace of used and/or new household goods. Typically, the items for sale are unwanted items from the household conducting the sale, but a yard sale may include items purchased for resale. The seller displays the items for sale to the public, usually in a garage, in a yard, in a driveway, or within the living area of the household. The duration of a yard sale is one calendar day. 
(b)  Yard sales are permitted to be held on private property within the corporate limits of the city. No permit or business license shall be required from the city in order to conduct a yard sale; provided, however, that one individual or family shall not conduct more than five yard sales during each calendar year. Any individual or family conducting more than five yard sales in a single calendar year period shall be considered to be in the "yard sale" business and shall obtain a business license from the city. 
(Ord. No. O-07-10-36, § 14-71, 10-18-2007) 
Secs. 46-4-46-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-23. - Date due and payable; collection and payment; execution; levy. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes on tangible property other than motor vehicles shall be payable in two installments. Such taxes due the city and the independent school system of the city, which are levied upon tangible property other than motor vehicles, shall become due and payable on September 1 and December 20 of each year. Notice of the amount due for such respective due dates shall be mailed to each taxpayer on or about July 1 of each year for the September 1 installment and on or about October 20 of each year for the December 20 payment, shall be the equivalent of at least one-half of such taxes due upon such property for the immediately preceding year. The amount of such tax due on December 20 shall be the difference between the amount due and payable on September 1 and the total amount of such tax as levied upon said property for the then-current tax year. 
(b)  Every taxpayer who shall neglect or refuse to pay such taxes by the dates upon which they are due and payable as herein provided shall be placed upon the digest as a defaulter, and the finance director shall forthwith as early as practicable issue an execution against such taxpayer for unpaid taxes, which execution shall bear teste in the name of the city council and be directed to the finance director. 
(c)  Upon the issuance of the execution authorized in subsection (b) of this section, the finance director shall be authorized to add thereto the cost for recording the execution on the general execution docket of the clerk of superior court of the county and also the cost of satisfying said execution on said general execution docket, said authorized costs to be in the same amount as is charged by the clerk of superior court of the county for recording and satisfying such executions as authorized by law. 
(d)  Nothing herein shall relieve any property owner who is required to make a return to the commissioner of the state department of revenue from that responsibility; nor shall anything herein abrogate or lessen the authority of said commissioner or his agent to issue execution for taxes due as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-512. 
(Code 1962, § 22-13; Code 1986, § 10-23; Ord. No. O-88-11-38, 11-28-1988; Ord. No. O-96-11-49, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-24. - Insolvent tax docket; responsibility of finance committee, finance director. 
    It shall be the duty of the finance committee on or about April 1 of each year to thoroughly examine the tax digest and tax executions that have not been paid, with a view of ascertaining the solvency of said executions and the amount of said uncollected taxes, and to submit, in writing, a report showing the result of said examination and inquiry, together with such recommendations to the city council as to the disposition of such as may be insolvent as said committee may deem advisable. After the making of said report as herein provided, unless specific action is taken by the city council as to said insolvent executions of taxes, it shall be the duty of the finance committee to charge off said insolvent tax executions on what is known as the "insolvent tax docket," which shall be kept by the finance director. 
(Code 1962, § 22-5; Code 1986, § 10-25; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-25. - Judicial in rem tax foreclosure for delinquent real property taxes. 
(a)  The city shall be authorized, from and after December 1, 1995, the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived, to utilize the procedures provided for judicial in rem tax foreclosure as contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-4-81, said state statutes being incorporated into this section by specific reference thereto. 
(b)  Such procedures may be used for the collection of any and all ad valorem taxes assessed against real property within the city that remain unpaid for a period of 12 months following the date that the taxes initially become delinquent. 
(c)  Any proceedings filed in accordance with this section shall be designed solely to enforce the lien for ad valorem taxes against the property subject to taxation, and such proceedings shall not constitute an action for personal liability for such taxes against the owner of the subject property. 
(d)  For the purposes of proceedings filed in superior court pursuant to this section, the city tax collector shall be defined as the finance director. 
(e)  Prior to any proceeding being filed in the superior court pursuant to this section, the tax collector shall cause the city attorney to check the title to the property which is subject to the ad valorem tax levy and report to the tax collector the name of the owner of the subject property and any other interested parties as defined by state law. The city attorney shall also provide to the tax collector a legal description of the subject property. 
(f)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the city from proceeding to collect delinquent ad valorem taxes in another manner or pursuant to another city ordinance or state statute as the methods for collection of such ad valorem taxes provided in this section are not exclusive, but are merely cumulative of the methods by which the city may collect such taxes pursuant to state law. 
(Code 1986, § 10-28; Ord. No. O-95-11-37, 11-30-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 46-26-46-53. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-03-06, §§ 1, 2, adopted Mar. 22, 2012, amended art. III in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former art. III, §§ 46-54-46-65, was entitled "Hotel-Motel Occupancy Tax", and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 10-30-10-41; Ord. No. O-01-04-17, adopted Apr. 19, 2001; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, adopted Dec. 16, 2004; and Ord. No. O-05-07-16, adopted July 21, 2005. 
State Law reference- Local hotel-motel occupancy taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 46-54. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
    City. The City of Americus and, variously, the incorporated territory of Americus, wherein the city government is empowered to impose this tax by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 
    City finance director. The duly appointed city finance director of the city or his designee. 
    Due date. The 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
    Estimated tax liability. The lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
    Folio. Primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the method(s) of payment. 
    Guest room. Accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    Hotel. Any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truckstop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. It does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
    Lodging provider. Any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
    Monthly period. The calendar months of any year. 
    Occupancy. The use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
    Occupant. Any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
    Permanent resident. Any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
    Person. Any individual, firm, partnership, joint adventure, association, social club, fraternal organization, joint stock company, corporation, cooperative, estate, trust, receiver, trustee, syndicate, or any other group or combination acting as a unit, the plural as well as the singular number; excepting the United States, the State of Georgia and any instrumentality of either thereof upon which the city is without power to impose the tax. 
    Rent. The consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    Tax. The tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq., specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a). 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-55. - Tax rate. 
    There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of seven percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 46-57. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
State Law reference- Hotel-motel tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
Sec. 46-56. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
    Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of seven percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 46-57. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-57. - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the State of Georgia or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
State Law reference- Exemptions generally, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51 et seq. 
Sec. 46-58. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city finance director on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that the ordinance codified herein becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city finance director. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city finance director shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-59. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the City of Americus monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent of any tax due and unpaid tax shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city finance director. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city finance director. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for a period longer than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-60. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city finance director is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 46-59. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city finance director shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-61. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city finance director shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city finance director. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in subsection 46-60(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 46-59. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-62. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city finance director may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city finance director either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the governing authority. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city finance director, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the governing authority at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The governing authority shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-63. - Administration of ordinance; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city finance director. The city finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city finance director may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city finance director or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision, unless the city finance director shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city finance director may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city finance director when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city finance director may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-64. - Violations. 
    Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 46-56 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both fine and confinement. Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 46-59, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the governing authority shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $100.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00, nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Sec. 46-65. - Effective date. 
    This article and the tax levied hereby shall become effective upon its adoption. 
(Ord. No. O-12-03-06, § 2(exh. A), 3-22-2012) 
Secs. 46-66-46-88. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OCCUPATION AND PROFESSIONS TAX; REGULATORY FEES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Local occupation taxes on businesses and professions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 46-89. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Dominant line means the type of business, within a multiple-line business, that the greatest amount of income is derived from. 
    Gross receipts. 
(1)  The term "gross receipts" means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets, or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods, or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty, or dividend income. 
(2)  The term "gross receipts" shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use, or excise tax; 
b.  Sales returns, allowances, and discounts; 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 USC 1563(a)(2), or between or among a parent corporation, wholly owned subsidiaries of such parent corporation, and any corporation in which such parent corporation or one or more of its wholly owned subsidiaries owns stock possessing at least 30 percent of the total value of shares of all classes of stock of such partially owned corporation, or between or among wholly owned partnerships or other wholly owned entities; 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent that contributed to the gross receipts in issue; 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions, or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employs salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this chapter, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts; and 
f.  Proceeds from sales of goods or services that are delivered to or received by customers who are outside the state at the time of delivery or receipt. 
    Location of office shall include any structure or vehicle where business, profession, or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. The renters or lessees location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession, or business for revenue raising purposes. 
    Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit, or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 80 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
    Practitioner of profession or occupation is one who, by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. 
    Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
    Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees, or by another name, which are required by the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8), or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Code 1986, § 14-8; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-90. - Administration. 
    The finance director shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the levy, assessment and collection of license taxes, fees and penalties imposed herein. 
(Code 1962, § 13-29; Code 1986, § 14-1; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-91. - Rules and regulations. 
    The finance director shall have the power and authority to make and publish reasonable rules and regulations not inconsistent with this article or other laws of the city and the state or the constitution of this state or of the United States, for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article and the collection of the occupational license taxes, fees and penalties hereunder. 
(Code 1962, § 13-30; Code 1986, § 14-2; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-92. - Responsible person. 
    Whenever in this article the term "dealer" or "person" is used, the principal, but in such principal's absence, any agent, clerk, or employee, shall be subject to the penalties herein imposed should the business be carried on without registering and paying the required occupational license tax in the same manner as if such agents, clerks and employees were the proprietors of said business. 
(Code 1962, § 13-25; Code 1986, § 14-3) 
Sec. 46-93. - Registration. 
    Any person for such person's self or as an officer of a firm or corporation exercising or carrying on any business or operating any establishment for which a license or payment of occupational taxes is required by this article, without first having registered as provided herein, shall be liable to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1962, §§ 13-6, 13-16; Code 1986, § 14-4) 
Sec. 46-94. - Levy. 
    The specific and general occupational license taxes provided in this article are hereby levied and shall be collected in the amounts hereinafter specified upon each person engaged in the business, trade, profession or occupation or doing acts named or described herein within the city during each calendar year. All such activities may be hereinafter referred to as "business." 
(Code 1962, § 13-1; Code 1986, § 14-5) 
State Law reference- Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 46-95. - Payment of tax prerequisite to engaging in business. 
(a)  No person shall be engaged in, prosecute or carry on any business, trade or profession, either in whole or in part, within the city by maintaining an office within the city or by soliciting orders through said office or engage in any business in any manner without having paid a license tax as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  No business license shall be issued by the finance director to any person or entity which is delinquent as to any ad valorem taxes, fees, assessments, charges, including charges for utilities provided by the city, and other indebtedness or fees owed to the city. 
(Code 1962, § 13-2; Code 1986, § 14-6; Ord. No. O-97-07-25, 7-24-1997) 
State Law reference- Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 46-96. - Occupation tax required. 
    Each person upon whom an occupational license tax is levied shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession, or occupation; which tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the finance director or designees, or to any police officer of said city, upon request. 
(Code 1986, § 14-7; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
State Law reference- Levy of occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 46-97. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; occupation tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee in the amount fixed by ordinance shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for initial start-up, renewal, or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee in the amount fixed by ordinance is hereby imposed as authorized under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9. Such regulatory fee shall not include an administrative fee. Such regulatory fee applies to each business more particularly set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(b), such section being incorporated into and being made a part of this section by specific reference thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 14-9; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-98. - Occupation tax-Levied; restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the corporate limits of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the following criteria: 
(1)  Gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession, or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications, or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service, or successor agencies of the United States. 
(2)  The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession, or occupation shall be as established by ordinance. 
(b)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business' gross receipts. 
(c)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(d)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the taxing jurisdiction and who sell property inside the taxing jurisdiction. 
(e)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(f)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the taxing jurisdiction or in the state. 
(g)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in the state shall be assessed occupation taxes pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 14-13-7, which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. 
(h)  The occupation tax payable pursuant to this section shall be as established by ordinance per business, trade, profession, or occupation required to pay the occupation tax. 
(i)  An alphabetical business classification (SIC) index is added to Ordinance No. O-95-12-41 as appendix A thereof, and the same is incorporated into this section by specific reference thereto. 
(j)  A tax class designation by SIC code and business description for tax classes 1 through 6 is added to Ordinance No. O-95-12-41 as appendix B, and the same is incorporated herein by specific reference thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 14-10; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-99. - Same-Paid by business with no location in the state. 
    Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business' largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 14-11; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-100. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
    The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Code 1986, § 14-12; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-101. - Professionals. 
    Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1)-(c)(18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as referenced in section 46-98(a)(2). 
(2)  A fee as established by ordinance per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location; provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this section shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(3)  Such election shall be made on or before February 1, 1995. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by written request filed by the professional on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(4)  Examples of businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations, which are subject to this section include, but are expressly not limited to, the following: 
a.  Lawyers; 
b.  Physicians licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.); 
c.  Osteopaths licensed under O.C.G.A. title 43, ch. 34 (O.C.G.A. § 43-34-1 et seq.); 
d.  Chiropractors; 
e.  Podiatrists; 
f.  Dentists; 
g.  Optometrists; 
h.  Psychologists; 
i.  Veterinarians; 
j.  Landscape architects; 
k.  Land surveyors; 
l.  Practitioners of physiotherapy; 
m.  Public accountants; 
n.  Embalmers; 
o.  Funeral directors; 
p.  Civil, mechanical, hydraulic or electrical engineers; 
q.  Architects; 
r.  Marriage and family therapists; 
s.  Social workers and professional counselors; 
t.  Dealers of motor vehicles, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 10-1-622(1); 
u.  Owners or operators of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1, and owners or operators of businesses where bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are available for commercial use and play by the public, provided that such amusement machines have affixed current stickers showing payment of annual permit fees, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9; 
v.  Merchants or dealers as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-354, as to their deliveries to businesses, and practitioners of professions and occupations in areas zoned for commercial use; and 
w.  Any other business, profession or occupation for which state licensure or registration is required by state law, unless the state law regulating such business, profession or occupation specifically allows for regulation by local governments. 
(Code 1986, § 14-13; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
State Law reference- Taxation of professionals, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(c), 48-13-10(g). 
Sec. 46-102. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
    Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax. 
(Code 1986, § 14-14; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
State Law reference- Exemptions generally, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-13. 
Sec. 46-103. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade, or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5-48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 14-15; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-104. - Tax due, payable; transacting business when tax delinquent; penalty. 
(a)  Each administrative fee, regulatory fee, and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be for the calendar year. Any administrative fee, regulatory fee, or occupation tax shall be payable March 15 of each year. For any new profession, occupation, or business begun in the city after March 15 of any year, the administrative fee, regulatory fee, and occupation tax, as applicable, shall be obtained immediately upon beginning business, and if not so obtained, shall be considered delinquent. Any amounts owed which remain due and unpaid for a period of 90 days shall be subject to penalties for delinquency as provided in this article. A regulatory fee certificate and an occupation tax certificate indicating that the profession, occupation, or business has paid the fees and taxes owed shall be issued by the finance director. Any person practicing a profession, occupation, or business without having a valid certificate issued to him or her shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. Each day that such fees and taxes remain unpaid shall be deemed to be a separate offense. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies specified in subsection (a) of this section, the finance director may proceed to collect the delinquencies in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Code 1986, § 14-16; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-105. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
(a)  For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
(b)  Where the business has locations outside the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Code 1986, § 14-17; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-106. - Exemption for businesses operated for charitable purposes. 
    No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 80 percent or more of the entire proceeds from said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Code 1986, § 14-18; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-107. - Evidence of state registration; conspicuously displayed; evidence of state sales tax registration. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. title 48 (O.C.G.A. § 48-1-1 et seq.) shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(c)  Each person who is required by the state to have a state sales tax registration number assigned by the state department of revenue shall provide evidence of proper state registration before the city registration is issued. 
(Code 1986, § 14-19; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-99-10-41, 10-21-1999) 
Sec. 46-108. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
    Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency, or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Code 1986, § 14-20; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-109. - Subpoena powers. 
    The city clerk shall have full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation pertaining to this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-21; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-110. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
(a)  The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electric service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. title 46, ch. 3 (O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.). 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Any state or local authority or nonprofit organization. 
(b)  The city shall not be authorized to require the payment of a fee in any amount by a business or practitioner for the cost of ascertaining whether such a business or practitioner has paid occupation tax to another local government. 
(Code 1986, § 14-22; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-111. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
    An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by the laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Code 1986, § 14-23; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-112. - Profitability class based upon dominant line of business. 
    A business shall be placed in the profitability class based upon the dominant line of business or service of the business. 
(Code 1986, § 14-24; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-113. - Occupation tax limitations. 
(a)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a person if: 
(1)  A person with no location or office in the city provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state, which purports to tax the person's gross receipts in this state, then the person shall be exempt from the occupation tax levied by this article. 
(2)  A person who has locations or offices elsewhere in the state who is subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall be subject to occupation tax by the city, unless the person provides documentation to the city of current payment of an occupation tax, measured by the gross receipts of the person, to other state and local governments. 
(b)  If a person commences business in the city on or after July 1 of any year, the city shall be authorized to levy the customary rate on the gross receipts of the business or practitioner from the date of commencement of the business. The administrative fee authorized by this article shall not be reduced for any such business commencing on or after July 1 of any year. 
(Code 1986, § 14-25; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-114. - Businesses at more than one location. 
    Wherever a business or occupation is conducted at more than one location or place within the city, each such location shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of the occupation tax imposed by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-26; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-115. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
    All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and, in default thereof, the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same. 
(Code 1986, § 14-27; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-116. - Registration, tax due and payable; transaction of business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all taxes and fees as provided herein within 90 days of the due date thereof. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession, or occupation without first having obtained said registration, shall be subject to the penalties provided in sections 46-104 and 46-117. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the finance director, and if any person, firm, or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of business, trade, profession, or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 14-28; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-117. - Due date; late fee penalty. 
    A late fee penalty is imposed on each business and practitioner of an occupation or profession which fails to apply for and obtain appropriate registration and to pay any and all regulatory and administrative fees and occupation taxes required by this article in a timely manner. Such late fee penalties shall be as established in section 46-401 of the City Code. Such late fee penalties shall be in addition to any other penalties, civil or criminal, which may be applicable. Such late fee penalties shall become due and payable when such regulatory and administrative fees and occupation taxes remain due and unpaid for 90 calendar days from the due date of the tax or fee. 
(Code 1986, § 14-29; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-2012-26, 10-18-2012) 
Sec. 46-118. - Penalty for violation of this article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of an offense; provided, however, practitioners of professions and any other persons whose qualification to practice their profession is determined by the general laws of the state and who fail to pay an occupation tax as provided in this article shall be subject only to the civil penalty and interest provisions as provided in section 46-117. 
(Code 1986, § 14-30; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-119. - Inspection of records. 
    The city, through its employees, officers, or agents, may inspect the books of any person subject to an occupation tax to determine the accuracy of the documents and information submitted by a business or practitioner to the city. Failure to submit such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the regulatory fee certificate and right to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city or made available in the city for examination by the designated city agents. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency exists as a result of improper designation of a dominant line of business, profession, or occupation, a penalty of ten percent of the deficiency and additional interest of 1.5 percent per month of the amount of the deficiency shall be assessed. 
(Code 1986, § 14-31; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-120. - Confidentiality. 
    Information provided by a person to the city for the purpose of determining the applicability and the amount of the occupation tax or the levy or collection of occupational tax levied pursuant to this article is confidential and exempt from disclosure. Such information may be provided by the governing authority of another local government for occupation tax purposes or pursuant to court order or for the purpose of collecting occupation tax or prosecution for failure or refusal to pay an occupation tax. 
(Code 1986, § 14-32; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-121. - Revocation. 
    Failure of any person to pay an applicable administrative fee, regulatory fee, or occupation tax, or any part thereof, before it becomes delinquent, or upon the failure to permit inspection of books as required, shall result in any business tax certificates or regulatory fee certificates granted by the city under this article permitting such person to do business in the city for the current year being automatically revoked without any further action required of the city. No new occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax or fees herein required are unpaid, nor shall such certificates be issued to a person who has failed to submit adequate records for inspection as required by section 46-119. 
(Code 1986, § 14-33; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-122. - Execution; liens. 
(a)  The finance director or designee, upon any tax or installment of any tax that becomes delinquent and remains unpaid, shall issue an execution for the amount of said tax against the person liable for said tax, including interest at the rate of one percent per month accruing thereon. The lien shall cover the property of the person liable for said tax as provided by this Code, the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien for said occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time that such tax or installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the appropriate city agent upon the person liable for said tax and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of said execution, with interest and cost allowed by law. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code, the Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter of the city and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(b)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered by the proper authority upon execution issued by the city against any person defaulting on an occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If at any time after the entry of the nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution pays the tax in full, together with all interest penalties and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges for services and goods due the person as though the person had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Code 1986, § 14-34; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-123. - Application to prior delinquencies. 
    This article does not repeal or affect the enforcement of any ordinance or part of any ordinance heretofore passed for fees and taxes levied when such fees and taxes have not been paid in full. Such ordinances and parts of ordinances heretofore passed providing for the issuing and enforcing execution for taxes or assessments required by such ordinances or that imposed fines or penalties for nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees pursuant to such ordinances, or failure to comply with the other provisions thereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1986, § 14-35; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-124. - Public hearing before future tax increases. 
    In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year for the city, the city shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue derived from such occupation taxes. This hearing shall be held pursuant to the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-28. 
(Code 1986, § 14-36; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-125. - Applications of provisions to prior ordinance. 
    This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinances, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in said ordinance, or failure to comply with any other provisions hereof, shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee, or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Code 1986, § 14-37; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-126. - Provisions to remain in full force and effect until changed. 
    This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax herein levied shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Code 1986, § 14-38; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-127. - Exemption or reduction in occupation tax. 
    The city council, may by subsequent ordinance or resolution, provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation taxes to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting, encouraging, or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation taxes shall not be arbitrary or capricious, and the reasons shall be set forth in the minutes of the city council. Such exemptions, reductions, or credits may include, but shall not be limited to, those exemptions, reductions, or credits more particularly set out in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-10(f)(2). 
(Code 1986, § 14-39; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Sec. 46-128. - Conflicts between specific and general provisions. 
    Where there is an apparent conflict in this article between specific and general provisions, it is the intention hereof that the specific shall control. 
(Code 1986, § 14-39.1; Ord. No. O-95-12-41, 12-21-1995) 
Secs. 46-129-46-154. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS LICENSE TAX 

Sec. 46-155. - Business license tax levied. 
    In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon the depository financial institutions located within the city at a rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institution. The term "gross receipts" shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Depository financial institutions shall mean state and national banks, state building and loan associations and federal savings and loan associations. 
(Code 1986, § 14-91; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 1) 
Sec. 46-156. - Minimum due. 
    The minimum annual amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to section 46-155 shall be established by ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 14-92; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 2) 
Sec. 46-157. - Form for filing of return. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c), each depository financial institution subject to this tax shall file a return of its gross receipts with the finance director of the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts are measured. Such return shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of revenue based on the allocation method set forth in of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The city council shall assess and collect the tax levy pursuant to this article based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Code 1986, § 14-93; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 3; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-158. - Due date. 
    Taxes levied pursuant to this article shall be due no later than 30 days after filing of the return prescribed by section 46-157 unless extended by the city council. 
(Code 1986, § 14-94; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 4; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-159. - Administrative provisions. 
    The finance director of the city is hereby directed to forward a copy of this article to each depository financial institution in the city and to the home office of each such depository financial institution if located outside the city. 
(Code 1986, § 14-95; Ord. of 12-28-1983, § 5; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 46-160-46-186. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT 

Sec. 46-187. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses, including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot be a de facto approach to prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests; reduced criminal activity and protection of the city's neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-1; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-188. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult business means any business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult dancing establishment means any restaurant, lounge, private club, nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, exotic dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult entertainment establishment means a business which consists of one or more of the following: an adult bookstore, an adult business, an adult dancing establishment, an adult motion picture theater, an adult minimotion picture theater, an adult hotel or motel, an adult motion picture arcade, an adult video store, or an escort bureau. 
    Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities of specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used primarily for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projections or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used primarily for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock and trade in videotapes, movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing, or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section thereof, comprising 20 percent of its total floorspace, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than 20 percent of its net sales from videotapes, movies or other reproductions which are characterized or distinguished by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Church means a body of communicants gathered into church order, united under one form of government by the profession of the same faith and the observance of the same ritual and ceremonies. 
    Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
    Escort bureau or introduction services means any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward, or profit furnishes or offers to furnish names or persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
    Good moral character means a person, according to this article, that has not been convicted of a drug-related crime, an alcohol-related felony, a sex-related crime, or a crime of moral turpitude in the past five years. 
    Minor means, for the purpose of this article, any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
    Partial nude dancing means appearing or dancing at an adult entertainment establishment, as defined herein, partially nude, but at a minimum with the human male or female genitals, pubic area and buttocks and all of the nipples of the breasts of a female being at least shielded and covered by a fully opaque covering. 
    Public indecency means as it relates to adult dancing establishment: 
(1)  Engaging in sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Engaging in deviate sexual conduct; 
(3)  Engaging in a state of total nudity as opposed to partial nudity; 
(4)  Fondling the genitals of oneself or another person; or 
(5)  Dancing with the male genitals covered, but in a discernible turgid state. 
Such activities shall be deemed to be acts of public indecency under the terms of this article. 
    Specified anatomical areas means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernable turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
Such activities shall be deemed to be acts of public indecency under the terms of this article. 
    Total nude dancing means appearing or dancing at an adult dancing establishment, as herein defined, without the protection or benefit of the minimal coverings required for partial nude dancing. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-2; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-189. - General regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation, or other entity shall operate, attempt to operate, advertise, or cause to be advertised, an adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this chapter, without a valid adult entertainment permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year an adult entertainment establishment permittee shall file a verified report with the finance director showing the permittee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An adult entertainment establishment permittee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed therein. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment permittee shall employ or contract with a person under the age of 21 years or a person not permitted pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An adult entertainment establishment, as defined in this article, shall be closed between 12:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. each day, every Sunday, and on Christmas Day. 
(g)  No adult entertainment establishment permitted employee shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any adult entertainment establishment employee on the licensed premises. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment permittee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing by an employee at an adult dancing establishment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(k)  No adult entertainment establishment permittee shall allow or permit an employee or any other person on the premises to engage in any of the following sexual activities: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral-anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellation, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; 
(2)  Clearly depicting human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment permitted hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(o)  No adult entertainment establishment shall serve, sell, distribute or allow the consumption or possession or any intoxicating liquor or controlled substances upon the premises of the permittee. 
(p)  Total nude dancing, appearing nude or dancing involving acts of public indecency as defined by this article are hereby prohibited in any adult dancing establishment. Any other dancing or acts of public indecency prohibited by other applicable laws of the state or ordinances of the city as now or hereinafter enacted, or the violation of any of the other criminal laws of the state or of the city, are likewise prohibited. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-3; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-190. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on, or operate in or upon any premises within the city, an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article, without a permit to do so. No permit so issued shall condone or authorize, or be deemed to condone or authorize, any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the statutes or ordinances of the United States, the state, or the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-4; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-191. - Operation of unpermitted premises unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau, adult business, or adult dancing establishment unless such business shall have a currently valid permit or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required therefor under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-5; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-192. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for a permittee to admit or permit the admission of minors into a permitted premises. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-6; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-193. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale from an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult massage parlor or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment enterprise. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-7; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-194. - Location. 
    No adult entertainment establishment business shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is zoned for multifamily or single-family uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building owned or occupied by such government, library, civic center, public park or neighborhood playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located; 
(4)  Within any zoning category other than the following three categories: 
a.  Roadside business (C-1) as defined in section 94-155; 
b.  General business (C-2) as defined in section 94-156; 
c.  Industrial (I) as defined in section 94-159; or 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
For the purpose of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from property line to property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-8; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-195. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the finance director to enforce the permit provisions of this article. It shall be the chief of police or the chief's designee's responsibility to enforce the operating regulations of this article. 
(1)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be at least 21 years of age. Any applicant for employment who has been previously convicted within the preceding five years of a sex-related crime, a drug-related crime, or an alcohol-related felony, or a crime involving moral turpitude shall not be eligible for employment as an adult entertainment establishment employee, and any employee who is convicted of a sex-related crime, drug-related crime, or alcohol-related felony while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work at any premises requiring permits under this article for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered as part of a court-ordered sentence. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty, or a plea of nolo contendere. The terms "employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee" and "work at any permitted premises" shall include all work done or services performed while in the scope of employment on the permitted premises or elsewhere. 
(2)  Approval for employment. Before any person may be employed at a permitted premises by a permittee hereunder, he shall file a notice with the police chief of the city of his intended employment on forms that require the information set forth in subsection (1) of this section. The city shall have 45 days to review and investigate the application submitted by the employee. If the employee is found to be qualified for such employment by the terms of this article, the police chief shall grant approval of the employment. Upon approval, the employee may be employed by the permittee. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply to the city manager of the city for a hearing. The decision of the city manager after hearing the appeal shall be final. 
(3)  Investigation fee . An investigation fee in the amount established by ordinance, or a receipt from the finance director evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed, shall accompany the notice of intended employment submitted to the police chief. 
(4)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be permitted as employees regardless of the type of business relationship with the owner or permittee of the adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-9; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 46-196. - Permit application. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment business shall make application to the finance director. Prior to submitting such application, the nonrefundable fee established by ordinance, shall be paid to the finance director to defray, in part, the cost of the investigations and reports required by this article. Upon payment thereof, the finance director shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. 
(b)  The application for such a permit shall not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-10; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-197. - Application information. 
(a)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain, at a minimum, the following information: 
(1)  The applicant's full name, social security number, and date of birth. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(4)  The business, occupation and employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. 
(5)  The business permit history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous businesses in this or any other city, state or territory, has had any license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation of the applicant subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation and charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, all states or other jurisdictions in which the applicant is authorized to do business (including written evidence of such authorizations), and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors. 
(7)  If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners. 
(8)  If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership. 
(9)  If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply to the corporate partner. 
(10)  The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one or more of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated person or persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  Whether or not the applicant, any partners or any corporate officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, have been convicted of any crime evidencing a lack of good moral character, as defined in this article, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction where the crime or act occurred, and any disposition thereof, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of any court-imposed sentence have been fully completed. 
(12)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of all trade name documents properly recorded as required by law. 
(13)  If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report to the Georgia Secretary of State. 
(14)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not and will not benefit financially in any way from the operation of the business if the permit is granted and who have not been convicted of any crime involving moral turpitude. The police chief shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this section for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(15)  The address of the premises to be permitted. 
(16)  Whether the premises are owned or rented by the applicant. 
(17)  A plat by a registered surveyor, licensed by the state, showing that the location of the proposed premises is in accord with the provisions contained in section 46-194 and the zoning chapter. 
In addition to the information required herein, the application shall disclose the name, address, social security number and date of birth of all persons who have a financial interest of any type in the business that is applying for the permit, and any other matter reasonably required by the chief of police. 
(b)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
(1)  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
(2)  If a partnership, the manager or general partner; 
(3)  If a corporation, the president of the corporation; 
(4)  If any other organization or association, the chief administrative official of such organization or association. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-11; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-198. - Applicant to appear. 
    The applicant, if an individual, or the designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership, corporation, or other entity, shall personally appear at the finance department before the finance director, or his designee, and produce proof that the nonrefundable application fee, established by ordinance, has been paid, and shall also present the completed permit application containing the required information to the police chief or his designee. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-12; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-199. - Application investigation and recommendations. 
(a)  The city shall have 45 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the police chief shall report his findings and recommendations to the planning commission, which shall consider the application within 30 days of receipt of the report from the police chief. After a hearing on the application, at which any interested persons present may be heard, the planning commission shall recommend to the city council the grant or denial of the permit at its next regular meeting; but the commission may only recommend the granting of such permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required application fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in connection with the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any officers or directors of the applicant, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, in a court of competent jurisdiction to an offense involving a sex-related crime or drug-related or alcohol-related felony or have been convicted, enter a plea of guilty or nolo contendere, of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted, entered a plea of guilty or nolo contendere in any other state as to an offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been the same or substantially the same offense as one or more of the above-stated offenses. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause in this city or in any other local government jurisdiction located in or out of this state prior to either the date of the application or the date of the granting of the application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment, and location of such business, as proposed by applicant, would comply with all applicable zoning and distance laws and would qualify to receive a certificate of occupancy under the law of this state and the ordinances of this city. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  That neither the applicant, nor any of the applicant's employees, agents, partners, directors, officers, or managers, has within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities defined herein to occur in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, nor has such applicant or other persons knowingly allowed or permitted the proposed permitted premises to be used as a place in which solicitations for any of the specified sexual activities occurred within said time period. 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person actually on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises shall not be located at any location not authorized by this article or by the zoning chapter. 
(12)  That the grant of such permit will not result in a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, or of any laws, rules or regulations of the state, or the United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(b)  The planning commission shall forward its recommendation to the city council which shall have the final authority to grant or deny the permit, but such permit shall not be granted unless the city council finds that all of the requirements of this chapter, including, but not limited to, this section and section 46-200, have been met by the applicant. 
(c)  All hearings regarding such application shall be open to the public and advertised in the legal organ of the city as required by state law and this section. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-13; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-200. - Additional permit requirements. 
(a)  The permittee shall maintain with the finance director and the police department, at all times, a written statement of the name, address, and phone number of the manager or assistant manager in charge of the permitted premises, and there shall, at all times, be a manager in charge and on the premises during operating hours. 
(b)  Each permittee shall have a continuing obligation to comply with all provisions of this Code relating to the operation of the permittee's business. 
(c)  The applicant may be required to appear at any hearing on the issue of the grant, denial, suspension, or revocation of the required permit governed by this article. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-14; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-201. - Persons prohibited as permittees. 
(a)  Subject to the other requirements of this article, no permit authorized by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes, including ad valorem taxes, for a business at that location; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character as defined in this article; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors, or shareholders is not of good moral character as defined in this article; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose partners or members is not of good moral character as defined in this article; 
(5)  Any person employing or assisted financially, in whole or in part, by any person who is not of good moral character as defined in this article; or 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current permits to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new permits shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. (427 US 50, 81). 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-15; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-202. - Permit-Renewal. 
    Permits for adult entertainment establishments shall be renewed on a calendar-year basis provided that the permittee continues to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments permits shall be as established by this article. Renewal applications shall be submitted by November 1 of each year prior to the year for which such permit is requested. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-16; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-203. - Same-Nontransferable. 
    No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permittee and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided, however, that if the permit is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case, the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner, subject to compliance with all other requirements of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-17; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-204. - Change of name. 
(a)  No permittee shall advertise, operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an adult entertainment establishment business under any name other than the name of the business as specified on the permit. 
(b)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article, and all other ordinances, rules and regulations of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-18; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-205. - Penalty for violation. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any permit granted hereunder. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-19; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-206. - Unlawful operation declared a nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to, or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for abatement, removal or enjoining thereof, in the manner provided by law. The city shall further be authorized to take such other steps and apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate such nuisance and retrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of any permit granted hereunder. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-20; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-207. - Revocation and appeal. 
(a)  After notice and hearing, the police chief shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a permit previously granted hereunder. In the event the police chief seeks to suspend or to revoke a permit the police chief shall give written notification to the permittee of such action and such notice shall contain a specification of the violation or violations upon which such suspension or revocation is based and shall be served upon the permittee, by registered mail, return receipt requested, at least five days prior to the date of the hearing. The permittee shall be given written notice of the time and place of the hearing. 
(b)  The police chief shall be authorized to suspend or revoke a permit in the event of the occurrence of any one or more of the following: 
(1)  A permittee provided false or misleading information in the original or subsequent application process; 
(2)  A permittee has knowingly allowed possession, use, or sale of controlled substances on the premises; 
(3)  A permittee has knowingly allowed the violation of an ordinance of the city or a violation of any criminal law of the state or of the United States to occur on the premises; 
(4)  A permittee has violated any provision of this article; 
(5)  A permittee has been convicted, during the license period, of any drug-related, alcohol-related or sex-related crime by the state, the city, or the United States regarding an offense which was committed on the premises, or which would otherwise violate the provisions of this article when such offense would serve to prohibit the permittee from obtaining a permit under this article; or 
(6)  A permittee fails to pay any fee, fine or other amount of money due the city under this article or any other license or occupational taxation ordinance of the city. 
(c)  In the event the police chief shall suspend or revoke any permit hereunder, the suspension or revocation shall be for a period of not less than one day nor more than 365 days, within the sound discretion of the police chief; provided, however, that the permittee shall be authorized to continue its business operations until the date of any hearing scheduled in accordance with subsections (a) or (d) of this section. No permittee or other applicant may apply for a permit during any period of suspension or revocation. In any hearing or investigation conducted by the police chief in connection with a possible suspension or revocation of a permit issued hereunder, the police chief shall consider, among other things, the severity of the allegations, the evidence submitted and the testimony presented, in making any decision on suspension, revocation and the duration of any suspension or revocation. 
(d)  In the event of a suspension or revocation by the police chief, the permittee may appeal the decision of the police chief to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal within ten days from the date that the permittee receives written notification of the decision of the police chief. Such written notification shall be mailed to the permittee by certified mail, return receipt requested. Thereafter, a hearing shall be scheduled before the city council within 45 days after the filing of the notice of appeal by the applicant. After hearing by the city council, the city council may take such action as it finds warranted from the evidence submitted to it, including, but not limited to, the affirming of the action of the police chief, the reversal of such action, or the imposition of modified sanctions upon the permittee. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-21; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 46-208. - Permit and annual renewal fees. 
(a)  There is hereby established a nonrefundable fee in the amount established by ordinance to be paid to the finance director with each application to operate an adult entertainment establishment pursuant to this article. The annual renewal fee for any such permit shall be as established by ordinance. 
(b)  Any permittee shall also be subject to all business license fees and occupational taxes imposed by the city pursuant to this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-22; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-209. - Advertising and posting. 
    The premises for which the permit herein is sought either as an initial permit or a renewal thereof, shall be posted with a notice in a form prescribed by the city manager for at least 21 days prior to any hearing on such application. In addition, a newspaper advertisement shall be published in the city's legal organ in a form prescribed by the city manager at least two times during the ten days prior to any hearing on such permit application or renewal. Such posted notice and newspaper advertisements shall notify all interested persons of the date, time, location and purpose of the hearing on such application. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-23; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 46-2010. - Premises open for inspection. 
    The permitted premises shall be open at any and all reasonable times for inspection by the city to establish and ensure compliance with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-24; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Sec. 46-211. - Compliance in newly annexed areas. 
    Notwithstanding any other provisions of this chapter to the contrary, any adult entertainment establishments are not permitted pursuant to this article that are located in newly annexed areas shall have 90 days from the effective date of the annexation to obtain a license hereunder and otherwise comply with all the terms, requirements and standards hereof. Any such adult entertainment establishments that is not in full compliance with said terms, requirements and standards at the end of said 90-day period shall cease operation no later than six calendar months following the end of said 90-day period. 
(Code 1986, § 2.5-25; Ord. No. O-93-06-25, 6-24-1993) 
Secs. 46-212-46-228. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - PAWNSHOPS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq. 

Sec. 46-229. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Month means that period of time from one date in a calendar month to the corresponding date in the following calendar month, but if there is no such corresponding date, then the last day of such following month. 
    Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledger or seller for a fixed price during a fixed period of time. 
    Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller during a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this definition. 
    Pawnshop means any business, a substantial portion of which is to take or receive, by way of pledge, pawn, or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise, or any kind of personal property whatsoever, as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
(Code 1986, § 14-202; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-230. - Purpose. 
    This article is enacted in accordance with a plan designed for the purpose of promoting the health and general welfare of the community, to provide, establish, and ascertain standards for the regulation and control of pawnshops or similar places where money is advanced on goods and other effects, merchandise, or personal property. 
(Code 1986, § 14-200; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-231. - Compliance required. 
    All persons, before beginning the business of operating a pawnshop, shall first file an application with the city and receive a business license for the operation of a pawnshop in order to conduct such business from the finance director. The application for such business license shall be made upon such forms and in such manner as the finance director may establish from time to time. Such business license shall be obtained in accordance with regular business license application procedure, which is required under article IV of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 14-201; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-232. - General qualifications for business license. 
(a)  No license shall be issued if the application or other evidence available to the city reveals that any one or more of the following conditions to exist: 
(1)  The applicant is of bad moral character or does not have the mental capacity to conduct the business for which the application is made. 
(2)  The applicant has had any business license or permit issued under the police powers of this or any other city or other governmental subdivision previously suspended or revoked. 
(3)  The applicant, while a holder of a license to operate a pawnshop has been convicted of, or pled guilty or nolo contendere to, a violation of any law, regulation, or ordinance relating to the pawnshop business within a ten-year period immediately preceding the date of application. 
(4)  The applicant has failed to produce any paper or document necessary in the operation of its business as may be required by any officer, agency, or department of a municipality, county, state, or the United States under authority of any law, ordinance, or resolution of such municipality, county, state, or the United States. 
(5)  The applicant has provided false information either upon his application or in any communication with any official of the city relative to his application. 
(6)  The applicant has failed to pay any fee required under this article or has otherwise failed to comply with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  In addition to the criteria in subsection (a) of this section, in determining whether or not any license applied for shall be issued, the following criteria shall be considered as being relevant to the city's obligation to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public, and in such connection, a negative finding by the city as to one or more of the following criteria shall authorize the denial of a licensure application: 
(1)  Whether the applicant is a previous holder of a pawnshop business license, the manner in which he conducted the business thereunder as to the necessity for unusual or enhanced police effort, observation and inspection in order to prevent the violation of any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business; 
(2)  The number of licenses already granted for similar businesses operating in the same general vicinity or neighborhood. 
(Code 1986, § 14-203; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-233. - Nontransferable. 
    No business license granted under this article shall be transferable. 
(Code 1986, § 14-204; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-234. - Revocations and suspensions of licenses. 
(a)  In the event that the owner of the pawnshop business or any employee of such owner fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, the finance director shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the pawnshop business license previously issued to such owner. In the event of such a suspension or revocation, notice of such decision shall be communicated to the owner in writing by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice is deemed to be effective upon personal service or upon mailing; provided, however, that such suspension or revocation shall be effective no sooner than ten calendar days from the effective date of such service or mailing. Any suspension hereunder shall be for such duration as the finance director deems appropriate, but any such suspension shall not exceed 30 calendar days. Violation of a written notice of suspension by the owner or any employee of the owner shall be grounds for revocation of the owner's pawnshop business license. 
(b)  Any person whose pawnshop business license is suspended or revoked has the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the city council within ten calendar days of the effective date of such suspension or revocation. Such appeal must be in writing, must be filed with the finance director, and must set out the grounds upon which the appellant contends that the suspension or revocation was erroneously issued. The filing of such an appeal shall constitute an automatic stay of the suspension or revocation, and such automatic stay shall continue in effect until such time as the appeal is finally adjudicated by the city council. The city manager of the city shall be notified of the filing of such an appeal and shall schedule a hearing thereon by the city council within 30 calendar days from the date of filing such appeal. In considering such appeal, the city council shall affirm the action or decision of the finance director if the city council finds that such decision was supported by any evidence. 
(Code 1986, § 14-205; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 46-235. - Daily report to police required. 
(a)  Every licensee shall prepare a daily report for the city police department, in such form as may be prescribed by the police department, of all property pledged to or bought by the licensee during the preceding 24 hours ending at 8:00 p.m. on the effective date of the report. In addition to any other information required by the police department, the report shall disclose: 
(1)  The name and address of the licensee; 
(2)  Time of transaction; 
(3)  Serial numbers of pawn tickets; 
(4)  Full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry, and all identifying names, marks, and numbers; 
(5)  A description of persons pledging, selling, or pawning; including name, address, information from such person's driver's license or government-issued identification, including weight, height, and eye color; and 
(6)  Serial numbers on items must be included in the report. 
Insufficient or incomplete reports shall be rejected. 
(b)  Any licensee or employee who fails or refuses to prepare and keep reports as provided in this section or makes false entries concerning a transaction or who fails or refuses to permit an inspection or examination of the report by any police officer, designated by the chief of police to conduct such inspections, shall constitute a violation of this Code, which shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(c)  Each licensee shall require any person pawning, pledging, or selling an article or articles to display government-issued identification which at a minimum contains a photograph of the person, the person's date of birth, race, and sex as well as the identification number, drivers license number and/or social security number of the person, the type of identification and the name of the city council issuing such identification. The licensee shall record all of the above information from such identification. 
(d)  The failure of any licensee or employee to comply with the provisions of this section shall constitute a violation of this Code, which shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-206; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-236. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction or entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendere in the city municipal court, be subject to: 
(1)  First offense: by a fine of not more than $600.00 or by confinement in the common jail of the county for a period of not more than 60 days or by both fine and confinement. 
(2)  Second offense: by a fine of not more than $900.00 or by confinement in the common jail of the county for a period of not more than 90 days or by both fine and confinement. 
(b)  Each violation of this article shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(c)  Any violation of the provisions of this article may also be enjoined by the Superior Court of Sumter County in an action filed for such purpose by the city. Such injunction may be granted by said court notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law may exist. Remedies contained in this article shall be cumulative in nature. 
(d)  Any violation of the provisions of this article by a licensee hereunder, and any failure to pay any taxes or fees owed to the city by a licensee hereunder, shall also subject the business owner of the pawnshop to suspension or revocation of such owner's business license under section 46-234. 
(Code 1986, § 14-207; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-237. - Disposal period for pawned, purchased articles. 
    Any licensee who takes goods on pawn or buys goods in its capacity as a pawnshop, taking full title thereto, shall hold such goods for at least 40 calendar days in the case of pawned goods and 15 calendar days in the case of purchased goods before disposing of same by sale, transfer, shipment, or otherwise unless such goods are redeemed by the owner thereof. Failure to comply with this section shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-208; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-238. - Dealing with minors prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee, his agents or employees, to receive in pawn, pledge, or sale goods of any character or description from a minor. For the purpose of this article, a minor is any person who is 17 years of age or younger. Any licensee or employee thereof violating this section shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-209; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-239. - Sale of prohibited weapons. 
    It shall be unlawful for any licensee to sell, offer for sale, or expose for sale any weapons, the sale of which are prohibited by city ordinance, state law, or federal law or regulation. Any licensee or employee thereof violating this section shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-210; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-240. - Security cameras required. 
(a)  Any establishment which is licensed by the city to engage in the business of operating as a pawnshop and which is open to the public for business any day of the week is required to install security cameras and recording mechanisms of a type and number capable of recording evidentiary quality images for the prosecution of criminal cases, or for such other uses as may be deemed authorized by law. 
(b)  Cameras and recording mechanisms meeting the requirements of this section must be capable of producing a retrievable image on video tape or other medium that can be made a permanent record and can be enlarged through projection or other means. Cameras and recording mechanisms meeting the requirements of this section shall be maintained in proper working order at all times and shall be subject to inspection by the city police department. 
(c)  Security videos must have a shelf life of 15 calendar days from time of daily taping. The security video must be maintained at the licensee's place of business in an unaltered state and be available for inspection by the city police department. 
(d)  In the event that the security cameras and recording mechanisms become inoperative, any licensee or employee thereof shall not be in violation of this section for conducting business if the licensee is diligently pursuing repairs of such system; provided that such repairs must be completed within ten days after such system becomes inoperative. 
(e)  Any licensee or employee thereof violating this section shall constitute a violation of this Code and shall be punishable as provided in this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-211; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-241. - Licenses constitute grant of privilege; fees; duration of licenses. 
(a)  All licenses issued hereunder shall be a mere grant of a privilege to carry on a pawnshop business during the term authorized in the license subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and by any other ordinance, resolution, or law of the county, state, or United States relating to such business. 
(b)  The cost of such pawnshop business license shall be as established from time to time by the city council and shall be paid as a regulatory fee under article IV of this chapter. 
(c)  Each pawnshop business license issued pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in which such pawnshop license was issued. Applications for renewal of such pawnshop business license shall be accepted by the finance director between January 1 and March 15 of each calendar year, but no person shall be authorized to engage in the pawnshop business beyond March 15 of any calendar year until such person's application for a new pawnshop business license and city business license is approved in accord with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 14-212; Ord. No. O-03-09-25, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 46-242-46-260. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - TRANSIENT SALES, TEMPORARY SALES, PEDDLING, CANVASSING, AND SOLICITING[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-2012-19, adopted July 19, 2012, amended art. VIII in its entirety, inasmuch adding div. 1 and div. 2, subdivs. I, II, to read as herein set out. Former art. VIII, §§ 46-261-46-269, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 14-50-14-59; Ord. No. O-03-11-37, adopted Nov. 20, 2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, adopted Dec. 16, 2004; and Ord. No. O-07-11-39, §§ 14-300-14-308, adopted Nov. 15, 2007. 

DIVISION 1. - SALES FROM PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY LOCATIONS 

Sec. 46-261. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City. The City of Americus, a Georgia municipal corporation. 
    Goods. For the purposes of this division, "goods" is defined as merchandise, wares, fabric, material, furniture, clothing, shoes, and other articles of commerce; provided, however, that "goods" shall not include the sale of motorized vehicles or boats. 
    Governing body. The mayor and city council of the City of Americus. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-262. - Enforcement and penalty for violation. 
(a)  The finance director shall be the enforcement officer and shall insure that the provisions are complied with prior to the issuing of any license. 
(b)  Any person, firm, partnership, or corporation that violates the terms of this division shall upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-263. - Location requirements. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code: 
(1)  No merchant, trader, manufacturer, dealer, salesperson, or other person, either in person or by or through agents, servants, or employees, shall offer for sale any kind or character of goods except from established places of business. 
(2)  No article of any kind or nature whatsoever shall be sold or offered for sale from vehicles, stands, or containers while standing or located in the streets, parks, or other property of the city. 
(3)  No display shall be erected or installed, nor shall any sales of goods or merchandise outside of a permanent place of business, take place within 50 feet of the curb or paved edge of a public street or roadway. 
(4)  Sales shall be permitted only on property where controlled vehicular ingress and egress or adequate off-street parking is provided. 
(5)  No portable structure shall be erected in connection with the sale of goods within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-264. - Sales from private property. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of this division to the contrary, goods may be sold from vehicles, stands, or containers, while located on private premises, but not until and unless the persons offering the same for sale have secured the written consent of the owner of such premises to sell the same thereon, and have paid for and obtained from the finance director a regular license to conduct such business within the city. 
(b)  In order to obtain such license, the seller shall have filed an application with the finance director for such license, which application shall contain, at a minimum the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  A copy of picture identification; 
(3)  Permanent address and telephone number of applicant; 
(4)  Local address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(5)  Applicant's date of birth and age, if an individual; 
(6)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal employer identification number; 
(7)  If applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name and home address of each partner, principal, or corporation officer; 
(8)  If applicant is a corporation, the day, date, and state of incorporation; 
(9)  If applicant is a partnership or corporation, the name, home address, date of birth, age, and Social Security number of the principal representative in the city; 
(10)  Name and home address of all employees to work in the city; 
(11)  Name of business represented by applicant, if different from applicant; 
(12)  Permanent address of the business represented by the applicant; 
(13)  Name of agent conducting the sale, if any; 
(14)  Local address and telephone number of sales agent, if any; 
(15)  Type of merchandise or service offered for sale; 
(16)  A brief statement of the nature and character of advertising done or proposed to be done in order to attract customers; 
(17)  Place where business is to be conducted and written approval from the property owner of such location; 
(18)  Fingerprints of the person or persons having the management of supervision of the applicant's business; 
(19)  Dates to be in business and total number of days to be in business; 
(20)  Hours in which the business will be conducted; 
(21)  Manner in which business is to be conducted; 
(22)  State sales tax number or authorization; 
(23)  State business license, if required; 
(24)  State license tag number of each vehicle to be used; and 
(25)  List of cities where business has been conducted by the applicant within the past 12 months. 
(c)  The license application shall be signed under oath by the applicant. 
(d)  In the event that the applicant provides all required information to the finance director and the applicant has not been previously convicted of a felony or a crime involving moral turpitude as evidenced by the fingerprint records submitted in accordance with section 46-69 hereof, and the applicant otherwise qualifies for the license, then such license shall be issued by the clerk upon payment of the appropriate fees therefor. 
(e)  A separate application, license, and fee shall be required for each separate location from which such applicant proposes to do business. 
(f)  In the event that a licensee violates any of the provisions of this division, then the license may be revoked by the finance director, and the justification of each revocation may be considered by the clerk in the event that such licensee applies for a license under this article at a future date. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-265. - Applicability to residents and nonresidents. 
    The prohibitions provided in this division shall apply to all persons, whether residents of the city, nonresidents of the city, residents of the state or nonresidents of the state. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-266. - Agricultural products exemption. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to the sale by the producers of agricultural products within the state; provided, however, such producers shall fully comply with all regulations heretofore and hereafter prescribed by the governing body and by any federal or state agency or department relative to the inspection and the sale of such products. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-267. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This division shall not apply to sales made to or by dealers, traders, manufacturers, merchants, or businesses at their established places of business within the incorporated limits of the city. 
(b)  This division shall not apply to any sidewalk sale, flea market, art show, or arts and crafts show or other merchandise on the public sidewalks, walkways, or other open areas at the invitation of or as a part of the downtown promotional activities of the downtown development authority or an organization licensed to do business as a charity under Georgia law. 
(c)  This division shall not apply to yard sales conducted in accord with the provisions of section 46-3 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-268. - Fees. 
    Licensees under this division shall pay a daily license fee of $100.00 per day for each day and for each location from which the licensee proposes to do business within the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-269. - Fingerprints to accompany application. 
    Any applicant for license to be issued pursuant to this division shall accompany the application with one complete set of fingerprints of the applicant and the applicant's manager or agent, if the operation of the business will be conducted by one other than the applicant; if the applicant is a partnership, of all partners of said partnership; if the applicant is a corporation, of all officers and directors of said corporation. The fingerprints shall be taken by the city's police department on forms to be provided by said department, and the applicant shall pay a fee of $15.00 for each individual fingerprinted. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
DIVISION 2. - SALES BY SOLICITORS 
Subdivision I. - Generally 

Sec. 46-270. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    City means the City of Americus. 
    Goods means, for the purposes of this division, merchandise, wares, fabric, material, furniture, clothing, shoes, and other articles of commerce. 
    Governing body means the Mayor and City Council of Americus. 
    Solicitor means any person who solicits orders for the sale of goods or services on behalf of a business, individual, vocation, or occupation by means of door-to-door or house-to-house solicitation. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-271. - Exemptions. 
    The following shall be exempt from compliance with the requirements of division 2 of this article: 
(1)  Representatives or agents of charitable or nonprofit organizations or corporations registered with the Georgia Secretary of State, or tax-exempt organizations which have been recognized as such by the Internal Revenue Service of the United States Treasury Department, shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this division. 
(2)  Any sales representative who calls upon prospective customers at their prior invitation shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this division of this article. 
(3)  Any sales representative who does not demand, accept, or receive payments in advance of final delivery and who has had, for the previous six months, a regularly established place of business or permanent residence in the city shall be treated as exempt from the provisions of this division. Any person who is exempt under this subsection must be soliciting orders only for goods capable of being delivered at one time and must have on such person proper identification which substantiates the claim to an exemption. 
    This division shall not apply to any individual or individuals engaged in door-to-door canvassing activities solely for the purpose of dispensing public information, engaging in religious activities, or engaging in political campaign activities. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-272. - Violation of other ordinances and laws. 
    It is unlawful for any person while engaging in any activity for which a permit is required by this division to violate any city ordinance, criminal law of this state, or any state or federal consumer protection law. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-273. - Hours of operation. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in any of the conduct for which a permit is required by this division between the hours of 7:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m., according to the standard time in effect. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-274. - Restriction on number of persons soliciting. 
    It is unlawful for more than two individuals to engage in solicitation upon any premises at the same time for the same goods or services. Each individual member of a group engaged in solicitation in violation of this provision shall be deemed to have violated this section. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-275. - Persons with criminal records. 
    It is unlawful for any person with a criminal record as described in section 46-525, whether or not otherwise eligible for an exemption under section 46-502, to engage in any of the activities for which a permit is required by this division. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-276. - Frequency of solicitation of same premises. 
    It is unlawful for any person to make more than one solicitation call at the same premises for identical goods or services within any consecutive two-week period, without receiving a prior invitation therefor from the occupant of any such premises. This section includes solicitation upon the same premises by employees, agents, or representatives of any person, organization, or corporation more than once during such period without a prior invitation. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-277. - Solicitation to be at main entrances. 
    It is unlawful for any person to solicit or attempt to solicit at a place of residence at any entrance or part of the building other than the main entrance to the residence. A solicitor shall honor any sign or notice located at the premises, or any verbal direction from the owner or occupant of the premises, that states or advises persons that no solicitation is authorized upon the premises. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-278. - Identification and announced purpose of call. 
    At each dwelling, whether it is an apartment unit or private residence, the solicitor shall, at the time of initial contact with a prospective customer, identify himself or herself, identify his or her organization or corporation, and inform the occupant in unambiguous terms of the purpose of the solicitation. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-279. - Fraud, etc. 
    It is unlawful for any person engaged in solicitation to misrepresent the purpose of the solicitation or use any false or deceptive statements or any misrepresentation to induce a sale or contribution, or use any plan, scheme, or ruse which misrepresents the status or purpose of the person making the call. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Subdivision II. - Permit 

Sec. 46-280. - Required. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this Code, any person engaged in or desiring to engage in any type of selling, soliciting, or any other business, occupation, or vocation, which by its nature requires going from door-to-door or house-to-house in the city, whether on a temporary or a permanent basis shall obtain a solicitor's permit from the city finance director. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-281. - Application. 
(a)  Questionnaire. The finance director shall prepare a questionnaire requiring pertinent information regarding the physical description, identity, and background of each applicant for a permit, to include the following: 
(1)  Name, local address, and telephone number. 
(2)  Date and place of birth. 
(3)  Driver's license number and issuing state. 
(4)  Social Security number. 
(5)  Race and sex. 
(6)  Height and weight. 
(7)  Eye color and hair color. 
(8)  Name, address and telephone number of the organization represented. 
(9)  Name and telephone number of immediate supervisor. 
(10)  Product or service. 
(11)  A list of all arrests, convictions, and the disposition of each charge, other than minor traffic violations. 
(b)  The questionnaire form shall also bear the following statement: 
"Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 16-10-71, provides that a person to whom a lawful oath or affirmation has been administered or who executes a document knowing that it purports to be an acknowledgment of a lawful oath or affirmation commits the offense of false swearing when, in any matter or thing other than a judicial proceeding, he knowingly and willfully makes a false statement." 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-282. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Upon filing of an application for a solicitor's permit, the police department shall review the application for the purpose of ascertaining whether the applicant has plead to, or has been convicted of, a felony, or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude. After ascertaining that the application has been properly completed, and that the applicant has not been disqualified by virtue of prior pleas or conviction, the finance director shall approve the application. 
(b)  The finance director shall charge a fee of $100.00 for each permit issued. 
(c)  In any case in which it appears to the finance director that a solicitor's permit should not be issued to an applicant, the finance director shall so inform the applicant of such decision in writing, and shall include in such writing a written statement of the reasons why the permit cannot be issued. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-283. - Expiration and renewal. 
    Each solicitor's permit shall indicate thereon an expiration date which is one year from the date of issue. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-284. - Denial; suspension or revocation. 
(a)  No solicitor's permit shall be issued to any person who has been found guilty of any misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude any time within five years prior to the date of application, nor shall a permit be issued to any person convicted of a felony. 
(b)  The permit of any solicitor charged with a felony or a misdemeanor involving violence or moral turpitude shall be deemed suspended from the time of lawful arrest, formal accusation, or indictment, whichever shall first occur. Such suspension shall remain in effect until the solicitor is convicted or acquitted. 
(c)  The permit of any solicitor who is convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or violence, shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. The permit of any solicitor convicted of having violated any provision of this article after issuance of the permit shall be deemed revoked from the time of such conviction. 
(d)  Any suspension or revocation occurring pursuant to the provisions of this division shall be effective by operation of law, whether or not any formal notification to the solicitor is given or received. 
(e)  It is unlawful for any person to act as a solicitor while such person's permit has been suspended or after it has been revoked. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 46-285. - Appeals. 
    A person to whom the finance director refuses to issue a solicitor's permit or whose solicitor's permit is suspended or revoked may appeal to the mayor and city council. Such appeal shall be submitted to the city clerk in writing within 15 calendar days of the date of the notice of denial, suspension, or revocation of a solicitor's permit. The legal and factual basis for such appeal shall be stated in the written notice of appeal. Such appeal shall be heard and determined by the city council within 45 days of the date of filing of the notice of appeal. 
(Ord. No. O-2012-19, 7-19-2012) 
Secs. 46-286-46-329. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - TRAVELING AND ITINERANT DEALERS OF GOLD AND SILVER[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Dealers in precious metals and gems, O.C.G.A. § 47-37-1 et seq. 

Sec. 46-330. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Itinerant or traveling dealer, salesperson or buyer means a person who does not have a business license in the city or shall enter the city for any period of time and advertise by any form of media communication to the public that such person will buy, sell, trade, or otherwise trade in and receive precious metals, gold, silver, coins and jewelry. 
(Code 1962, § 13-72; Code 1986, § 14-60) 
Sec. 46-331. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to all traveling and itinerant dealers, salespersons, and buyers of gold, silver, jewelry, coins and other precious metals, whether said sales, trades and purchases are retail, wholesale, or by any form of pawn. Specifically excluded are wholesalers; buyers and sellers, who sell, trade and deal only with mercantile establishments and buyers; and sellers who have permanent mercantile establishments. 
(Code 1962, § 13-71; Code 1986, § 14-61) 
Sec. 46-332. - Notice of intent; required information. 
(a)  Prior to advertising any buying, selling, trading, or otherwise dealing in precious metals, gold, silver, coins, or jewelry, the person shall, at least 72 hours prior to the initial advertising, file with the chief of police a written notice of intent to conduct business in the city. 
(b)  Such notice shall include the following: 
(1)  Full name of the person and such person's address. 
(2)  The name of the person who will be in the city and such person's address. 
(3)  The length of the stay in the city, including the dates of opening and closing. 
(4)  Where business will be conducted and during what hours. 
(Code 1962, § 13-73; Code 1986, § 14-62) 
Sec. 46-333. - Records and information to be maintained. 
    All traveling and itinerant dealers, salespersons, and buyers of gold, silver, coins, jewelry, and other precious metals shall keep books wherein shall be entered an accurate description of all property pledged, traded, or sold by them. Such description shall include, to the extent possible, the name or the make of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made. In such books there shall be entered also the full name and address of the person by whom same was deposited or sold, and the time this was done. Such entries shall be made as soon after the transaction as is possible, and in no event more than four hours thereafter. 
(Code 1962, § 13-74; Code 1986, § 14-63) 
Sec. 46-334. - Report to police; contents, submission. 
(a)  Every traveling and itinerant dealer, salesperson, or buyer shall make a written report to the police department no less than 24 hours after completion of its business in the city. The report shall be in such form as may be prescribed by the chief of police, and of all property pledged, traded, bought, or sold during the period of operation in the city. In addition to any other information required by the chief of police, they shall show: 
(1)  The name and address of any person who bought, sold, traded, or otherwise disposed of or received any item; 
(2)  The date and time of the transaction; 
(3)  The amount paid or advanced, or the item traded; 
(4)  The full description of articles, including kind, style, material, color, design, kind and number of stones in jewelry, and all identifying names, ranks, and numbers; and 
(5)  A description of persons trading, buying, selling or pawning, including the name, address, race, weight and height. 
(b)  Such report shall be delivered to the police department no less than 24 hours after completion of business. It shall be neat and legible. 
(Code 1962, § 13-75; Code 1986, § 14-64) 
Sec. 46-335. - Dealing with minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any traveling or itinerant dealer, salesperson, or buyer to receive in pawn, trade, or to buy from minors or to sell to minors, goods of any character or description. A minor, for the purposes of this section, is an individual 17 years of age or under. 
(Code 1962, § 13-77; Code 1986, § 14-65) 
Sec. 46-336. - Receiving or possessing prohibited items. 
    No traveling or itinerant dealer, salesperson, or buyer shall take in pawn, or receive, sell, trade, or exchange any of the following named articles: knucks, dirk, sword-cane, blackjack, bowie knife, spring-back knife, switchblade knife, or any knife with a blade exceeding four inches in length, but it is not the intention thereof to prohibit case knives, butcher knives or other knives customarily used for domestic or industrial purposes only; nor shall they own or keep on hand any of the weapons named or referred to in this section. 
(Code 1962, § 13-78; Code 1986, § 14-66) 
Sec. 46-337. - Articles not to be disposed of seven days after acquisition. 
    All traveling and itinerant dealers, salespersons, and buyers of gold, silver, jewelry, coins and other precious metals shall hold such goods so pledged, traded, or purchased by them for at least seven days before disposing of them in any way. 
(Code 1962, § 13-79; Code 1986, § 14-67) 
Sec. 46-338. - Surrender of stolen property. 
    In the event it is determined that any item bought, sold, or traded to, or received by the traveling or itinerant dealer, salesperson or buyer is the subject of any theft or crime, the dealer, salesperson, or itinerant buyer shall, upon demand of the chief of police, or the chief's designee, surrender the same to the police department. 
(Code 1962, § 13-76; Code 1986, § 14-68) 
Sec. 46-339. - Penalties; suspension or revocation of authority to do business. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article, or such other laws or ordinances as may be passed by the city council shall, by vote of the city council, be barred from conducting business in the city until such time as they fully comply with this article. 
(Code 1962, § 13-82; Code 1986, § 14-69) 
Secs. 46-340-46-366. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - VEHICLES FOR HIRE 

Sec. 46-367. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Vehicle for hire means and shall refer to any vehicle utilized by a person has been issued a permit to transport persons for a fee by the chief of police consistent with the provisions of this article. Such a vehicle of hire shall be owned only by a person who has been issued a business license by the finance director for the operation of a vehicle for hire business within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 22-1; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-368. - Business license required; cost. 
    In order to operate a vehicle for hire business within the corporate limits of the city, the owner of such business must obtain a business license from the finance director of the city for such business. The cost of such business license, which shall be paid at the time of application and which shall be nonrefundable, shall be in an amount to be determined from time to time by the city council. The issuance of such business license for a vehicle for hire business shall not authorize the owner of the business, or any other person employed by such owner, to engage in the vehicle for hire business until such owner complies with all of the other provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 22-2; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-369. - Documentation required; notification of changes. 
    The owner of such business shall keep on file with the chief of police documentation providing the name of the owner of the business, the owner's business address, all business telephone numbers listed in the owner's name, the names of all drivers of vehicles for hire employed by such owner, the permit number for each such driver, the home address of each such driver, and the total number of vehicles for hire that such owner operates as part of such business. Any changes in such information shall be reported by the owner in writing to the chief of police within 48 hours of such change. 
(Code 1986, § 22-3; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-370. - Regulations; compliance. 
    Every owner of a vehicle for hire business shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Include in the application for such owner's business license the hours and service periods during which the vehicles for hire will be available to the public; 
(2)  Provide a telephone call system for vehicle for hire customers and sufficient vehicles to provide the public with the service as contemplated in the license application; 
(3)  Require vehicle for hire drivers to comply with all city, county, state, and federal statutes, laws, ordinances, and regulations; 
(4)  Submit all vehicles used as vehicle for hire to inspection when requested by the chief of police or his designee for the purpose of maintaining all such vehicles in a safe, sanitary, and clean condition at all times; 
(5)  Require that each vehicle for hire display the business name, the business telephone number or numbers, and the vehicle for hire permit number appropriately; 
(6)  Maintain a record of all telephone calls requesting vehicle for hire service for a minimum of 90 calendar days from the date of such call for use by the police department if necessary; and 
(7)  Require that each driver of a vehicle for hire maintain a daily written trip log or manifest. 
(Code 1986, § 22-4; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-371. - Serial numbers; locations; decals; size. 
    Upon the issuance of a business license by the finance director to the owner of the vehicle for hire business, the finance director shall also provide to such owner a distinct serial number that shall be painted or stenciled on each vehicle for hire. One distinct serial number shall be issued to each vehicle for hire, and no two vehicles shall be authorized to use the same serial number. Such number shall be at least six inches in height and shall be placed on a conspicuous part of the vehicle for hire so that it may be visible. In addition, the name and address of the vehicle for hire business shall be displayed in a conspicuous place on all of the vehicles for hire at all times. The name of the driver shall be prominently displayed within all vehicles for hire. No vehicle for hire shall be authorized to operate within the corporate limits of the city as a vehicle for hire until compliance with the provisions of this section is completed. 
(Code 1986, § 22-5; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-372. - Business location in city. 
    No vehicle for hire business shall operate in the city unless the owner thereof shall maintain a place of business within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Code 1986, § 22-6; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-373. - Drivers' permits-Required; applications. 
(a)  Any person, including any person who owns and operates a vehicle for hire business, who intends to drive a vehicle for hire within the corporate limits of the city, shall apply for a permit to do so from the police department. Such permit shall be applied for in writing upon such application forms as are deemed appropriate by the chief of police. Such application shall require such information as may be deemed necessary by the chief of police. Such permit shall be in addition to the vehicle for hire business license that the owner of such vehicle for hire business is required to obtain from the finance director as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Such permit application shall be signed by at least two individuals who are personally familiar with the applicant and can testify to the applicant's good character. No person may sign such application as a reference who either owns a vehicle for hire business or who has, or is in the process of applying for, a permit to operate a vehicle for hire as a driver. Such application shall also be signed by the applicant. 
(c)  No permit to operate a vehicle for hire shall be issued to any person who has not exhibited a familiarity with this article and the traffic laws, statutes, ordinances, and regulations of the state, who has been convicted by the state or any other state of a felony within the past five years, or who has been convicted of three or more moving traffic offenses during the five years immediately preceding the date of the application; provided, however, that any applicant who has been convicted of a felony within the prescribed time may be issued a permit if the chief of police has determined that the sentence imposed for such felony conviction has been served, that the service of such sentence has been completed for at least three calendar years from the date of the application, and the nature of the felony for which such applicant was convicted is determined by the chief of police not to be such an offense that would adversely impair the applicant's ability to operate a vehicle for hire and would not endanger or be reasonably likely to expose any vehicle for hire passengers to an unacceptable risk of bodily injury, property damage or loss. 
(Code 1986, § 22-7; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 46-374. - Same-Valid state driver's license. 
    In order for a person to receive a permit to operate a vehicle for hire within the city, such person must have attained the age of at least 18 years and must possess a valid state driver's license issued by the state department of motor vehicles of the appropriate class under O.C.G.A. title 40 (O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.) that would authorize the applicant to drive persons in a vehicle for hire. Any loss of the privilege to drive a motor vehicle arising out of or in connection with the permit holder's arrest for or violation of any of the traffic or drug statutes or ordinances of this state, any other state, or any county or municipality located in this or any other state, shall immediately invalidate any permit to operate a vehicle for hire issued under this article. 
(Code 1986, § 22-8; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-375. - Health certificate; vision certificate. 
    Each person applying for a permit to drive a vehicle for hire shall furnish a health certificate and a vision certificate to the chief of police with such permit application. The health certificate shall be signed by a practicing physician in good standing and the vision certificate shall be signed by a practicing ophthalmologist or optometrist in good standing. The form of the certificate must be approved by the chief of police. 
(Code 1986, § 22-9; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-376. - Drivers permit-Examination; familiarity with this article and traffic laws. 
    No person shall be authorized to drive a vehicle for hire carrying passengers until such person has exhibited, upon examination by the chief of police or his designee, a familiarity with the provisions of this article and the traffic statutes, laws, ordinances, and regulations in force in the city. The chief of police shall provide at least one copy of the vehicle for hire article to each vehicle for hire driver. 
(Code 1986, § 22-10; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-377. - Same-Expiration date. 
    Each permit issued to a driver of a vehicle for hire shall expire on December 31 of the year in which such permit was issued. Applications for renewal of such permit shall be accepted by the police department between December 1 and December 31 of each calendar year, but no person shall be authorized to operate a vehicle for hire beyond December 31 of any calendar year until such person's application for a new or renewal permit is approved in accord with this article. 
(Code 1986, § 22-11; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-378. - Same-Application fee; permit display. 
(a)  The application fee required to be paid at the time of the submission of the application for a permit as a driver of a vehicle for hire, shall not be prorated. 
(b)  The permit issued to a successful applicant shall be numbered, dated as of the date of issue, and shall have such other information displayed thereon as may be deemed appropriate by the chief of police. 
(c)  The permit shall, at all times when the permittee is engaged in driving a vehicle for hire within the city, be displayed in a conspicuous place by said permittee in the vehicle so that the permit can be easily seen by passengers riding in said vehicle for hire. 
(Code 1986, § 22-12; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-379. - Liability insurance. 
(a)  Each applicant for a vehicle for hire business license shall, before the license is granted, provide evidence of a policy or certificate of motor vehicle liability insurance, with respect to each vehicle to be operated as a vehicle for hire, with coverage in the following amounts: 
(1)  Ten thousand dollars for injury to one person; 
(2)  Twenty-five thousand dollars for injury to more than one person in any one accident; and 
(3)  Five thousand dollars for property loss or damage. 
(b)  Such insurance shall be issued by a company authorized to do business in the state. The policy or certificate of insurance shall identify all vehicles insured under such policy and shall contain a provision obligating the insurance carrier to provide notice of cancellation or modification of the policy to the chief of police within 15 calendar days after such a cancellation or modification. In the event of lapse, cancellation, or termination of such policy or certificate of insurance, or in the event that such coverage as required above are no longer afforded under such policy or certificate of insurance, then the license for the vehicle for hire business shall be deemed to have immediately expired. 
(c)  In lieu of such liability insurance requirement, the licensee shall be authorized to operate as a "self-insurer" if such operation is otherwise authorized under O.C.G.A. § 33-34-5.1. 
(Code 1986, § 22-13; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-380. - Rates posted in vehicle, visible to passengers. 
    The rates charged by vehicles for hire must be posted in the vehicle, for inspection by passengers at all times. 
(Code 1986, § 22-14; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-381. - Inspection by police department; driver and vehicle. 
    Each person who drives a vehicle for hire upon the streets of the city shall submit to inspection of both the vehicle and the driver by a certified police officer of the city police department whenever directed to do so. 
(Code 1986, § 22-15; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003) 
Sec. 46-382. - Suspension or revocation of license or permit. 
(a)  In the event that the owner of the vehicle for hire business fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, the finance director shall be authorized to suspend or revoke the business license previously issued to such owner. In the event of such a suspension or revocation, notice of such decision shall be communicated to the owner in writing by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice is deemed to be effective upon personal service or upon mailing. Any suspension hereunder shall be for such duration as the finance director deems appropriate, but any such suspension shall not exceed 30 calendar days. Violation of a written notice of suspension by the owner shall be grounds for revocation of the owner's license to operate such vehicle for hire business. 
(b)  In the event that a person issued a permit to drive a vehicle for hire violates or fails to comply with any of the provisions of this article, then the chief of police shall be authorized to suspend or revoke such permit. In the event of such a suspension or revocation, notice of such decision shall be communicated to the permittee in writing by personal service or by certified mail, return receipt requested. Such notice is deemed to be effective upon personal service or upon mailing. Any suspension hereunder shall be for such duration as the chief of police deems appropriate, but any such suspension shall not exceed 30 calendar days. Violation of a written notice of suspension by the permittee shall be grounds for revocation of the permittee's permit to drive a vehicle for hire. 
(c)  Any person whose business license to operate a vehicle for hire business, or whose permit to drive a vehicle for hire in the city has been suspended or revoked, has the right to appeal such suspension or revocation to the city council within ten calendar days of the effective date of such suspension or revocation. Such appeal must be in writing, must be submitted to the city official who ordered such suspension or revocation, and must set out the grounds upon which the appellant contends that the suspension or revocation was erroneously issued. The city manager of the city shall be notified of the filing of such an appeal and shall schedule a hearing thereon by the city council within 30 calendar days from the date of filing such appeal. In considering such appeal, the city council shall affirm the action or decision of the finance director or the chief of police, as the case may be, if the city council finds that such decision was supported by any evidence. 
(Code 1986, § 22-16; Ord. No. O-03-12-41, 12-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 46-383-46-400. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - FEES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 46-401. - Fee schedule. 
    The fees and charges to be charged by the city are more particularly established and adopted in accord with the following fee schedule attached to the ordinance from which this article derives and incorporated into this article as follows: 
Section Chapter Title Subsection Fee Description Amount Additional 
Amount (if 
applicable) 2-114 Administration c2 For filing and docketing executions in any case: 2-114 Administration c2  First Page $5.00 2-114 Administration c2  Each additional page $2.00 2-114 Administration c3 For canceling fi.fas.of record $7.00 2-114 Administration c4 For drawing recognizance: 2-114 Administration c4  First Page $5.00 2-114 Administration c4  Each additional page $2.00 2-113 Administration 4 For affixing the seal of the city any document $0.50 2-113 Administration 5 For furnishing certified copies of records of such officer's office except such as are needed or requested by the city council per 100 words $0.25 2-144 Administration 13 Nonrefundable handling fee for Economic Development loan application $50.00 Administration Franchise Fee - Telephone & Telegraph 3% Administration Franchise Fee - Cable Services 5% 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b Alcohol Beverage License by Type: 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b1  Wine - Wholesale $900.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b1  Wine - Retail $540.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b1  Wine Manufacturer (Vintner) $3,600.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b2  Beer - Wholesale $540.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b2  Beer - Retail $450.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b2  Beer Manufacturer (Brewery) $3,600.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Distilled Spirits - Wholesale $4,500.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Distilled Spirits - Retail $4,500.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Distilled Spirits - Manufacturer $4,500.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Maximum Alcohol License Fee $4,500.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages  Sunday Sales $0.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages b3  Wine Tasting $75.00 6-37 Alcoholic Beverages  Caterer's License $450.00 6-42 Alcoholic Beverages f2a License Transfer Fee $100.00 6-42 Alcoholic Beverages f2b License Investigation Fee $50.00 10-5 Animals & Fowl c Fee for impounding livestock per head $5.00 10-5 Animals & Fowl c Fee for keeping livestock per head per day $5.00 10-67 Animals & Fowl k Fee for certificate of registration for a dangerous dog $50.00 14-4 Buildings and Building Regulations b3 Permit for construction of ponds $50.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations f Inspection fees by total valuation  
Section Chapter Title From To Fee Description Amount Additional 
Amount (if 
applicable) 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $0 $1,000 $35 per thousand or fraction thereof $35.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $1,001 $2,000 $20 per thousand or fraction thereof $43.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $2,001 $3,000 $20 for the first $2,000 $51.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $3,001 $4,000 plus $8 for each additional thousand, or $59.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $4,001 $5,000 fraction thereof, to and including $15,000 $67.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $5,001 $6,000 $75.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $6,001 $7,000 $83.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $7,001 $8,000 $91.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $8,001 $9,000 $99.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $9,001 $10,000 $107.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $10,001 $11,000 $115.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $11,001 $12,000 $123.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $12,001 $13,000 $131.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $13,001 $14,000 $139.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $14,001 $15,000 $147.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $15,001 $16,000 $147 for the first $15,000 $155.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $16,001 $17,000 plus $8 for each additional thousand, or $163.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $17,001 $18,000 fraction thereof, to and including $50,000 $171.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $18,001 $19,000 $179.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $19,001 $20,000 $187.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $20,001 $21,000 $195.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $21,001 $22,000 $203.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $22,001 $23,000 $211.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $23,001 $24,000 $219.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $24,001 $25,000 $227.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $25,001 $26,000 $235.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $26,001 $27,000 $243.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $27,001 $28,000 $251.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $28,001 $29,000 $259.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $29,001 $30,000 $267.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $30,001 $31,000 Plan review fee is minimum of $50 up to $31,000 then 20% of permit fee $275.00 $50.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $31,001 $32,000 $283.00 $56.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $32,001 $33,000 $291.00 $58.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $33,001 $34,000 $299.00 $59.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $34,001 $35,000 $307.00 $61.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $35,001 $36,000 $315.00 $63.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $36,001 $37,000 $323.00 $64.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $37,001 $38,000 $331.00 $66.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $38,001 $39,000 $339.00 $67.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $39,001 $40,000 $347.00 $69.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $40,001 $41,000 $355.00 $71.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $41,001 $42,000 $363.00 $72.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $42,001 $43,000 $371.00 $74.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $43,001 $44,000 $379.00 $75.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $44,001 $45,000 $387.00 $77.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $45,001 $46,000 $395.00 $79.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $46,001 $47,000 $403.00 $80.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $47,001 $48,000 $411.00 $82.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $48,001 $49,000 $419.00 $83.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $49,001 $50,000 $427.00 $85.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $50,001 $51,000 $435.00 $87.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $51,001 $52,000 $443.00 $88.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $52,001 $53,000 $451.00 $90.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $53,001 $54,000 $459.00 $91.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $54,001 $55,000 $467.00 $93.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $55,001 $56,000 $475.00 $95.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $56,001 $57,000 $483.00 $96.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $57,001 $58,000 $491.00 $98.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $58,001 $59,000 $499.00 $99.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $59,001 $60,000 $507.00 $101.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $60,001 $61,000 $515.00 $103.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $61,001 $62,000 $523.00 $104.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $62,001 $63,000 $531.00 $106.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $63,001 $64,000 $539.00 $107.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $64,001 $65,000 $547.00 $109.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $65,001 $66,000 $555.00 $111.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $66,001 $67,000 $563.00 $112.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $67,001 $68,000 $571.00 $114.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $68,001 $69,000 $579.00 $115.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $69,001 $70,000 $587.00 $117.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $70,001 $71,000 $595.00 $119.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $71,001 $72,000 $603.00 $120.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $72,001 $73,000 $611.00 $122.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $73,001 $74,000 $619.00 $123.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $74,001 $75,000 $627.00 $125.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $75,001 $76,000 $635.00 $127.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $76,001 $77,000 $643.00 $128.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $77,001 $78,000 $651.00 $130.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $78,001 $79,000 $659.00 $131.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $79,001 $80,000 $667.00 $133.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $80,001 $81,000 $675.00 $135.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $81,001 $82,000 $683.00 $136.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $82,001 $83,000 $691.00 $138.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $83,001 $84,000 $699.00 $139.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $84,001 $85,000 $707.00 $141.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $85,001 $86,000 $715.00 $143.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $86,001 $87,000 $723.00 $144.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $87,001 $88,000 $731.00 $146.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $88,001 $89,000 $739.00 $147.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $89,001 $90,000 $747.00 $149.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $90,001 $91,000 $755.00 $151.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $91,001 $92,000 $763.00 $152.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $92,001 $93,000 $771.00 $154.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $93,001 $94,000 $779.00 $155.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $94,001 $95,000 $787.00 $157.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $95,001 $96,000 $795.00 $159.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $96,001 $97,000 $803.00 $160.60 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $97,001 $98,000 $811.00 $162.20 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $98,001 $99,000 $819.00 $163.80 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $99,001 $100,000 $827.00 $165.40 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $100,001 $500,000 $827 for the first $100,000 plus $8 for each additional fraction thereof, to and including $500,000 plus plan review fee of 20% of permit fee per calc per calc 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations $500,001 -   $4,027 for the first $500,000 plus $7 for each additional fraction thereof, plus plan review fee of 20% of permit fee per calc per calc 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Development Permit per 1,000 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Building Sprinkler Systems per 1,000 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Certificate of Occupancy Fee $50.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Minimum Electrical, Plumbing & HVAC Fee $35.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Reinspection Fee: 1st $25.00, 2nd $50.00, 3rd $100.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Residential Assessment Report $50.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Commercial Assessment Report $100.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Board-Up Permit $150.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Grease Trap Permit: $50.00 up to $5,000.00 then per 1,000 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Land Development Burn Permit $250.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Fire Alarm Permit: $50.00 up to $5,000.00 then per 1,000 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Low Voltage Permit: $35.00 Res per 1,000 Com 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Tent or Temporary Structure Permit $60.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Power Approval Inspections $35.00 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Irrigation: $35.00 Res per 1,000 com 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations Temporary Office $100.00  
Section Chapter Title Subsection Fee Description Amount Additional 
Amount (if 
applicable) 14-29 Buildings and Building Regulations e Fee for moving structure $50.00 14-108 Buildings and Building Regulations a Gas permit fee $2.50 14-234 Buildings and Building Regulations a2 Application fee for special exception for antennas and towers $100.00 $250.00 14-275 Buildings and Building Regulations Filing fee for certificate of appropriateness $100.00 14-275 Buildings and Building Regulations Additional fee for certificate of appropriateness $10.00 18-3 Cemeteries Cemetery lot sales: 18-3 Cemeteries  Oak Grove - Resident $525.00 18-3 Cemeteries  Oak Grove - Non-resident $3,300.00 18-3 Cemeteries  Eastview - Resident $475.00 18-3 Cemeteries  Eastview - Non-resident $3,300.00 34-72 Environment and Natural Resources b3 Permit fee for land disturbing activity per acre ($40 retained by City, $40 to GSWU) $80.00 34-133 Environment and Natural Resources h Wet-lands local development permit $150.00 $250.00 + 
$25.00 per lot 34-160 Environment and Natural Resources Appeals on permit applications $100.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection Fire calls outside the City - annual registration  
Section Chapter Title From To Fee Description Amount Additional 
Amount (if 
applicable) 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection 0 $30,000 Residential Property Value - Building only $125.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $30,001 $60,000 $200.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $60,001 $120,000 $300.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $120,001 $240,000 $400.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $240,000 Over $500.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection 0 $5,000 Business or factory based on square footage $250.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $5,001 $25,000 $500.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $25,001 $50,000 $750.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $50,001 $150,000 $1,000.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $150,001 $350,000 $1,500.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $350,001 over $2,000.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection 0 $5,000 Hotel/Motel based on square footage $200.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection $5,001 Over $400.00 38-51 Fire Prevention and Protection Any barn greater than 999 square feet $125.00  
Section Chapter Title Subsection Fee Description Amount Additional 
Amount (if 
applicable) 38-52 Fire Prevention and Protection Hourly Fee for Fire Calls requested by other governments (Other than Sumter County) $100.00 Business and Occupational Licensing a Business and Occupational Licensing Current 46-1 Business and Occupational Licensing a Insurer's license fee $75.00 46-1 Business and Occupational Licensing b Separate business location $26.25 46-1 Business and Occupational Licensing c Insurer's agency license fee $75.00 46-97 Business and Occupational Licensing a Administration fee for business accounts $50.00 46-97 Business and Occupational Licensing b Regulatory fee for business licenses $25.00 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing a2 Occupational license tax rates applied to gross receipts: 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 1 $0.000415 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 2 $0.000623 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 3 $0.000831 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 4 $0.001039 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 5 $0.001246 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing  Profit/Tax Class 6 $0.001454 46-98 Business and Occupational Licensing h Occupational tax maximum $2,000.00 46-101 Business and Occupational Licensing 2 Professional flat license fee $400.00 46-117 Business and Occupational Licensing Late fee penalty $50.00 46-156 Business and Occupational Licensing Minimum tax for Depository financial institutions $1,000.00 46-195 Business and Occupational Licensing 3 Investigation fee $50.00 46-208 Business and Occupational Licensing a Non-refundable annual permit fee for adult establishments $3,500.00 46-268 Business and Occupational Licensing Transient Sales/Temporary Sales/Vending - Fee per day per sale site $100.00 46-269 Business and Occupational Licensing Fingerprint fee $15.00 46-294 Business and Occupational Licensing a Annual registration for residential soliciting $100.00 46-294 Business and Occupational Licensing i Renewal of Soliciting certificate $25.00 54-2 Municipal Court a Technology add-on fee - per fine $10.00 74-30 Special Exception Sign Variance $100.00 74-54 Signs Permit fee for signs $60.00 78-55 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places 5 Special Activity Fee $50.00 78-56 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places Per day Electricity Charge for Rylander Park/Rees Park and its Gazebo (permitted) $25.00 78-56 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places Per day Electricity Charge for Rylander Park/Rees Park and its Gazebo (without permit) $100.00 78-94 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places Excavation fee - paved surface $20.00 78-94 Streets, Sidewalks, & other Public Places Excavation fee - unpaved surface $10.00 82-6 Subdivisions Subdivision plat filing fee $10.00 Subdivisions Subdivision plan review $200.00 + $25.00 per lot $200.00 90-162 Utilities a Water Tap Fees: 90-162 Utilities   5/8 inch meter or 3/4 inch $600.00 90-162 Utilities  1 inch meter $656.39 90-162 Utilities  11/2 inch $1,649.50 90-162 Utilities  2 inch meter (compound commercial variable) $2,575.00 90-162 Utilities  3 inch meter $3,653.00 90-162 Utilities  4 inch meter $4,729.00 90-162 Utilities  6 inch meter Special Order 90-162 Utilities b Fee to move a meter (less than 2 inches) $240.00 90-163 Utilities Minimum Commercial Water Service deposit $75.00 90-164 Utilities a Residential Water Service deposit 
 Excellent Credit/Low Risk connection fee deposit waived $25.00 90-164 Utilities a       Medium Risk $100.00 90-164 Utilities a       High Risk $125.00 90-165 Utilities a Water Utility Rates - Inside City Limits: 90-165 Utilities a  Residential Base fee per month $7.10 90-165 Utilities a  Residential Operating fee per 100 cubic feet $2.32 90-165 Utilities a  Industrial Base fee per month $7.10 90-165 Utilities a  Industrial Operating fee per 100 cubic feet $2.32 90-165 Utilities a  Senior Citizens Base fee per month $6.39 90-165 Utilities a  Senior Citizens Operating fee per 100 cubic feet $2.09 90-167 Utilities a Bulk Water Rate: 90-167 Utilities a  1 to 5,000 gallons $25.00 90-167 Utilities a  Over 5,000 gallons - per 1,000 gallon charge $5.00 90-167 Utilities a Hydrant Meter - Refundable Deposit $1,000.00 90-168 Utilities e Sprinkler system monthly charge $5.00 90-170 Utilities Reconnection charge - Water $50.00 90-171 Utilities After Hours Service Charge $50.00 90-199 Utilities Water restriction penalty $200.00 90-289 Utilities a Sewer Tap and Connection charges: 90-289 Utilities a   5/8 inch water meter $325.00 90-289 Utilities a  3/4 inch water meter $325.00 90-289 Utilities a  2 inch water meter (compound commercial) $1,090.00 90-289 Utilities a  4 inch water meter (compound commercial) $600.00 90-289 Utilities a  6 inch water meter (compound commercial) $800.00 90-289 Utilities a  8 inch water meter (compound commercial) $1,000.00 90-289 Utilities a Connection to City Sewer $400.00 90-290 Utilities b Sewer Service Charges and Rates: 90-290 Utilities a  Residential Base fee per month $12.50 90-290 Utilities a  Residential Operating fee per 100 cubic feet $2.95 90-290 Utilities a  Industrial Base fee per month (computed) $12.50 90-290 Utilities a  Industrial Operating fee per 100 cubic feet (computed) $2.95 90-290 Utilities a  Industrial Base fee per month (metered) $12.50 90-290 Utilities a  Industrial Operating fee per 100 cubic feet (metered) $2.95 90-292 Utilities Sewer deposit (non-users of water system) $100.00 90-297 Utilities Reconnection charge - Sewer $100.00 90-300 Utilities Bulk Sewage Rate:  1 to 1,250 gallons $25.00  Over 1,250 gallons - per 100 gallon charge $2.00 90-343 Utilities Gas Service Deposit: 
 Excellent Credit/Low Risk connection fee deposit waived $25.00 90-343 Utilities       Medium Risk $150.00 90-343 Utilities       High Risk $225.00 90-343 Utilities Reconnection charge - Gas $50.00 90-346 Utilities Residential Gas Rate Margin - per MCF $4.28 90-347 Utilities After Hours Service Charge $65.00 90-429 Utilities Monthly Sanitation Rates: New rates for 2018 90-429 Utilities  Residential Hobo $25.47 90-429 Utilities  Commercial Hobo $29.82 90-429 Utilities  Dumpster Rate, per cubic yard per pick-up $6.48 90-429 Utilities  Additional Hobo $11.55 90-507 Utilities Monthly Stormwater Rates:  Residential - Based on 3,000 sq ft (ERU) $4.00  All other properties to be based on # of ERU's 94-32 Zoning Special Exception application fee $250.00 94-53 Zoning Zoning Fee $250.00  
(Ord. No. O-08-02-01, exh. A, 2-21-2008; Ord. No. O-08-12-42, exh. A, 12-18-2008; Ord. No. O-09-03-06, exh. A, 3-19-2009; Ord. No. O-09-04-12, exh. A, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. O-09-04-13, exh. A, 4-23-2009; Ord. No. O-09-05-16, exh. A, 5-21-2009; Ord. No. O-09-12-35, exh. A, 12-17-2009; Ord. No. O-10-04-09, exh. A, 4-22-2010; Ord. No. O-10-12-43, exh. A, 12-16-2010; Ord. No. O-11-12-34, exh. A, 12-15-2011; Ord. No. O-12-02-02, exh. A, 2-23-2012; Ord. No. O-12-04-11, exh. A, 4-19-2012; Ord. No. O-2012-26, 10-18-2012; Ord. No. O-2012-29, exh. A, 12-20-2012; Ord. No. O-2013-10, 4-18-2013; Ord. No. O-2014-21, 12-18-2014; Ord. No. O-2015-7, exh. A, 4-15-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-17, exh. A, 10-22-2015; Ord. No. O-2015-19, exh. A, 12-17-2015; Ord. No. O-2016-7, 12-22-2016; Ord. No. O-2017-6, Exh. A, 6-22-2017; Ord. No. O-2017-14, exh. A, 12-21-2017) 
Secs. 46-402-46-450. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - DUE COMPENSATION APPLICABLE TO ANY TELEGRAPH OR TELEPHONE COMPANY 

Sec. 46-451. - Due compensation for telephone companies with end user retail customers within the city. 
(a)  The city hereby requires due compensation of three percent of actual recurring local service revenue, as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 46-5-1(b)(8), (9); provided, however, that any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues pursuant to an existing franchise agreement, shall continue to pay in accordance with the agreement until the expiration of the franchise agreement, or December 31, 2012, whichever occurs first, and any company which pays in excess of three percent of actual recurring local service revenues in accordance with an occupational license tax arrangement, shall continue to pay in accordance with such payment schedule until December 31, 2012. 
(b)  Regarding any telephone company that does not have retail end user customers located within the city's municipal boundaries, the payment by such company to a municipal authority in accordance with the rates set by regulations promulgated by the department of transportation for the use of its rights-of-way shall be considered the payment of due compensation. 
(Ord. No. O-09-08-29, 8-20-2009) 
Sec. 46-452. - Authorized designee. 
    The city manager of the city shall, on behalf of the city, exercise day to day administrative duties necessary to fulfill the regulatory authority of the city under O.C.G.A. § 46-5-1 et seq. and shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Review application information submitted by a telephone company to the city and, if an application is incomplete, notify the telegraph or telephone company within 15 business days of the receipt of such application, identifying in such notice all application deficiencies; 
(2)  Report the receipt of a completed application to the city council within 60 calendar days of the receipt of such completed application; 
(3)  Review payments of due compensation submitted by the company to insure compliance with the provisions of the amended law and the ordinance from which this article derives; 
(4)  Provide a coordination function between a telephone company and all city departments on any matter relating to the amended law and the ordinance from which this article derives; 
(5)  Arrange and evaluate, no more than once per year, a comprehensive review of the records of a company which is reasonably related to the calculation and payment of due compensation; 
(6)  Provide to all telegraph and telephone companies located in its rights-of-way, written notice of annexations and changes in municipal corporate boundaries. 
(Ord. No. O-09-08-29, 8-20-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Chapter 50 - MANUFACTURED HOMES AND TRAILERS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 50-1. - Recreational vehicles at nursing homes or convalescent centers. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the parking of recreational vehicles on property owned and controlled by a nursing home or convalescent home where the following conditions are met: 
(1)  The area where such recreational vehicles are to be parked is paved with asphalt or other suitable paving material and is not larger than 15,000 square feet. 
(2)  The area where the recreational vehicles are to be parked is not located adjacent to a city street or state highway but is located at least 500 feet from the right-of-way of any city street or state highway. 
(3)  No occupant of any recreational vehicle may reside at such location for more than 30 consecutive days and that there are no more than ten recreational vehicles parked at such location at any one time. 
(4)  The owner of the nursing home or convalescent home shall be authorized to establish electrical connections and running water connections to the area set aside for the parking of such recreational vehicles, but such electrical connections and water connections shall, in all respects comply with the other provisions of this Code. 
(5)  Under no circumstances shall any sewage from such recreational vehicles be disposed of in the city's sewerage system, but the owner of the nursing home or convalescent home shall be responsible for ensuring that all such sewage is disposed of properly in appropriate locations. 
(6)  The owner or operator of any recreational vehicle parked in accord with the terms of this section shall not be required to pay any rent or lease for the space utilized by such vehicle; nor shall such owner or operator be charged for the use of any electricity or water at such location. 
(7)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall prohibit the owner of a recreational vehicle who resides at a nursing home or convalescent center from parking his recreational vehicle at such location during such times and for such lengths of time as he or she may deem appropriate, and the nursing home or convalescent center shall be authorized to permit the owners of such recreational vehicles to connect to the electrical and water connections at such parking area. 
(Code 1986, § 21-16; Ord. No. O-97-02-03, 2-20-1997) 
Secs. 50-2-50-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TRAILER CAMPS 

Sec. 50-21. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Automobile trailer, trailer coach, or trailer means any vehicle or structure so designed and constructed in such manner as will permit occupancy thereof as sleeping quarters for one or more persons, for the conduct of any business or profession, occupancy or tract, or use as a selling of advertising device, and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways or city streets, propelled or drawn by its own or other motor power, excepting a device used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
    Trailer camp means any park, trailer park, trailer court, court, camp, site, lot, parcel, or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purposes of supplying a location or accommodations for any trailer coach or trailer coaches and upon which any trailer coach or trailer coaches are parked and shall include all buildings used or intended for use a part of the equipment thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the trailer camp and its facilities or not. The term "trailer camp" shall not include automobile or trailer sales lots on which unoccupied trailers are parked for purposes of inspection and sale. 
    Unit means a section of ground in a trailer camp of not less than 1,000 square feet of unoccupied space in an area designated as the location for only one automobile and one trailer. 
(Code 1986, § 21-1; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-22. - License. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to establish, operate or maintain, or permit to be established, operated or maintained upon any property owned or controlled by him, a trailer camp within the limits of the city without having first secured a license therefor. Such license shall expire one year from the date of issuance but may be renewed under the provisions of this chapter for additional periods of one year. 
(b)  Application. The application for such license or the renewal thereof shall be filed with the finance director, there will be no such fee charged for this license, for each unit in the existing or proposed camp. The application for a license or renewal thereof shall be made on such printed forms or other documents as may be furnished by the finance director and shall include the name and address of the owner of the tract and such a legal description of the premises, upon which the trailer camp is or will be located as will readily identify and definitely locate the premises. The application shall be accompanied by four copies of the camp plan showing the following, either existing or as proposed: 
(1)  The extent and area to be used for camp purposes. 
(2)  Roadways and driveways. 
(3)  Location of sites or units for trailer coaches. 
(4)  Location and number of sanitary conveniences, including toilets, washrooms, laundries and utility rooms to be used by occupants of units. 
(5)  Method and plan for sewage disposal. 
(6)  Method and plan for garbage removal. 
(7)  Plan for water supply. 
(8)  Plan for electrical lighting of the units. 
(c)  Recommendation; procedure. Before such license may be issued, there must be a favorable recommendation by the majority of the planning commission and the plan and premises must be inspected and approved by the chief of the fire department and the county health department. Upon obtaining the recommendation of the planning commission, the chief of the fire department, and the county health department, the license application shall be transmitted to the city council for public hearing. Such public hearing shall be conducted in the same manner as public hearings are conducted for rezoning or amendments to the zoning chapter, with the additional requirement that the city council shall consider and determine whether or not the proposed camp complies with the requirements contained in this chapter. After initial approval of the application and the granting of the license by the city council, the city council shall not be required to have a public hearing on the renewal of such license in subsequent years unless so requested by the planning commission, the chief of the fire department, or the county health department, or where a license previously issued shall have expired prior to the renewal thereof. 
(d)  Determination. Upon the conclusion of the public hearing, the city council shall determine whether or not to grant the license to the applicant. 
(e)  Limitations. Licenses issued under the terms of this chapter convey no right to erect any building, to do any plumbing work or to do any electrical work. 
(Code 1986, § 21-2; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-23. - Zoning. 
(a)  No trailer camp shall be located in any zone within the city limits other than an R-4 MH residential district, as amended. 
(b)  No trailer or tourist camp shall be located within the limits of the city unless city water and sewer connections and fire protection facilities are available. 
(c)  No occupied trailer or any other building shall be located within the city limits within the recognized setback line for the zoning district in which such trailer is located nor less than ten feet from any other building or vehicle or the boundary line of the tract on which located. 
(d)  No trailer camp shall be licensed or operated in conjunction with or as part of a mobile home park or as a part of a mobile home subdivision. 
(Code 1986, § 21-3; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-24. - Plan for stormwater, driveways, electricity, etc., required. 
(a)  Every trailer camp shall be located on a well-drained area, and the premises shall be properly graded so as to prevent the accumulation of stormwater or other waters. 
(b)  Units shall be clearly designated and the camp so arranged so that all units shall face or abut on a driveway of not less than 16 feet in width, giving easy access from all units to a public street. Such driveway shall be maintained in good condition having natural drainage into a city street catchbasin, be well lighted at night, and shall not be obstructed. 
(c)  The camp shall be laid out so that no trailer shall be located farther than 200 feet from the toilets and service buildings provided for herein, and walkways to such buildings shall be well lighted at night. 
(d)  Every trailer unit shall be furnished with an electric service outlet. Such outlet shall be equipped with an externally operated switch or fuse of not less than 30 amperes capacity, and heavy duty outlet receptacle. 
(Code 1986, § 21-4; Ord. No. O-90-07-18, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-25. - City water required; adequate faucets and hot water. 
(a)  An adequate supply of pure water, furnished through a pipe distribution system connected directly with the city water main, with supply faucets located not more than 200 feet from any trailer shall be furnished for drinking and domestic purposes. 
(b)  No common drinking vessels shall be permitted, nor shall any drinking water faucets be placed in any toilet room. 
(c)  An abundant supply of hot water shall be provided at all times for bathing, washing and laundry facilities. 
(Code 1986, § 21-5; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-26. - Service building requirements; accommodations based on plan. 
(a)  Every trailer camp shall have erected thereon, at a distance not greater than 200 feet from any unit it is designed to serve, a suitable building for housing toilets, showers, and laundry facilities as required by this article. 
(b)  There shall be provided separate toilet rooms for each sex. Flush toilets provided with an adequate water supply shall be enclosed in separate compartments and shall be provided for each sex in the ratio of one toilet for each eight units. 
(c)  Separate bathing facilities for each sex shall be provided with one shower for each eight units. 
(d)  Laundry facilities shall be provided. 
(e)  The accommodations, specified in this section, shall be based on the total camp capacity according to its accepted plans. 
(Code 1986, § 21-6; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-27. - Connection to city sewer system required; garbage collection by city services. 
(a)  All waste from showers, toilets, laundries, faucets and lavatories shall be wasted into a sewer system extended from and connected with the city sewer system. 
(b)  All sanitary facilities in any trailer that are not connected with the city sewer system by means of rigid pipe connections shall be sealed and their use is hereby declared unlawful. 
(c)  Each faucet site shall be equipped with facilities for drainage of waste and excess water into the sewer. In no case shall any wastewater be thrown or discharged upon the surface of the ground or disposed of by means other than is herein provided. 
(d)  Every unit shall be provided with a wheeled container supplied by the city for garbage depository from which the contents shall be removed by the city garbage collection services. 
(Code 1986, § 21-7; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-28. - Length of stay; number of occupants. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to remain or live in any trailer or tourist camp for more than 90 days in each 12-month period, unless an exception to this requirement is approved by the city manager of the city, or his designee, and such exception may be approved for good cause only. 
(b)  No trailer may be inhabited by a greater number of occupants than that for which it was designed. 
(Code 1986, § 21-8; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 50-29. - Management. 
    At all times, the management (licensee) shall: 
(1)  Keep a register of all guests, showing for such guests: 
a.  Names and addresses. 
b.  Dates of entrance and departure. 
c.  License numbers of all trailers and towing or other automobiles. 
d.  States issuing such licenses. 
e.  Place of last location and length of stay. 
(2)  Maintain the camp in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
(3)  See that the provisions of this chapter are complied with and enforced and report promptly to the proper authorities any violations of this chapter or any other violations of law which may come to their attention. 
(4)  Prevent the running loose of dogs, cats or other animals or pets. 
(5)  Maintain in convenient places, approved by the chief of the fire department, hand fire extinguishers in the ratio of one to each eight units. 
(6)  Prohibit the lighting of open fires on the premises. 
(7)  Prohibit the use of any trailer by a greater number of occupants than that which it is designed to accommodate. 
(8)  Report to the county health department all cases of persons or animals infected or suspected of being infected with any communicable disease. 
(Code 1986, § 21-9; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-30. - Compliance with plumbing, electrical and building ordinances. 
    All plumbing, electrical, building and other work on or at any camp licensed under this chapter shall be in accord with the ordinances of the city regulating such work unless such ordinances are specifically made inapplicable under the terms of this chapter. 
(Code 1986, § 21-10; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-31. - Parking restricted. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful within the city limits for any person to park any trailer on any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the city, except as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  Emergency or temporary stopping or parking is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than one hour, subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations, or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances of that street, alley or highway. 
(c)  No person shall park or occupy any trailer on the premises or any occupied dwelling or on any lot which is not part of the premises of any occupied dwelling, either of which is situated outside an approved trailer camp; except, the parking of only one unoccupied trailer in an accessory private garage building, or in a rear yard in any district, is permitted, provided no living quarters shall be maintained or any business practiced in said trailer while such trailer is so parked or stored. 
(Code 1986, § 21-11; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Sec. 50-32. - Revocation. 
    The planning commission is hereby authorized to revoke any license issued pursuant to the terms of this article if after due investigation they determine that the holder thereof has violated any of the provisions of this article or that any trailer or trailer camp is being maintained in an unsanitary or unsafe manner or is a nuisance. 
(Code 1986, § 21-12; Ord. No. O-90-07-19, 7-23-1990) 
Chapter 54 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

Sec. 54-1. - Bail bond or confinement in jail; failure to appear; forfeiture procedure; surrender of principal. 
(a)  The chief of police, any police officer or the judge of the municipal court may take bond with security or bond without security or a cash bond at their discretion, payable to the city, in a sum not exceeding $1,200.00 for the appearance of any person accused or suspected of being guilty of a violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city to stand to and abide trial in the municipal court of the city, and also as a witness to testify in any case pending or about to be commenced in the municipal court. 
(b)  If any party or witness shall fail or refuse to give the bond and security, as required, such person so failing or refusing may be confined in the jail of the county, to be kept under a guard, so as to be present to abide the trial or to testify, as the case may be. 
(c)  All bail taken under this chapter shall be special bail, and the power of the security over the principal, shall be the same as in special bail. Upon the failure to appear of any principal in any bond or recognizance given by a person charged with a violation of this Code or any other ordinance of the city, or by witness to appear to testify, the recorder shall pass a rule requiring the principal and securities on such bond to show cause on any day therein named, not to be less than ten days from the passage of such rule why they should not be required to pay the amount of such bond. 
(d)  A copy of said rule shall be served upon the principal and security by the finance director or any officer or member of the police force, if the principal is to be found in the city or within the county, at least five days before the time therein set for hearing of the same. 
(e)  If no sufficient cause is shown, the municipal judge shall proceed to enter judgment against such principal and securities for the amount of said bond, and the finance director shall issue execution for the amount of such judgment and shall proceed to collect the same by levy and sale as in the case of tax executions. 
(f)  Any surety upon a bail bond of any person charged with a violation of this Code or any other city ordinance, may surrender the principal at any time, to any member of the police force, who shall confine such principal in the jail of the county until discharged by the order of the municipal court, or by giving other and good security. The delivery of the principal as aforesaid, shall discharge the surety of all further liability upon such bond; provided, that such delivery shall be before any judgment of forfeiture upon said bond shall have been entered. 
(Code 1962, §§ 19-2-19-5; Code 1986, §§ 8-3-8-6; Ord. No. O-03-09-23, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
State Law reference- Authority to provide for bond forfeitures, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-4. 
Sec. 54-2. - Additional penalties. 
(a)  In every case in which the municipal court shall impose a fine, which shall be construed to include costs, for any offense against a criminal or traffic law of this state, or against an ordinance of this city, there shall be imposed by the judge of the municipal court at the time of sentencing an additional penalty in the amount set by ordinance. 
(b)  The sums provided for in subsection (a) of this section shall be assessed and collected by the officer or agent of the court charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from such fines, and such funds shall be paid over to the city treasury at such time as may be required by the finance director. 
(c)  An amount equal to all funds remitted to the city treasury as provided for in this section for the immediately preceding calendar year shall be appropriated to fund the acquisition, maintenance, and operation of information technology equipment and services to be used in the city police department. Such funds shall be exclusively expended for such purposes, and any funds not so expended in any calendar year shall not lapse, but shall be available for use for the same purposes in the next succeeding city fiscal year. Notwithstanding the foregoing, such funds, and the information technology equipment and services for which such funds are to be expended, shall be included as items in the city police department section of the annual operating budget of the city as approved by the city council on an annual basis. 
(Code 1986, § 8-9; Ord. No. O-04-03-06, 3-18-2004) 
Chapter 58 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 58-1. - Abatement of nuisances, officials designated to petition municipal court; authority of officials to inspect nuisance conditions. 
(a)  The chief of police, the chief of the fire and emergency services department, and the building official, or their respective designees, are each hereby authorized to petition the municipal court to abate any nuisance, as defined under the laws of this state or under the ordinances of this city, which is created or maintained within the city. 
(b)  The chief of police, the chief of the fire and emergency services department, and the building official, and their respective designees, are authorized and empowered to enter upon any real property and structure at reasonable times to inspect the real property and structure for existing or complained of nuisances thereon or therein. 
(c)  The authority granted in this section shall be applicable to nuisances which are violations of state law, nuisances which are violations of city ordinances, including, but not limited to, nuisances which arise in accord with the provisions of article II and article III of this chapter of the Code of Ordinances. 
(Code 1962, § 2-74; Code 1986, § 12-7; Ord. No. O-10-04-12, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 58-2. - Same-Penalties for having a nuisance or failure to abate a nuisance. 
(a)  Any person who is found guilty of violating the nuisance ordinances of the city, including, but not limited to, the nuisance ordinances referenced in article II and the nuisance ordinances referenced in article III of this chapter, shall, upon conviction of a first offense thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code; provided, however, that the minimum fine upon such first conviction shall be $100.00. Upon a second conviction of maintaining a nuisance, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code; provided, however, that the minimum fine for such conviction shall be $300.00. Upon a third or subsequent conviction of maintaining a nuisance, such person shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code; provided, however, that the minimum fine for such conviction shall be $500.00. 
(b)  Each day in which the court finds that the nuisance has existed shall constitute a separate offense, and each such offense shall subject the violator, upon conviction, to the penalties provided in subsection (a) hereof for each such offense. 
(c)  Any person who fails to abate a nuisance within a time period as ordered by the judge of the municipal court may be subject to punishment for contempt by the judge pursuant to the provisions of subsection 4-104(b) of the City Charter. Any penalty for contempt shall be in addition to the penalties that may be imposed in accord with subsections (a) and (b) hereof. 
(Code 1962, § 2-75; Code 1986, § 12-8; Ord. No. O-10-04-12, 4-22-2010) 
Secs. 58-3-58-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LOT CLEARING 

Sec. 58-23. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means and includes the waste product from coal, wood, or other fuels used for cooking and heating from private residences. 
    Building refuse means solid waste generated from construction or demolition activities undertaken on property located within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
    Common continuing nuisance means a wrong that arises from unreasonable, unhealthful, unwarranted, or unlawful use by a person of his property, either real or personal, or from his improper, indecent or unlawful personal conduct, working an obstruction or an injury to the rights of the public, and producing material annoyance, inconvenience, discomfort or hurt to the public continuously or at frequent intervals. 
    Contractor means any person, and the agents and employees thereof, engaged in construction, electrical, mechanical, air conditioning, heating, plumbing, roofing, demolition, landscaping, masonry, allied work, nurserymen, and grounds keepers. 
    Debris means residue of any nature accumulating from the activities enumerated in the definition of contractor. 
    Garbage means all vegetable and animal matter, food, and other refuge from a kitchen, market, store, or elsewhere, including all matter that decays, attracts flies, and creates disagreeable odors. 
    Industrial refuse means waste materials from factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling plants, food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, sawdust, shavings, and any other waste products from industrial and manufacturing processes. 
    Junk means old, scrap copper, brass, rope, rags, batteries, paper, trash, rubber debris, including tires, waste, junked, dismantled, or wrecked automobiles, trucks, or other vehicles or parts thereof, iron, steel, used household appliances, bottles, containers, boxes, barrels, and plastic. 
    Nuisance means stagnant water on-premises, loud or unusual noises which are detrimental to the public, including without limiting the foregoing, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes such as loud music and other activities; dead or decaying matter which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to others; obstruction of a public street, highway, sidewalk; unused refrigerators, washing machines and other similar unused or unusable appliances; an accumulation of debris, objects, materials, and other conditions which may constitute a health, accident, or fire hazard, or which creates a blighting or deteriorating effect; any weeds, grasses, or plants other than trees, bushes, flowers, or other ornamental plants, growing to a height of 12 inches anywhere in the city; any vacant lot whereon debris is permitted to accumulate or vegetation, e.g., kudzu, is allowed to remain uncontrolled, in such a manner as to create a fire or other hazard to the public health, safety, or welfare; and any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
    Rubbish means a variety of nonrecyclable household waste derived from places of residence and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, broken glass bottles and jars, crockery, rubber, discarded clothing, and similar materials. 
    Waste means unwanted or discarded material including, but not limited to, ashes, building refuse, garbage, hazardous waste, industrial refuse, recyclable waste, rubbish, solid waste, and yard debris. 
    Wrong means a violation of public rights and duties which affect the community. 
    Yard debris means tree limbs, branches, stumps and logs, twigs, grass and shrub trimmings and clippings, bushes, weeds, leaves, and general yard and garden waste materials, and includes stone and dirt rakings and similar waste materials resulting from landscaping activities. 
    Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-24. - Prohibited generally. 
(a)  Debris that hinders free use of right-of-way. Except for yard clippings and similar debris intended to be picked up by public waste disposal services, it shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, throw, place, or cause to be deposited, thrown, or placed, into or upon any public square, street, alley, or sidewalk of the city, or on the property of another without such person's permission, any paper, rags, shavings, trash, rubbish, chips, ashes, oyster shells, cuttings of vines, shrubbery or trees, filth, offal, rotten fruit, vegetables, dead animals, liquids, or any other thing which is or may become offensive, or which may damage any of said public squares, streets, alleys or sidewalks, or interfere with the free use and enjoyment of the same. 
(b)  Property owners or lessees to maintain. Except for yard clippings and similar debris intended to be picked up by public waste disposal services, no person shall sweep any trash, dirt, filth, clay, manure, or other objectionable matter from the sidewalks into the streets, nor shall any property owners or lessees permit any such to remain on the sidewalk in front of such person's property or on the space between the property line and outer edge of the sidewalk. 
(c)  Injury to persons. It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on, or maintain any nuisance, which hurts or inconveniences any person. 
(d)  Injury to health . It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance, which tends to injure or does injure or jeopardize the health of any person. 
(e)  Injury to property. It shall be unlawful for any person to create, carry on or maintain any nuisance within the city, which causes damage or injury to any other person's property. 
(f)  Annoyance. No person shall keep or maintain on his premises any nuisance to the annoyance of his neighbor. 
(Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-25. - Storage of junked vehicles, garbage, trash, rubbish, scrap parts, household appliances, etc., on property. 
(a)  It shall be illegal to store scrap parts of cars, household appliances, and other similar items on residential lots within the city, unless such items are located within a building or garage upon the premises. 
(b)  It shall be illegal to use porches, decks, patios, or vacant lots for the storage of unused materials, construction materials, appliances, or other similar items that may cause injury to person or property. 
(Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-26. - Property owners required to keep premises in sanitary condition. 
(a)  All property owners within the city are required to keep their premises in a clean, sanitary, and healthful condition. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of every owner of any parcel of ground within the city to keep every house, building, establishment, lot, yard, and ground owned by such person at all times free from filth, carrion, impure or unwholesome matter, and noxious odors of any nature whatsoever. 
(c)  No owner of any parcel of land within the city shall allow garbage, trash, junk, dirt, weeds, vines, grass, or other vegetation or trash or rubbish to grow, or accumulate thereon, which would likely become a breeding place for snakes, rats, flies, gnats, mosquitoes, or other harmful or dangerous creatures or insects, or is likely to cause personal injury or property damage by human illness or fire, or which may become a health hazard for any other reason, or which may become a hazard to traffic on the public streets in the city. Nothing herein shall be construed to require the removal of trees and other vegetation from any parcel of land that has never been developed for residential, commercial, or industrial uses. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner or lessee to allow any weeds, grass, shrubbery or other rank vegetation of any character to grow between the property line and the outer edge of the street curb, and it shall be the duty of such owner or lessee to keep grass plots between the property line and the outer curb properly cut or mowed. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any property owner in the city to allow noxious weeds and grasses to grow upon such person's premises over 12 inches in height. 
(Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-27. - Contractor debris. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every contractor in the city to use extra diligence in the work and conduct of such contractor's business, so that debris therefrom shall not be allowed to fall, be strewn upon, or accumulate upon the streets, sidewalks, and rights-of-way of the city. 
(b)  In the event debris shall be allowed to fall, be strewn, or accumulate upon the streets or sidewalks, it shall be the duty of such contractor to remove such debris, within 12 hours of such debris being left upon the streets, leaving the street, sidewalks, and rights-of-way in a clean, clear, and uncluttered condition. Failure to do so shall be a violation of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-28. - Junked motor vehicles as nuisance. 
    In the event that a junked motor vehicle falls within the prohibitions provided in this article and article III they shall apply to such junked motor vehicles and to abatements of any nuisances created by such junked motor vehicles. 
(Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Sec. 58-29. - Nuisance abatement. 
(a)  Any owner of property who permits the same to become in a prohibited condition under this article shall be notified in writing by the code enforcement officer to remove the condition within 15 calendar days of the date of such notification. 
(b)  Unless the condition complained of is removed, the city, at the expiration of such 15-calendar-day period shall remove the condition or hire a private contractor to remove the condition. 
(c)  The cost thereof will be charged against the property and the property owner thereof, and it shall constitute a lien on the property. 
(d)  In the event the costs of abating the nuisance are not paid, the execution issuing hereunder shall be issued, enforced, and collected in the same manner as that provided by law for executions for ad valorem taxes due the city. 
(e)  In addition, the creation of a nuisance shall be deemed unlawful. 
(Ord. No. O-06-05-15, 5-18-2006) 
Secs. 58-30-58-46. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - JUNKED VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Authority as to junked motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 

Sec. 58-47. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article, the following terms, phrases and words and their derivation shall have meanings respectfully given herein: 
    Inoperative means not capable of being moved under its own power without additional work or repairs being completed to the motor vehicle or without any additional components being added to or placed upon said motor vehicle. 
    Junked motor vehicle means any motor vehicle, as defined in this article, which does not have, lawfully affixed thereto, both an unexpired license plate and a current license decal, or the condition of such motor vehicle is wrecked, dismantled, partially dismantled, inoperative, abandoned or discarded. 
    Motor vehicle means any vehicle which is or is intended to be self-propelled and designed to travel on the ground and shall include, but shall not be limited to, automobiles, buses, motorbikes, motorcycles, motor scooters, trucks, tractors, go-carts, golf carts, campers and trailer, as well as any part thereof. 
    Police chief means the police chief of the city or the chief's agents. 
    Private property means any real property within the city which is privately owned and which is not public property as defined in this section. 
    Public property means any street or highway, which shall include the entire width between the boundary lines of every publicly maintained way and dedicated to the purposes of vehicular traffic and shall also mean any other publicly owned property or facility. 
(Code 1986, § 12-35; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 58-48. - Declared nuisance. 
    No person shall park, store, leave or permit the parking, storing or leaving of any junked motor vehicle of any kind upon any private property within the city for a period of time in excess of 30 days. The presence of a junked motor vehicle or parts thereof on private property is hereby declared a public nuisance, which may be abated as such in accord with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1986, § 12-36; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995) 
Sec. 58-49. - Exemptions. 
    Those vehicles, which are exempted from the provisions of this article are as follows: 
(1)  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof, which are located on the premises of licensed automobile dealers; 
(2)  Any motor vehicles or parts thereof, which are located on the premises of any licensed junkyard operated in compliance with state and local laws relating to licensing, regulating and zoning of such junkyards; 
(3)  Any motor vehicle enclosed within a building on private property which is not a hazard to public health and which is not an attractive nuisance to children; or 
(4)  Any motor vehicle in operable condition specifically adapted or designed for operation on drag strips or raceways. 
(Code 1986, § 12-37; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995) 
Sec. 58-50. - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever it comes to the attention of the code enforcement officer that any nuisance as defined in this chapter exists in the city, a notice in writing shall be served upon the occupant of the real property where the nuisance exists, upon the owner of the property, and upon the owner of the junked motor vehicle or other property which constitutes such nuisance, notifying them of the existence of the nuisance and directing its removal within 15 days. In the event that such owners cannot be located, or in the event that the address of such owners is unknown, then notice shall be made to the last known address of such owners, or in the event that the identity of such owners cannot be ascertained after due investigations, such notice shall be posted in a prominent location on the premises where the nuisance exists, and upon the junked motor vehicle itself. 
(Code 1986, § 12-38; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 58-51. - Responsibility for removal. 
    Upon such notice, the owner of the junked motor vehicle, and the owner or occupant of the private property upon which the same is located, either, or all of them, shall be responsible for its removal. In the event that such owners fail to remove such vehicle and thereby abate such nuisance within the 15-day time period provided in the notice, the police chief shall be authorized to institute proceedings against such owner or owners in the municipal court of the city pursuant to the ordinances and rules of said court, and such persons shall be notified of the date and time of the hearing scheduled no later than five days prior to the date set for the hearing. Such notice shall be served upon such owner or owners in the same manner as provided in section 14-175. 
(Code 1986, § 12-39; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995; Ord. No. O-00-09-38, 9-21-2000; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-01-06, exh. A, 1-20-2005) 
Sec. 58-52. - Hearing. 
(a)  At the hearing, the court shall determine the owner of the vehicle and whether or not a nuisance exists and, if so, the court shall order abatement of such nuisance and shall impose such penalty or penalties as may be authorized by this section for failure to abate such nuisance. 
(b)  In the event that the court determines that a nuisance exists and abatement thereof is ordered, the court shall be authorized to grant the owner a period of time, not to exceed 15 days, to abate such nuisance. The court shall further include in its order provisions authorizing the city to abate such nuisance if such nuisance is not abated by the owner within the time period for such abatement as ordered by the court. Such order shall also include authority for the city to enter upon the premises upon which the nuisance exists and abate the same, and shall further provide that the cost of abatement of the nuisance incurred by the city shall be assessed against the owner of the premises upon which the nuisance existed. 
(Code 1986, § 12-40; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995) 
Sec. 58-53. - Abatement by the city. 
    In the event that the nuisance is abated by the city pursuant to the authority of the order of the court authorized by this article, the city shall abate the nuisance in the following manner: 
(1)  The city shall hire a wrecker service, or such other service as may be required, to remove the nuisance, and direct that the nuisance be removed to a local licensed junkyard or other similar facility. 
(2)  The wrecker service hired to remove the nuisance shall notify the owner of the property and the owner of the motor vehicle within ten days of removal of the property of the location of the junked motor vehicle and of the cost incurred by the owner in connection with the abatement service. Such cost may include the actual cost of removal of the motor vehicle and storage charges, if applicable, up to and including the date of payment by the owner. 
(3)  In the event that the owner does not pay the charges or otherwise recover the motor vehicle within such time as may be established by the wrecker service or by state law, the wrecker service may be authorized to recover its costs and expenses and dispose of the property in accord with general provisions of state law. 
(Code 1986, § 12-41; Ord. No. O-95-07-26, 7-20-1995) 
Sec. 58-54. - Procedures for purchasing junked vehicles by city. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the city shall be authorized to establish a procedure by which the city can acquire junked motor vehicles, as defined in section 58-47 of the Code, by issuing one-time credits on the city utility bill of the owner of the junked vehicle. Such provisions shall, at a minimum, provide as follows: 
(1)  That the city utilities director, or his designee, shall undertake, on a continuing basis, to locate, examine, and inventory all junked vehicles within the city. Such inventory shall be kept and maintained by the utilities director in his office and at such other location or locations as may be directed by the governing body of the city. 
(2)  With respect to any junked motor vehicle located upon the premises of a single-family or two-family residence, the utilities director shall determine the ownership of such motor vehicle, and such ownership shall be included in the inventory referred to above. 
(3)  The owner of the junked motor vehicle shall be contacted by the utilities director, or his designee, who shall be authorized to purchase the junked motor vehicle from the owner thereof in consideration of a $200.00 credit against the owner's city utility services bill. 
(4)  No such credit shall be provided until ownership of the junked motor vehicle is transferred to the city by certificate of title transfer or by bill of sale in the event that the junked motor vehicle is too old to require a certificate of title transfer. Any written transfer of a junked motor vehicle shall include, as part of the terms thereof, authority from the owner of the premises where the junked motor vehicle is located authorizing the city or its designee, to come upon the property where such junked motor vehicle is located and remove the junked motor vehicle by such means as may be deemed necessary by the city or its designee. 
(5)  Upon acquisition of the ownership of the junked motor vehicle, the utilities director shall be authorized to sell the junked motor vehicle to a recycling company determined by the utilities director to offer the most advantageous terms (financial and otherwise) to the city with respect to such purchase or purchases. Any sale to a recycling company may be made on a vehicle-by-vehicle basis or with respect to the sale of a group of vehicles. No public bidding shall be required for such sale. 
(6)  In the event that the utilities director is required to hire a tow truck company or companies to remove the junked motor vehicles from the premises where they are located, the utilities director shall be authorized to bid out such tow truck services on an annual basis, with the tow truck service being awarded to the lowest responsible bidder or bidders as determined by the utilities director. The utilities director shall also have the authority to terminate any such agreement with a tow truck service at any time due to the failure of the tow truck service to provide such service in a manner acceptable to the city. Notwithstanding the foregoing, nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the utilities director from awarding such bid to more than one tow truck service at a time and to use such tow truck services on a rotating basis as established by the utilities director if such procedure is determined to be in the best interest of the city. 
(b)  The city manager of the city, or her designee, shall be authorized to adopt further rules and regulations to implement and carry out the purposes and intent of this section. 
(Ord. No. O-11-09-18, 9-22-2011; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 58-55-58-80. - Reserved. 
Chapter 62 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 62-1. - Handbills. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to distribute any advertising matter such as handbills to any person not willing to accept it. It shall be unlawful for any person to place any handbill on a motor vehicle. 
Sec. 62-2. - [Novelty lighters; retail sales, gift or distribution prohibited.] 
(a)  Definitions. "Novelty lighter" means a lighter without safety features that has entertaining audio or visual effects or that depicts, by way of logos, decals, or artwork, or resembles, in physical form or function, articles commonly recognized as appealing to or intended for use by children ten years of age or younger. The term includes, but is not necessarily limited to, lighters that depict or resemble cartoon characters, toys, guns, watches, musical instruments, vehicles, toy animals, food, or beverages, or that play musical notes or have flashing lights or other entertaining features. Such a lighter may operate on various fuels including, but not limited to, butane or liquid fuel. 
(b)  Prohibition. The retail sale, donation, gift, transfer or distribution of any novelty lighter within the city limits is prohibited. 
(c)  Penalty. Any person convicted, or pleading guilty or nolo contendere to, a violation of this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Americus. 
(Ord. No. O-08-08-20, 8-21-2008) 
Secs. 62-3-62-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES INVOLVING DAMAGING, DEFACING PROPERTY 

Sec. 62-21. - Generally. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to willfully, maliciously, wantonly, negligently or otherwise damage, deface, destroy, tamper or interfere with, or remove real property or improvements thereto, or movable or personal property belonging to or under supervision or control of the city. 
(Code 1962, § 15-41; Code 1986, § 15-7) 
State Law reference- Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-22. - Writing, etc., on streets; attaching advertising. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to write, print or paint on any of the paved streets or sidewalks in the city or to otherwise use the streets or sidewalks in the city for the purpose of placing thereon any matter of advertising whatsoever. 
(Code 1962, § 20-10; Code 1986, § 15-8) 
State Law reference- Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-23. - Buildings, etc. 
    No person shall cut, scratch, paint, write on, paste on, or in any manner deface the walls, or any portion thereof, of any church, college, school building, academy, depot building, or any other building in this city; nor shall any person wantonly remove, damage or deface any fence, gate, sign or ornament attached to any store or office in the city. 
(Code 1962, § 15-9; Code 1986, § 15-9) 
State Law reference- Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-24. - Trees on public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, deface or destroy any shade tree on public property in the city unless authorized by the city. 
(Code 1962, § 15-46; Code 1986, § 15-10) 
State Law reference- Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-25. - Removing dirt, materials, etc. from public property. 
    It shall be unlawful for any unauthorized person to move, disturb, or remove any earth, stone or other material from any public property. 
(Code 1962, § 15-42; Code 1986, § 15-11) 
State Law reference- Criminal damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-22 et seq. 
Sec. 62-26. - Advertising or posting bills prohibited; exception. 
    No person shall paint, print, post or cause to be posted, any bills or advertisements on any buildings, sheds or fences in this city, unless by consent of the owner or occupant thereof. 
(Code 1962, § 15-2; Code 1986, § 15-13) 
Sec. 62-27. - Refusal to leave premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to idle, loiter, or stand within any public or private building after being requested by the owner or person in charge thereof to leave. 
(Code 1986, § 15-21) 
State Law reference- Refusal to leave premises, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-21(a)(3). 
Sec. 62-28. - Damaging, injuring or interfering with property of public utility companies, or city. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, intentionally and without authority, to damage, injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus belonging to any company, or to the city, engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public services; or intentionally and without authority, to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; or in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company, or the city; or to intentionally divert any services of such company or city; or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of such company or the city any service manufactured, sold or distributed by such entities. 
(b)  Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a) of this section, or proof that a person knowingly received the benefit of such acts, or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) of this section were done on premises in possession of a person, with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facie evidence that such person or persons are responsible for such acts of tampering or diversion. 
(Code 1986, § 15-35; Ord. No. O-87-11-25, 11-23-1987) 
State Law reference- Damaging utility property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
Secs. 62-29-62-57. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC SAFETY 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 62-58. - Leaving wells and excavations open. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner, occupant or person to permit any open well or hazardous excavation to remain or exist on the property under the control of such owner, occupant or person. 
(Code 1962, § 15-27; Code 1986, § 12-2) 
State Law reference- Abandoned hole or well, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14. 
Sec. 62-59. - Iceboxes, refrigerators, etc.; abandonment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to leave outside of any building or dwelling in a place accessible to children any abandoned, unattended or discarded icebox, refrigerator or any container of any kind that has a door, without removing the door from such icebox, refrigerator, or container. 
(Code 1962, § 15-15; Code 1986, § 12-3) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-100. 
Sec. 62-60. - Barbed wire fence adjacent to sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee of real estate in the city to build or maintain any barbed wire fence adjacent to or along any sidewalk in the city, or so near thereto as to endanger any person using such sidewalk. 
(Code 1962, § 20-12; Code 1986, § 12-4) 
Sec. 62-61. - Obstruction of railroad tracks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to place on any railroad track in this city, any stone, timber, brush, iron, or any other article or thing, with the intention of derailing, obstructing or retarding the cars while in motion, or to injure or damage any track, wire, motor, locomotive, car or any other appliance of said railroads. 
(Code 1962, § 18-5; Code 1986, § 20-22) 
Secs. 62-62-62-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - WEAPONS 

Sec. 62-81. - Knives, razors and ice picks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to have, possess, or carry upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or in any public place in the city any of the following implements unless same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of, which when open projects from the handle more than three inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives and/or knives, which do not close and any type knife with the blade open. 
(4)  Any razor or razor blade. 
(5)  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point. 
(Code 1962, § 15-48; Code 1986, § 15-31) 
Sec. 62-82. - Discharging firearm in city; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the corporate limits of the city except in defense of person or property. This section shall not apply to authorized officers of the law. This section shall not apply to persons acting as official starters for track meets being held in the city. 
(Code 1962, § 15-49; Code 1986, § 15-32) 
Sec. 62-83. - Bow and arrow; air and pressure rifles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use, discharge or shoot any air rifle, or guns discharged by forcing of air, gas, pressure or any other manner, or bow and arrow in the city. 
(Code 1962, § 15-50; Code 1986, § 15-34) 
Secs. 62-84-62-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC PEACE AND ORDER 

Sec. 62-110. - Loud and unnecessary noises-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue, or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the city. 
(Code 1962, § 15-20; Code 1986, § 12-5) 
Sec. 62-111. - Same-Acts enumerated. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this Code, but said enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle, or any other vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creating by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; and the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; or the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, or other machine or device for the purpose of producing or reproducing sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with more volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling, or singing on public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. or at any time so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or any persons in the vicinity. 
(4)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird that by causing frequent or long continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(6)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine or motorboat or any other motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(7)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle, or other vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such a manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(8)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creating of a loud and excessive noise in connection with the loading or unloading of a vehicle or the opening or destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(9)  Construction or repairing of building. The erection, including excavation, demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety and then only with a permit from the building official, which permit may be granted for a period of not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building inspector should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if such official shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, such official may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(10)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, court or church, while many of the same is in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institutions, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(11)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of wares, ringing bells or use of other noise making device by peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(12)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale, except parcels, etc., authorized by proper authorities. 
(13)  Metal, rails, pillars and columns, transportation. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material, over and along the streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, or trucks, which in any way disturbs the peace and quiet of persons in such streets or public places. 
(14)  Railroad operation. The causing, permitting or continuing any excessive, unnecessary and avoidable noise in the operation of a railroad locomotive or cars. 
(15)  Piledrivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steamshovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliances, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of the operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Code 1962, § 15-21; Code 1986, § 12-6) 
Sec. 62-112. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to disturb or endanger the public peace or decency by any disorderly conduct. 
(b)  The following acts, among others, are declared to be disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Use of obscene, abusive or profane language that is reasonably foreseeable to provoke an immediate breach of the peace. 
(2)  Making of any threats of violence to or against any other person. 
(3)  Being noisy and disorderly in or upon any street or other public place in the city. 
(4)  Making any indecent or immoral exposure of the person. 
(5)  The reckless and dangerous use of dangerous weapons. 
(6)  Engaging in, promoting, encouraging, aiding or abetting any fight, riot, or noisy and disorderly proceeding on any street or public place, or in any private building or dwelling when persons residing in the vicinity are disturbed. 
(7)  Assault and battery upon any person on any street or public place, or in any private building or dwelling when persons residing in the vicinity are disturbed. 
(Code 1986, § 15-15) 
State Law reference- Indecent exposure, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-8; assault, O.C.G.A. § 16-5-20 et seq. 
Sec. 62-113. - Maintaining a disorderly house. 
    A person who keeps and maintains, either by such person's self or others, a common, ill-governed, and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens, is guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1962, § 15-7; Code 1986, § 15-16) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-44. 
Sec. 62-114. - Loitering-Generally. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to congregate with another or others in or on any public way or in any parking lot or shopping center so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuse to clear that public way or parking lot or shopping center when ordered by the city police or other lawful authority. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter in such a manner as to cause a breach of the peace, disturbance, or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person, or to obstruct free passage of pedestrians or vehicles, or to obstruct, molest or interfere with any person lawfully in any public place by conduct, including the making of unsolicited remarks of any offensive, disgusting or insulting nature, or which are calculated to annoy and disturb persons in whose hearing they are made, under circumstances that warrant alarm for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(Code 1962, §§ 15-18, 20-6; Code 1986, § 15-19) 
Sec. 62-115. - Same-Near schools. 
    No person shall loiter at or near any public school in this city, or engage by conversation, sign or otherwise, the attention of any of the pupils at said school to the disturbance of the same, or to the detriment of the discipline of such school. 
(Code 1962, § 15-19; Code 1986, § 15-20) 
State Law reference- Trespass on school property, O.C.G.A. § 20-2-1180. 
Sec. 62-116. - Public intoxication; use of drugs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be intoxicated or under the influence of any narcotic, narcotic derivative, stimulant, depressant, hallucinogenic or other type drug or medicine, now or hereafter controlled by state law, or any other intoxicant-type material not prescribed and administered according to state law; to inject or administer orally any narcotic, narcotic derivative, stimulant, depressant, hallucinogenic or other type drug or medicine controlled by state law, or not prescribed and administered according to law, or to take or use any other intoxicant-type materials not according to law upon the streets, lanes, roads and alleys in the city or in any motor vehicle, house, premises, building or enclosure in the city. 
(Code 1962, § 15-6; Code 1986, § 3-7) 
State Law reference- Public intoxication, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-41. 
Sec. 62-117. - Obstruction of streets, etc.-Prohibitions, exceptions. 
    No person shall obstruct any public street or sidewalk for the purpose of selling, vending, showing or disposing of wares and merchandise, or of delivering the same; nor shall an assembly of persons, as bidders be assembled for the purpose of bidding for the same so as to obstruct free passage on the sidewalks or streets of the city, except that the foregoing shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  The selling, vending, or offering for sale of fresh produce to the general public by the following persons: 
a.  The producer of such fresh produce; or 
b.  The owner of an existing and duly licensed business, who has purchased such fresh produce directly from the producer. 
This exception shall not apply to anyone who has a regular place of business where produce is or could be sold as a normal part of such business. 
(2)  The selling, vending, or offering for sale of fresh flowers, plants, and similar products to the general public. 
(3)  The selling, vending, or offering for sale of newspapers via the placement of self-service newspaper boxes on the city sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to any business premises. 
(4)  The owner or operator of any business authorized to place products on the city sidewalk for sale under the provisions of this article shall place said products not more than 36 inches from the facade of such owner's or operator's business premises on the city sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to said owner's or operator's business premises. 
(Code 1962, § 20-5; Code 1986, § 15-25; Ord. No. O-99-05-18, 5-20-1999) 
Sec. 62-118. - Same-Delivery of goods. 
    No person shall deposit, place or put, or cause to be deposited, placed or put any vehicles, of any description or any goods, wares, wood, boxes, barrels, casks, logs, or other obstructions in or upon any street, alley or sidewalk of the city, so as to obstruct the free passage and use of the same; provided, this section shall not be construed as to prohibit the use of the streets, alleys and sidewalks for the necessary reception and delivery of any wood, goods, wares, or merchandise or to prevent workers employed in building or doing other necessary work, who have permission therefor, from depositing lumber, brick, mortar, and other building material and remains of old buildings on the streets, alleys and sidewalks contiguous thereto; but said workers shall obstruct the same as little as possible and remove said materials as soon as it can be done consistently with the prosecution of the work in which they are engaged; and shall remove such obstruction whenever required to do so by the city council. 
(Code 1962, § 20-7; Code 1986, § 15-26) 
Sec. 62-119. - Public urination. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to urinate in a public place which is not set aside or established as a place for urination by the local governmental entity or by the owner of the premises where the public urination occurs. 
(b)  A person committing a violation of this section shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-3, 2-21-2013) 
Secs. 62-120-62-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC MORALS 

Sec. 62-150. - Prostitution. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit an act of prostitution or to keep a place of prostitution. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of prostitution when such person performs or offers or consents to perform an act of sexual intercourse for money. 
(c)  A person having or exercising control over the use of any place or conveyance that would offer seclusion or shelter for the practice of prostitution commits the offense of keeping a place of prostitution when such person knowingly grants or permits the use of such place for prostitution. 
(Code 1962, §§ 15-38-15-40; Code 1986, § 15-17) 
State Law reference- Prostitution, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-9 et seq. 
Sec. 62-151. - Peeping Toms. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to lurk about the premises or near the private habitations of other persons, or to enter upon the private premises of another to spy or look into the houses or buildings used for residential purposes. 
(Code 1962, § 15-28; Code 1986, § 15-18) 
State Law reference- Peeping Toms, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-61. 
Sec. 62-152. - Syringes, etc., for illegal administration of drugs; illegal possession of certain drugs. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Apothecary means a license pharmacist as defined by the laws of this state and, where the context so requires, the owner of a store or other place of business where narcotic drugs are compounded or dispensed by a licensed pharmacist; but nothing in this section shall be construed as conferring on a person who is not registered nor licensed as a pharmacist any authority, right or privilege that is not granted to him by the pharmacy laws of this state. 
    Cocoa leaves means and includes cocaine and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture, or preparation of cocoa leaves, except derivatives of cocoa leaves, which do not contain cocaine, ecgonine, or substances from which cocaine or ecgonine may be synthesized or made. 
    Dentist means a person authorized by law to practice dentistry in this state. 
    Drugs means coca leaves, opium, isonipecaine, marijuana, and every other substance neither chemically nor physically distinguishable from them and any other drugs to which the federal laws relating to narcotic drugs may now apply; and any drug found by the state board of pharmacy to have an addiction-forming or addiction-sustaining liability similar to morphine or cocaine; Methylphenidate HCl (Ritalin); Phencyclidine HCl (PCP); Methylbenzilate; Diethyltryphtamine (DET); N-Methyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCl (LBJ, JB-336); N-Ethyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCl (JB-318); Benactylzine HCl (DMZ); 3, 4-Methylendedioxy amphetamine HCl (STP, DOM); Dipropyltryptamine (RTP); Chlordiazepoxide (Librium); Asmadore; any drug, which under the Federal Food, Drug and Cosmetic Act (52 Stat. 1040 (1938)), 21 USC 301; or under any law of this state may be dispensed only upon prescription; any drug which the state board of pharmacy shall determine to be dangerous or detrimental to the public health when taken in accordance to directions. 
    Hospital means an institution for the care and treatment of the sick and injured approved by the state board of pharmacy as proper to be intrusted with the custody of narcotic drugs and the professional use of narcotic drugs under the direction of a physician, dentist, or veterinarian. 
    Marijuana means all parts of the plant Cannabis sativa L., whether growing or not; the seeds thereof; the resin extracted from any part of such plant; and every compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such plant, its seeds, or resin; but shall not include the mature stalks of such plant, fiber produced from such stalks, oil or cake made from the seeds of such plants, any other compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of such mature stalks, (except the resin extracted therefrom), fiber, oil, cake, or the sterilized seed of such plant which is incapable of germination. 
    Opium includes morphine, codeine, and heroin, and any compound, manufacture, salt, derivative, mixture or preparation of opium, but does not include apomorphine or any part of its salts. 
    Physician means a person authorized to practice medicine in this state and any other person authorized by law to treat sick and injured human beings in this state and to use narcotic drugs in connection with such treatment. Osteopaths who are authorized to secure a federal narcotic permit as allowed physicians and other persons. Provided, however, osteopaths shall be allowed to purchase, prescribe, dispense and administer, for the alleviation of pain only, certain narcotic drugs, to wit: those narcotic drugs or their derivative, the sale or dispensing of which is regulated by the federal act known as the "Harrison Narcotic Act," as amended, said act being set out in the 26 USCA, Internal Revenue Code, section 3220 et seq. 
    Veterinarian means a person authorized by law to practice veterinary medicine in this state. 
(b)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to possess any apparatus, device or instrument for the unauthorized use of drugs. Use shall not be unauthorized if authorized by a physician, dentist, veterinarian or hospital. 
(c)  Handling medical syringes and needles. All hypodermic syringes and hypodermic needles must be destroyed when no longer in use for medical purposes, and it shall be unlawful not to destroy same. Hypodermic needles shall be broken off from the hub, glass hypodermic syringes shall be broken, and disposable hypodermic syringes shall be incinerated. 
(d)  Selling, possessing, buying. It shall be unlawful for any person, except a dealer in surgical instruments, physician, apothecary, dentist, veterinarian or nurse, attendant or intern of a hospital, sanatorium, or institution in which persons are treated for disability or disease, at any time to have, possess, or buy a hypodermic needle or hypodermic syringe unless said possession, or purchase be authorized by the prescription or the certificate of a physician, dentist or veterinarian. It shall be unlawful to sell a hypodermic needle or hypodermic syringe unless such sale is authorized by prescription or a certificate of a physician, dentist or veterinarian and the prescription or certificate is not to be refilled or renewed unless authorized by the prescriber. 
(e)  Specific drugs. Except as authorized by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to possess drugs known as: 
(1)  Methylphenidate HCl (Ritalin) 
Phencyclidine HCl (PCP) 
Methylbenzilate 
Diethyltryptamine (DET) 
N-Methyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCl (1BJ, JB-336) 
N-Ethyl-3-piperdyl Benzilate HCl (JB-318) 
Benactylzine HCl (DMZ) 
3, 4-Methylenedioxy amphetamine HCl (MDA) 
4-Methyl-2, 5-dimethoxyamphetamine HCl (STP, DOM) 
Dipropyltryptamine (DPT) 
Chlordiazepoxide (Librium) 
Asmadore 
(2)  Any drug which the state board of pharmacy shall determine to be dangerous or detrimental to the public health when taken in accordance to directions, unless: 
a.  Such drug was obtained upon a valid prescription and is held in the original container in which such drug was delivered; or 
b.  Such drug was delivered by a practitioner in the course of his professional practice and the drug is held in the immediate container in which said drug was delivered. 
(Code 1962, § 15-51; Code 1986, § 15-27) 
State Law reference- Drug laws, O.C.G.A. § 16-13-1 et seq. 
Sec. 62-153. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-01-01, adopted Jan. 19, 2012, deleted § 62-153, entitled "Gambling", which derived from: Code 1962, § 15-14; and Code 1986, § 15-28. See § 62-241 for similar provisions. 
Secs. 62-154-62-172. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - OFFENSES INVOLVING UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 62-173. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Custodian means any person over the age of 21 years who is in loco parentis to a minor. 
    Guardian means any person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a minor. 
    Minor means any person under the age of 18 years. 
    Parent means the natural or adoptive parent of a minor. 
    Public place means any street, alley, highway, sidewalk, park, playground, or place where the general public has access and a right to resort for business, entertainment, or other lawful purpose. The term "public place" shall include, but shall not be limited to, a store, shop, restaurant, tavern, cafe, theater, drugstore, poolroom, shopping center, and any other place or location devoted to amusement or entertainment of the general public. It shall also include the front or immediate area of any of the above. 
(b)  Applicable hours. It shall be unlawful for any minor to remain, idle, wander, stroll, or play in any public place either on foot or to cruise about without a set destination in a vehicle, in, about or upon any place in the city between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Sunday through Thursday and between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Friday through Saturday. 
(c)  Exceptions. It is a defense to prosecution under this subsection that the minor was: 
(1)  Accompanied by the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian; 
(2)  On an errand at the direction of the minor's parent or guardian or an adult designated by the minor's parent or guardian, without any detour or stop; 
(3)  In a motor vehicle involved in interstate travel; 
(4)  Engaged in an employment activity, or going to or returning home from an employment activity, without any detour or stop; 
(5)  Involved in an emergency. In this subsection the term "emergency" means an unforeseen combination of circumstances or the resulting state that calls for immediate action. The term includes, but is not limited to, a fire, a natural disaster, or automobile accident, or any situation requiring immediate action to prevent serious bodily injury or loss of life; 
(6)  Attending an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor, or going to or returning home from, without any detour or stop, an official school, religious, or other recreational activity supervised by adults and sponsored by the township, a civic organization, or another similar entity that takes responsibility for the minor; 
(7)  Exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech, and the right of assembly; or 
(8)  Married or had been married or had disabilities of minority removed in accordance with law. 
(d)  Business compliance required. It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation operating or having charge of any public place to knowingly permit, encourage or allow the presence of minors under the age of 18 between the hours of 12:01 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Sunday through Thursday or between the hours of 1:00 a.m. and 5:30 a.m. Friday through Saturday in violation of subsection (b) of this section. 
(e)  Parental or guardian responsible. It shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having custody or control of any minor under the age of 18 years of age to knowingly permit or by inefficient control allow such minor to be on the streets or sidewalks or on or in any public property or public place between the hours on the days set out in violation of subsection (b) of this section. 
(f)  Procedure upon violation. The following procedures shall be followed in connection with a violation of this section: 
(1)  Any police officer, upon finding a minor in violation of subsection (b) of this section, shall ascertain the name and address of such minor and then warn the minor that he or she is in violation of curfew and shall direct the minor to proceed at once to his home or usual place of abode. The police officer shall report the action to the chief of the city police department, who, in turn, shall notify the parents, guardian or person having custody or control of such minor. 
(2)  If such minor refuses to heed the warning or direction issued by a police officer, or refuses to give such police officer his correct name and address, or if the minor had been warned on a previous occasion that he or she is in violation of curfew, he or she shall be taken to the city police department and the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of such minor shall be notified to come and take charge of the minor. If the parent, guardian or other adult person above cannot be located or fails to come and take charge of the minor, the minor shall be released to the custody of juvenile authorities. 
(g)  Penalties. Each violation of this section shall constitute a separate offense. Any minor violating this section shall be dealt with in accordance with the juvenile court law of this state and procedures authorized by said law. In the event that any minor violates this section and such minor is not specifically covered or dealt with by the juvenile court law of this state, such minor shall be subject, after having been charged with the same and found guilty in the municipal court of the city, to punishment as provided in section 1-8. Any parent, guardian, or other adult person having legal care and custody of a minor and who permits said minor to violate this section shall be subject, after having been charged with the same and found guilty in the municipal court of the city, to punishment as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1962, § 15-5; Code 1986, § 15-22; Ord. No. O-94-01-02, 1-25-1994) 
Sec. 62-174. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-12-01-01, adopted Jan. 19, 2012, deleted § 62-174, entitled "Minors frequenting gambling houses", which derived from: Code 1962, § 15-22; and Code 1986, § 15-24. See § 62-242 for similar provisions. 
Sec. 62-175. - Truancy. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Custodian means any person over the age of 21 years who is in loco parentis to a minor. 
Guardian means a person other than a parent who has legal guardianship of a minor. 
Minor means a child between the ages of such child's seventh and 16th birthday who is required by Georgia law to enroll or be enrolled in a public school, a private school, or a home study program. 
Parent means the natural or adoptive parent of a minor. 
Public place means any street, highway, alley or right-of-way, including sidewalks, any park, playground, shopping center, or other place or building open to the public; any cemetery, school yard, body of water or watercourse; any privately or publicly owned place of amusement, entertainment, or combination, including parking lots and other areas adjacent thereto; and any vacant lot or land. 
(b)  Prohibited; exceptions. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any minor between the ages of seven years and 16 years to loiter, wander, stroll, or play in and upon public streets, highways, road, alleys, parks, playgrounds, or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots, or any other public place between the hours of 8:30 a.m. and 2:30 p.m. on any school day when school is in session; provided, however, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following circumstances: 
a.  When the minor is accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
b.  When the minor is upon an emergency errand directed by his parent, guardian, or other adult person 21 years of age or older having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
c.  When the minor is returning directly home from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced place during the prescribed period of time; 
d.  When the minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent for normal travel with interstate and intrastate travel through the city being excepted in all cases from this section; 
e.  When the minor is enrolled in a valid home study program as authorized by the O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690; 
f.  When the minor has completed all course study requirements for high school graduation; 
g.  When the minor is married in accordance with applicable law; 
h.  When the minor has written proof from school authorities that he is excused from school attendance at that particular time; or 
i.  When the minor is participating in an approved school or study activity, which requires the minor to be off school property. 
(2)  Any minor who violates this section is subject to the jurisdiction of the juvenile court, or any other court having jurisdiction of such minor, under O.C.G.A. title 11, ch. 15 (O.C.G.A. § 11-15-1 et seq.). 
(3)  The provisions of this section shall also be applicable to a minor who has been suspended or expelled from school. 
(c)  Parent or guardian responsible. 
(1)  No parent or guardian of a minor between the ages of seven years and 16 years shall allow a minor to violate subsection (b) of this section. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, it shall be a defense for the person charged with such offense if the parent or legal guardian has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court as to the minor violating subsection (b) of this section prior to the time that such minor violated such subsection. 
(d)  Suspension or expulsion from school. 
(1)  In addition to the other provisions of this section, if a minor has been suspended or expelled from school, the parent or legal guardian of that minor, for the duration of the suspension or expulsion, shall: 
a.  Personally supervise the minor or arrange for a responsible adult 21 years of age or older to supervise the minor at the times that the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he not been expelled or suspended; and 
b.  Prohibit the minor from being in any public place at the times the minor would have been required to be in attendance at school had he not been suspended or expelled unless: 
1.  The minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian or responsible adult 21 years of age or older, selected by the parent or legal guardian to supervise the minor; or 
2.  The minor is employed pursuant to an age or schooling certificate during the actual working hours or traveling directly to or from his job site. 
(2)  Upon conviction of a violation of this section, such convicted person shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(3)  It shall be a defense for the person charged with such offense if the parent or legal guardian has invoked the jurisdiction of the juvenile court as to the minor violating this section at the time that such minor violated this section. 
(e)  Police may assume temporary custody if minor found in violation. 
(1)  A police officer may assume temporary custody during school hours of any child subject to compulsory school attendance who is found violating the provisions of this section or who is absent from a public or private school or a home study program without a valid written excuse from school officials or from the parent or legal guardian in charge of the home study program. 
(2)  Any police officer assuming temporary custody of a child pursuant to this subsection, or pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 20-2-698, shall immediately deliver such minor to the parent, legal guardian, or other person having control or charge of such minor, or to the school from which such minor is absent, or if the child is found to have been adjudged a delinquent or unruly, such police officer shall cause the child to be brought before the probation officer of the county having jurisdiction over the child. 
(Code 1986, § 15-36; Ord. No. O-96-10-46, 10-24-1996) 
Secs. 62-176-62-203. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - OFFENSES INVOLVING PUBLIC AUTHORITY 

Sec. 62-204. - Resisting police; obstruction; following. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resist any member of the police department, or any other person duly empowered with police authority, while in the discharge or apparent discharge of official duty, or in any way interfere with, obstruct or hinder such officer or other person in the discharge of official duty. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to follow any police officer, while in charge of any prisoner, after such person has been commanded to desist such following, or after any crowd has been commanded to disperse. 
(Code 1962, § 15-33; Code 1986, § 15-1) 
State Law reference- Obstruction of law enforcement officers, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24; refusal to disperse, O.C.G.A. § 16-20-30. 
Sec. 62-205. - Compliance with orders and directions. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order or direction of a police officer of the city. 
(Code 1962, § 15-35.1; Code 1986, § 15-3) 
State Law reference- Refusal to obey official request, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-30. 
Sec. 62-206. - Impersonating; badges. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to wear or carry the uniform, apparel, badge, identification card or any other insignia of office, like or similar to, or a colorable imitation of that adopted and worn or carried by the official police officers of the city, unless such person is an official officer of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession a police badge of the city except the official police badge. 
(Code 1962, §§ 15-31, 15-32, 15-34; Code 1986, § 15-5) 
State Law reference- Impersonating an officer, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23. 
Sec. 62-207. - Prisoners; escapes. 
(a)  Furnishing tools, etc. No person shall make available to, present, or place within the reach of, any person confined under authority of the city any tool, implement, or other thing calculated to aid in the escape of such person so confined or any other person confined under the authority of the city or confined by police officers of the city. 
(b)  Aiding escapee. No person shall assist or aid, or attempt to assist or aid any person in the custody of or confined under the authority of the city, to escape from jail, place of confinement, or custody. 
(c)  Attempts by those in custody or confinement. No person while a prisoner in the city jail, or in any other place where prisoners are confined, or otherwise in custody of and confined by the city or police officer of the city, shall escape or attempt to escape or to assist others to escape or attempt to escape from such custody or confinement. 
(Code 1962, § 15-37; Code 1986, § 15-6) 
State Law reference- Escapes, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-52. 
Sec. 62-208. - False alarm made to police or ambulance. 
    No person shall intentionally make, turn in, or give a false alarm by phone, in person or in any other manner, the need for police or ambulance assistance, or aid or abet in the commission of such false reporting. 
(Code 1962, § 15-11; Code 1986, § 15-29) 
State Law reference- False alarms and reports, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26 et seq. 
Sec. 62-209. - False reports of crimes. 
    No person within the city shall make to, or file with, the police department of the city or any police officer of the city any false, misleading, or unfounded statement, or report concerning the commission or alleged commission of any ordinance or law violation occurring within the city. 
(Code 1962, § 15-12; Code 1986, § 15-30) 
State Law reference- False alarms and reports, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-26 et seq. 
Secs. 62-210-62-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - GAMBLING; AMUSEMENT GAME ROOMS AND COIN-OPERATED AMUSEMENT DEVICE REGULATIONS 

Sec. 62-241. - Gambling. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to set up, promote or play at any game of chance by lot or with dice, cards, numbers, hazards or any other gambling device whatever for the disposal of money or other thing of value or under the pretext of a sale, gift or delivery thereof, or for any right, share or interest therein. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
State Law reference- Gambling, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20 et seq. 
Sec. 62-242. - Minors frequenting gambling houses. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor to visit a gambling room. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Secs. 62-243, 62-244. - Reserved. 
Sec. 62-245. - Gambling devices prohibited. 
    Gambling devices, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(2) are prohibited in the City of Americus, and the ownership, use, or transport thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law, except as exempted pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(a)-(i). 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-246. - Gambling places prohibited. 
    Gambling places, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-20(3) are prohibited in the City of Americus, and the operation thereof shall be a misdemeanor pursuant to state law. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-247. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, or phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Amusement game room means any location as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(b), (c), or (d) where one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machines are operated that permit noncash redemption as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(d)(1)(B), (C), or a combination thereof. 
    Bona fide coin-operated amusement machine means the same as this term is defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-17-1(2)(A) and (B) and any applicable regulations of the State of Georgia. Examples of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines include, but are expressly not limited to the following: 
(1)  Pinball machines; 
(2)  Console machines; 
(3)  Video games; 
(4)  Crane machines; 
(5)  Claw machines; 
(6)  Pusher machines; 
(7)  Bowling machines; 
(8)  Novelty arcade games; 
(9)  Foosball or table soccer machines; 
(10)  Miniature racetrack, football or golf machines; 
(11)  Target or shooting gallery machines; 
(12)  Basketball machines; 
(13)  Shuffleboard machines; 
(14)  Kiddie ride games; 
(15)  Skeeball machines; 
(16)  Air hockey machines; 
(17)  Roll down machines; 
(18)  Coin-operated pool table or coin-operated billiard table as defined in O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1(3); and 
(19)  Any other similar amusement machine which can be legally operated in Georgia. 
The term "coin-operated amusement machine" does not include the following: 
(1)  Coin-operated washing machines or dryers; 
(2)  Vending machines which for payment of money dispense products or services; 
(3)  Gas and electric meters; 
(4)  Pay telephones; 
(5)  Pay toilets; 
(6)  Cigarette vending machines; 
(7)  Coin-operated vending machines; 
(8)  Coin-operated scales; 
(9)  Coin-operated gumball machines; 
(10)  Coin-operated television sets which provide cable or network programming; 
(11)  Coin-operated massage beds; and 
(12)  Machines which are not legally permitted to be operated in Georgia. 
    City means the City of Americus. 
    Location means a business within the City of Americus that has complied with the provisions of the ordinances of the city relating to occupation taxes and business licenses. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-248. - License required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city without first having obtained a license from the city and without first having paid the applicable occupation tax required under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-249. - Issuance of license. 
(a)  Application for a license for operating an amusement game room within the corporate limits of the city shall be made to the city clerk upon a form to be supplied by the city clerk for this purpose. The license application shall include the following information: 
(1)  Name, address and age of the applicant and the date of the application; 
(2)  Address or place where the bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or machines are to be offered to the public for play and the other business or businesses operated at that place or places; 
(3)  Name and address of the owner of the machine or machines and a copy of the owner's master license; 
(4)  Name and address of any other business owned or operated by applicant within the corporate limits of the city; 
(5)  List of any other licenses or permits from the city held by the applicant. 
(b)  Upon issuing a license for an amusement game room, the city official or employee shall provide the licensee with a copy of the ordinance from which this article derives. The city shall not require a fee for licensure or registration of an amusement game room. A license issued in accordance with this article shall be valid until December 31st of the year in which the license was issued. The owner or operator of an amusement game room shall be required to pay occupation taxes in accordance with chapter 46 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(c)  Any person or entity operating an amusement game room on or after January 1st of any year shall be obligated to obtain all licenses and permits required hereunder and shall be subject to all of the provisions hereof. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-250. - Occupation tax required. 
    No person, firm or corporation shall engage in the business of an owner or proprietor of amusement game room, as the term is herein defined, without first having completed the occupation tax certificate form, paid the required occupational tax, and without first having obtained the license required under this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-251. - Distance. 
(a)  No license for operating an amusement game room, required by the provisions of this article, shall be issued for a location within 300 feet of a location in which a license for operating an amusement game room is in effect. 
(b)  No license for operating an amusement game room, required by the provisions of this article, shall be issued for a location within 200 yards of any of the following: 
(1)  Church buildings; 
(2)  School buildings or educational buildings; 
(3)  School grounds; 
(4)  College campuses; 
(5)  Alcoholic treatment centers that are owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein; or 
(6)  Housing authority property. 
(c)  As used in this section, the term "school building(s)" or "educational building(s)" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state, and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
(d)  For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. For purposes of calculating such measurement, the following method shall be used: 
(1)  In a straight line from the front door of the location seeking a license for operating an amusement game room to the nearest property line of the location listed in subsection (b), supra. 
(2)  All renewal applications shall use the measurements required in the initial application and license. 
(e)  After a hearing, the city council may waive the applicability of this section to an individual location if no alcohol is served or sold at such location. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-252. - Number of bona fide coin-operated amusement machines at a location. 
    No amusement game room in the city shall offer to the public more than nine bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering noncash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2), or both at the same location. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-253. - Gross receipts from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines and from business. 
    Every amusement game room shall keep records available for inspection by city officials that account separately annual gross receipts for the amusement games and the other products and services sold at the location. Income from bona fide coin-operated amusement machines offering noncash redemption in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 16-12-35(c) and (d)(1)(2) shall not constitute more than 50 percent of the income from the location. Compliance with this section requires both the availability of records for inspection and compliance with the 50 percent of income requirement. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-254. - Notice requirements. 
(a)  Every amusement game room shall post a conspicuous sign with the following or similar words: 
 "GEORGIA LAW PROHIBITS GIVING OR RECEIPT OF ANY MONEY FOR WINNING A GAME OR GAMES ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR FREE REPLAYS WON ON AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE; GIVING OR RECEIPT OF MONEY FOR ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY WON ON ANY AMUSEMENT MACHINE; OR AWARDING ANY MERCHANDISE, PRIZE, TOY, GIFT CERTIFICATE, OR NOVELTY OF A VALUE EXCEEDING $5.00 FOR A SINGLE PLAY OF AN AMUSEMENT MACHINE." 
(b)  Every amusement game room shall post the license issued by the city conspicuously and permanently. 
(c)  The owner or proprietor of each amusement game room shall inform every employee of the acts and omissions prohibited by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and by this article, and of the penalties for violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-35 and this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-255. - Compliance with O.C.G.A. provisions relating to master licenses, location licenses, and stickers for individual machines. 
    Bona fide coin-operated amusement machines may be used in an amusement game room within the city only if the machines are owned by a person who holds a valid master license issued by the State of Georgia in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2, and each machine offered to the public for play has a valid permit sticker in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9. In addition, the business owner where the machines are available for play by the public must pay a location license fee in order to obtain a valid location license in accordance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-17-2(a.1) and (b). The city official in charge of issuing business licenses shall notify the state revenue commissioner of any observed violation of O.C.G.A. § 48-17-2 or O.C.G.A. § 48-17-9. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-256. - Penalties for violations by owners or operators of amusement game rooms. 
(a)  Penalties for violation of the provisions of this article by the owner or operator of an amusement game room, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, are as follows: 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for operating an amusement game room at the location for not more than three months, or both. 
(2)  Second offense: Fine not to exceed $750.00 for each violation, suspension of the owner or operator's license for operating an amusement game room at the location for not more than six months, or both. 
(3)  Third offense: Fine not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation, suspension or permanent revocation of the owner or operator's license for operating an amusement game room at the location, or suspension of other permits and licenses granted by the city for the remainder of the calendar year, or both. 
(b)  The penalties for violation of the ordinance from which this article derives may be imposed by the judge of the municipal court of the city. 
(c)  Offering one or more bona fide coin-operated amusement machine games in violation of an order suspending or revoking the license for operating an amusement game room at the location is punishable, after conviction in the municipal court of the city, by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-257. - Penalties for violations by those who play bona fide coin-operated machines in violation of law or ordinance. 
    The municipal court of the city is authorized to impose the following penalties on any person convicted of receiving money as a reward for the successful play or winning of any bona fide coin-operated amusement machine from any person owning, possessing, controlling, or overseeing such bona fide coin-operated amusement machine or any person employed by or acting on behalf of a person owning, possessing, controlling, or overseeing a bona fide coin-operated amusement machine. 
(1)  First offense: Fine not to exceed $250.00 for each violation. 
(2)  Second and subsequent offenses: Fine not to exceed $500.00 for each violation, imprisonment not to exceed 60 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-258. - Operating regulations. 
    Each business operating as an amusement game room hereunder shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  Devices to be kept in plain view; gambling devices prohibited. All machines shall at all times be kept and placed in plain view of and open and accessible to any person(s) who may frequent or be in any place of business where such machines are kept or used. Nothing in this section shall be construed to authorize, permit, or license any gambling device of any nature whatsoever. 
(2)  Inspection. The chief of police shall inspect or cause the inspection of any place or building in which any such machine(s) are operated or set up for operating, and shall inspect, investigate, and test such machines as needed. 
(3)  Attendant required. It shall be unlawful for any proprietor to open his business to the public unless an attendant is present. Said attendant shall be of sufficient mental and physical capacity so as to be able to provide aid to patrons if needed or desired. Said attendant shall not be less than 18 years of age. 
(4)  Loitering. As used in this section, "loitering" shall mean remaining idle in essentially one location and shall include the concepts of spending time idly, loafing, or walking about aimlessly, and it shall be unlawful for any person, firm, or corporation licensed to operate an amusement game room to permit loitering on or in the immediate vicinity of any machine or business premises regulated hereunder in such a manner as to: 
a.  Create or cause to be created a danger or a breach of the peace; 
b.  Create or cause to be created any disturbance or annoyance to the comfort and repose of any person; 
c.  Obstruct the free passage of pedestrians or vehicles; 
d.  Obstruct, molest, or interfere with any person lawfully in a public place. 
(5)  Shirt and shoes required. All proprietors shall require shirts and shoes to be worn at all times by any person frequenting their premises. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-259. - Revocation of license. 
    In the event that it comes to the attention of the governing body of the city that an amusement game room has created a nuisance to the surrounding community or the operator or proprietor has violated any provision of this section, the following procedure will be followed: 
(1)  The city clerk shall issue a notice of objection which shall include the address of the location and the specific reasons why the amusement game room in question is alleged to be a nuisance or alleged to be in violation of any provision of this section. The city clerk will then notify the proprietor that a notice of objection has been filed and will set a date for a hearing before the mayor and city council. Extensions of the date of hearing shall be as agreed upon between the city and the proprietor. 
(2)  At the time of the hearing, any resident, the operator, the proprietor and the city clerk or other witnesses may be heard. Thereafter, the mayor and city council shall issue a notice of decision which will call for the dismissal of the objection, removal of the machines, or such other remedy as they deem appropriate under the circumstances that are consistent with the purpose of this article. The formal rules of evidence shall not apply at such hearing, and the proprietor may be represented by legal counsel and such hearing. All parties shall have the right to present and cross-examine witnesses. 
(3)  The decision of the mayor and city council shall be in writing and shall state the reasons for their decision. 
(4)  The decision of the mayor and city council shall be binding upon the proprietor and operator of the amusement game room under consideration, subject to appeal by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Sumter County. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-260. - Licenses and permits nontransferable. 
(a)  Licenses required in this article are nontransferable. All businesses that have bona fide coin-operated amusement machines on the premises shall display, in plain view, the current license issued by the city. Each separate amusement game room location shall require a separate license and applicable permits from the city. 
(b)  The issued license shall not be transferred to another owner at the same site within the city. A new owner or proprietor must first obtain a new license to operate an amusement game room at any location or locations in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Sec. 62-261. - Enforcing officer. 
    The chief of police or his designee is hereby designated as the enforcement officer and be responsible for enforcing this article. 
(Ord. No. O-12-01-01, 1-19-2012) 
Secs. 62-262-62-290. - Reserved. 
Chapter 66 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Local government recreational systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

Sec. 66-1. - Prohibited acts in public parks and grounds. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cut, pluck, break down, damage or destroy any tree, shrub, plant, flower, grass or vines in any of the public parks or grounds of the city, or to bathe in, or throw any stick or other substance, to befoul or pollute the waters of any fountain, lake, spring, or stream, natural or artificial, within any public park or grounds of the city; or to damage, deface or destroy any gate, fence, railing, enclosure, fountain, water or gas fixture or other fixture or property of the city situated or being within said public park or grounds; or to otherwise intermeddle or injuriously interfere with any of the property in said parks and public grounds; or to drive any vehicle or animal, or to ride any animal upon the grounds or walks of any such public park or grounds of the city; or bring any animal within the park enclosure. 
(Code 1962, § 6-9; Code 1986, § 16-1) 
State Law reference- Damaging property, O.C.G.A. § 16-17-22 et seq. 
Sec. 66-2. - Damaging playground equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to vandalize or, in any manner, destroy or mutilate any playground equipment installed and maintained by the city in any public park. 
(Code 1962, § 6-16; Code 1986, § 16-2) 
State Law reference- Damaging property, O.C.G.A. § 16-17-22 et seq. 
Sec. 66-3. - Hours of operation. 
    All public parks or playgrounds shall be open for public use; provided, however, that the public use thereof shall be limited to the period of time between 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. in those parks or playgrounds where such opening and closing times are conspicuously posted by the city or under its authority. It shall be unlawful for any person to enter upon or remain upon the premises, or any part thereof, owned by the city and known as playground property before the time said premises are opened to the public by the person in charge thereof or after said premises are closed to the public by the person in charge thereof in the afternoon or night. 
(Code 1962, §§ 6-15, 15-30; Code 1986, § 16-3; Ord. No. O-88-08-31, 8-22-1988) 
Chapter 70 - PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 70-1. - Property owned by the city not subject to zoning and historic district ordinances. 
    Unless otherwise provided by general state law, property owned by the city shall not be subject to zoning ordinances and historic district ordinances of the city; provided, however, that the city shall notify the historic preservation commission at least 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and shall allow the commission an opportunity to comment on such proposal during such 45-day period. 
(Code 1986, § 1-13; Ord. No. O-95-02-06, 2-27-1995) 
Secs. 70-2-70-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PLANNING COMMISSION 

Sec. 70-21. - Generally. 
(a)  Created. Pursuant to article IX, section II, paragraph IV of the Constitution of Georgia of 1983 and also pursuant to the general law, the city planning commission (hereinafter referred to as the "planning commission") is hereby created and established. 
(b)  Composition. The planning commission shall consist of seven members who shall be registered voters of the city, five of whom shall be appointed by the city council. The remaining two members shall be ex officio voting members, who shall consist of the city manager of the city and the executive director of the housing authority of the city. 
(c)  Quorum. Four members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(d)  Term of office. The term of the non-ex-officio members of the commission shall be for three years. Any non-ex-officio member may be reappointed for a subsequent term. Any vacancy in the membership of the commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by appointment by the city council in the same manner as hereinbefore provided. The city council shall, by majority vote, have the authority to remove any member of the planning commission for misfeasance, malfeasance, conviction for a felony or for a crime involving moral turpitude, neglect of office, or for such other cause as the city council may deem appropriate. Non-ex-officio commission members shall not be deemed employees of the city for any purpose whatsoever, and the personnel regulations of the city shall not be applicable to such members. 
(e)  Compensation. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties. 
(Code 1962, § 27-72; Code 1986, § 23-70; Ord. No. O-87-11-23, 11-23-1987; Ord. No. O-05-10-33, 10-20-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 70-22. - Powers and duties; chairman elected from members. 
(a)  Chairman. The planning commission shall elect a chairman from its members. The term of the chairman shall be for one year; the chairman shall be eligible for reelection as chairman. 
(b)  Assistance from city employees. The planning commission shall be entitled to receive such assistance from city employees as it shall request and shall be authorized to appoint such employees and staff and to secure such professional assistance on a fulltime or parttime basis as it may in its discretion deem necessary or appropriate; provided that the expenditures therefor shall not be in excess of such amounts as may be appropriated therefor by the city council. 
(c)  Rules of procedure. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and shall determine its time of meetings. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action shall be taken shall be open to the public and all records of the planning commission shall be public records and shall be kept in the custody of the city clerk. 
(d)  Powers and duties. The planning commission is hereby vested with all the powers, duties and responsibilities provided by law. 
(Code 1962, § 27-73; Code 1986, § 23-71) 
Sec. 70-23. - Effect on previous commission. 
    The planning commission shall have taken over all the duties, responsibilities and functions previously performed by the joint Americus-Sumter County Planning Commission as to all matters pertaining to zoning and planning within the city limits. 
(Code 1962, § 27-74; Code 1986, § 23-72) 
Secs. 70-24-70-99. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRIPP STREET ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT CORRIDOR 

Sec. 70-100. - [Established.] 
    The Tripp Street Economic Development Corridor for economic development purposes is hereby established and is more particularly described as commencing at the intersection of Tripp Street with Felder Street and concluding at the intersection of Tripp Street with East Forsyth Street, in the City of Americus. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-19, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 70-101. - [Design standards.] 
    All future development in the Tripp Street Economic Development Corridor shall be subject to certain design standards which shall be applicable in such economic development corridor area. Such design standards are more particularly set out and established in Exhibit "A" attached to the ordinance from which this article derives and kept on file with the city. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-19, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 70-102. - [Future or existing conflicts.] 
    Subject to the provisions of this section, such design standards shall take precedent over existing and future design standards for properties located in areas not included in the Tripp Street Economic Development Corridor. Notwithstanding the foregoing, these design standards shall not be construed to repeal or eliminate existing or future design standards applicable to properties located within the Tripp Street Economic Development Corridor where such existing or future design standards are not in conflict with the design standards established in this article. The design standards established in this article shall be considered cumulative of, and in addition to, other existing or future design standards applicable city-wide unless such existing or future design standards conflict with this article, in which case the design standards established in this article shall control only with respect to such areas of conflict. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-19, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 70-103. - [Violation.] 
    The violation of such design standards shall be considered a violation of the City Code and any person convicted of such a violation shall be subject to punishment in the magistrate court as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-19, 5-20-2010) 
Secs. 70-104-70-130. - Reserved. 
Chapter 74 - SIGNS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 74-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Aggregate sign area means the area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
    Animated sign means a sign with action, motion, or changing colors that requires electrical energy. The term "animated sign" does not include signs that indicate only time, temperature, date, or any combination thereof. 
    Area of a sign or sign area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, circle, or combination thereof, which encompasses one face of the entire sign, inclusive of any border and trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
    Awning sign means a sign located on a roof-like cover extending before a place as a shelter and which may be used in lieu of a wall sign. 
    Banner means a piece of fabric or similar material that is attached to a pole, enclosed in a frame, or mounted as a temporary sign device. 
    Billboard sign means a type of ground sign which is permitted in certain zoning districts as provided by this article, and which shall be a maximum of 35 feet in height and 240 square feet in sign face area, and which is greater than 100 square feet in sign face area. Billboards may be double-faced, and may include embellishments not exceeding an additional 50 square feet. 
    Directional sign means a sign dedicated to providing traffic direction such as enter, exit, drive through, etc. Limited to three feet in height and no larger than four square feet in sign area. 
    Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where one face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign securely affixed to a support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. 
    Hanging/shingle-type signs means a sign no larger than six square feet in area, with a clearance of seven feet eight inches above the sidewalk or ground. Such a sign shall be attached firmly and perpendicular to a building. Such a sign may be double-faced but may not be more than four inches thick. 
    Illuminated sign means a sign that has light cast upon the sign from a source either internal to the sign or from an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
    Monument sign means a permanent monument sign designed so that the base of the sign face is flush with the supporting base, and the supporting base is flush with the ground and extends the full width of the sign face and shall not exceed six feet in height, and 60 square feet in total area which shall include sign and structure. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign that does not conform to the provisions of this article that was legal at the time of its erection. 
    Parcel means a separate tax unit of real property on county real estate records. 
    Portable signs means a mobile/temporary electric or non-electric sign that is mounted on a trailer or trailer-type frame with wheels or skids or a portable wood or metal frame and is not permanently attached to the ground or to any building or other structure. The definition of portable sign does not include messages painted directly upon or attached by sticker or magnetic backing to a motor vehicle or placed within a motor vehicle such that it may be viewed from outside the vehicle through windows. 
    Roof sign means a sign attached to or supported by the roof of a building that extends above the immediately adjacent roofline of the building. 
    Shopping center means a commercial area apart from the central business district consisting of two or more businesses in one or more buildings in any linear or other arrangement and providing not less than 75 off-street parking spaces. 
    Sign means a device or representation for visual communication that is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. 
    Streamers means a sign consisting of narrow strips of plastic, cloth, or similar material used to direct attention to a building, sign, or physical location on a temporary or permanent basis. 
    Strip center means a commercial area apart from the central business district consisting of two or more businesses in one or more buildings in any linear or other arrangement and providing at least 25 off-street parking spaces. 
    Temporary sign means a sign of a nonpermanent nature. 
    Wall sign means a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, and may be located on multiple walls provided each sign faces a street or parking lot. 
    Window sign means a sign installed flush with or on a window and intended to be viewed from the outside, and cannot exceed 30 percent of the available window space. Window signs shall not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area. 
(Code 1986, § 5-172; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-2. - Purpose and findings. 
    Signs provide an important medium through which individuals may convey a variety of messages. However, left completely unregulated, signs can become a threat to public safety as a traffic hazard and detriment to property values and the city's overall public welfare as an aesthetic nuisance. By enacting this article, the city council intends to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of individuals to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs; 
(2)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(3)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(4)  Maintain the historical image of the city; 
(5)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(6)  Promote economic development; and 
(7)  Ensure the fair and consistent enforcement of sign regulations. 
(Code 1986, § 5-171; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-3. - Exemptions. 
(a)  Signs erected by a public officer in the performance of his duties, including, but not limited to, public notices, safety signs, danger signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques, and historical markers, shall be exempt from the provisions of this article. 
(b)  The following types of signs shall be exempt from the permit requirements of section 74-49 and shall not count towards the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in subsection 74-85(g): 
(1)  Non-illuminated, temporary freestanding signs (excluding banners which are regulated in accordance with section 74-81. For R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-3a zoning districts there will be no limitation). For C-1, C-2, C-3, I-N, N-S, I, and A-G zoning districts each lot will be allowed not more than two signs up to four square feet. In addition, each sign shall not be greater than three feet above ground level. These signs shall not be located within the public street right-of-way and shall be no closer than ten feet to the back of curb of a public roadway. 
(2)  Numerals displayed for the purpose of identifying the property. 
(3)  Seasonal displays located outside of the public right-of-way that are erected for a maximum period of 30 days, no more than twice a year. 
(4)  Political signs. 
(5)  Real estate signs advertising the sale, rental, or lease of the land or building upon which such sign is located. 
(6)  Signs located on the premises in conjunction with active construction or property improvement projects. 
(7)  Memorial signs or tablets, including names of buildings and dates of erection of buildings cut into masonry, bronze, or similar materials. 
(c)  Every parcel may display no more than two flags that shall not count toward the maximum aggregate sign area limits provided in subsection 74-85(g) without obtaining a permit. Flagpoles in residential zoned districts, shall not exceed 25 feet in height or the height of the primary structure, whichever is less. Flagpoles in commercial or industrial zoned districts shall not exceed 60 feet in height or the height of the primary structure whichever is less. The dimensions of any flag shall be proportional to the flagpole height such that the hoist side of the flag shall not exceed 50 percent of the vertical height. 
(Code 1986, § 5-188; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-4. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(1)  Roof signs. 
(2)  Animated signs. 
(3)  Signs on public rights-of-way other than publicly owned or maintained signs. 
(4)  Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the window area. 
(5)  Signs that contain words, pictures, or statements that are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(6)  Signs that simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hides from view any traffic or street sign, signal, or public service sign. 
(7)  Signs that emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing. 
(8)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic. 
(9)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening, or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curve, utility pole, fence, or other structure except as set forth herein. 
(10)  Streamers. 
(11)  Portable signs. 
(Code 1986, § 5-179; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-5. - Enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  All signs shall be maintained in good condition so as to present a neat and orderly appearance. The city may, after due notice, issue a citation to any permittee, or to the person owning such sign if the sign does not require a permit, for any sign which shows gross neglect or becomes dilapidated. Such due notice shall be in writing, shall specify the sign and its location, and shall state that the sign has not been properly maintained. The city shall give permittee ten days to rectify the condition of the sign or to remove the dilapidated sign before issuing a citation for violation of this article. 
(b)  Any lawfully existing sign which is not maintained, which has been abandoned for 180 calendar days or longer, or which no longer advertises a bona fide business or product, shall be taken down or removed by the owner, agent, or person having beneficial use of the building, structure, or land upon which such sign is located. The removal of such sign shall be undertaken and completed within 30 calendar days after written notification from the city building inspector is forwarded to the owner, agent, or person having the beneficial use of the use of the building, structure, or land upon which such sign is located requesting removal of such sign. The failure to remove such sign within such time period shall be a violation of this article and shall subject the offender to punishment for violation thereof as provided in section 1-8 of the City Code. 
(c)  The city may issue a citation to any person who violates any provision of this article and, upon conviction or a plea of guilty, the municipal court shall be authorized to punish such offender as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 5-189.1; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-10-06-20, 6-24-2010) 
Secs. 74-6-74-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 74-29. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  Nonconforming signs, which met all legal requirements when erected, may stay in place, provided that within 120 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived, the owner of the nonconforming sign, or his designee, registers the sign with the city. Such registration shall contain the information listed in section 74-50 and shall specify the sign being registered as nonconforming and shall state that the sign was completely installed before the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The payment of a fee is not required for the registration of a nonconforming sign. Nonconforming signs shall be permitted until one of the following conditions occur: 
(1)  The deterioration of the sign or damage to the sign makes it a hazard or unsightly; 
(2)  The sign has been damaged by circumstances beyond the control of the owner to the extent that more than minor repairs are required to restore the sign; or 
(3)  The 120 days has expired from the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived without the sign being registered. 
(b)  No structural repairs or change in shape, size or design shall be permitted except to make a nonconforming sign comply with all requirements of this article. 
(c)  A nonconforming sign, may not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except where changed conditions beyond the control of the owner, render the sign nonconforming or warrant the sign's repair. 
(Code 1986, § 5-186; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-30. - Variances. 
    Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variance shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. A variance from compliance with the sign regulations of this article shall be limited to the following hardship situations: 
(1)  Standards. 
a.  Where the proximity of existing signs on adjoining lots causes the subject property to be ineligible due to spacing requirements, for a sign of the type sought; or 
b.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the public street and within 50 feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, buildings, or structures on a different lot; and 
c.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction and such visibility obstruction, was not created by the owner of the subject property, and the variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to traffic. 
(2)  Applications. Variance applications shall be submitted to the board and shall be heard under the same rules governing appeals. 
    Administrative variances. The planning and inspection director shall be able to authorize a variance for minimal or minor variations from the requirements of the sign ordinance including, but not limited to, maximum height, maximum size in square feet, minimum ground clearance, or any distance or setback requirement where the minimal variation does not vary 25 percent. The planning and inspection director shall use the same criteria as the board of appeals in subsection 94-88(3). 
(Code 1986, § 5-187; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Secs. 74-31-74-48. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMITS 

Sec. 74-49. - Required. 
(a)  Existing signs must be permitted and registered with the city within 120 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under section 74-50. No permit fee will be required for the registration of existing signs. 
(b)  Work on illegal signs. No person shall erect or assist in the erection, construction, maintenance, alteration, relocation, repair or painting of, or do any work upon any sign for which a permit has not been obtained. Any such sign shall be illegal and the director of planning and inspection shall order the owner to remove the sign immediately. If the owner fails to remove the sign within 30 days, the director of planning and inspection shall proceed in accordance with this article. 
(c)  Inspection. All signs for which a permit is required by this article are subject to inspection by the director of planning and engineering, chief building inspector, or their designees. 
(d)  Revocation. The director of planning and inspection is hereby authorized and empowered to revoke any permit issued by him upon failure of the holder thereof to comply with the provisions of this section within ten days after notification in writing. 
(e)  Where the sign construction requires an electrical connection, the electrical contractor shall obtain an electrical permit. 
(Code 1986, § 5-173; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-50. - Application and content. 
    Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be submitted for approval by the sign contractor or the sign installer with the building risk management office of the city. Notwithstanding the identity of the sign permit applicant, the owner or lessee of the property where the sign is installed shall be responsible for ensuring that the sign is installed in accord with the provisions of the sign permit and this chapter. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
(1)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property that bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign. 
(2)  The aggregate area for all signs on the parcel. 
(3)  The name and address of the owner of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
(4)  Consent of the owner, or the owner's agent, granting permission for the placement or maintenance of the sign. 
(5)  Name, address, phone number, and business license number of the sign contractor. 
(6)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected, including a drawing depicting the design and size of the sign. 
(7)  The approximate distance of the sign from the closest adjacent sign in either direction. 
(8)  A drawing of the proposed sign showing dimensions and construction specifications. There may be circumstances such that in order to protect public health, safety and welfare the drawing must be prepared and signed by an architect or engineer licensed by the State of Georgia. This will be determined by the director of planning and inspection. 
(Code 1986, § 5-174; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-51. - Processing procedure. 
    The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the city's actual receipt of a completed application and a sign permit fee. The building risk management office shall notify the applicant of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a notice to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the completed application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to act within the 30-day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. 
(Code 1986, § 5-175; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-52. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. The city shall deny permits to applicants that submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, incomplete applications, and applications containing any false material statements. Violation of any provision of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, the building risk management office shall revoke the permit. Should the city deny a permit, the reasons for the denial are to be stated in writing and mailed by certified mail, return receipt requested, or via hand delivery to the address on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the city's receipt of the application. Any application denied and later resubmitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the date of resubmission, instead of the date of the original submission. No permit shall be denied or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and the applicant is granted a public hearing before the board. The applicant will be given ten days' written notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the denial of the permit application, or the revocation of a permit. The term "due cause" means the violation of the provisions of this chapter, state or federal law related to signage, or the submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. 
(b)  Appeal; final decision by city council. An individual whose permit application has been denied, or a permittee whose permit has been revoked, may appeal the decision to the board to the city council, provided that they file written notice of an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the decision. Such appeal shall be considered by the city council at the next city council meeting held after the city's receipt of the written notice of appeal, provided that notice of appeal is received a minimum of two full business days before the meeting. If the appeal is not heard at such meeting, it shall be heard at the next regular meeting of the city council thereafter. The city council shall make a final decision no later than 30 days from the date of the hearing. An applicant denied a permit by final decision of the city council shall have a right to appeal the decision of the council to the superior court. 
(c)  Petition for writ of certiorari by denied applicant. In the event that an individual whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city council, he or she may petition for writ of certiorari to the superior court as provided by law. 
(Code 1986, § 5-176; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-53. - Expiration. 
    A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permit fees paid for permits that expired due to failure to erect a permitted sign. If later an individual desires to erect a sign at the same location, a new application must be processed and another fee paid in accordance with the fee schedule applicable at such time. 
(Code 1986, § 5-177; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-54. - Fees. 
    The cost of a permit shall be as established by ordinance. 
(Code 1986, § 5-178; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Secs. 74-55-74-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESTRICTIONS AND REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 74-81. - Banners and moving signs. 
(a)  Banners shall be limited to 32 square feet; only one banner per property or road frontage; and only permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3, I-N, I, A-G, and N-S zoning classifications, and it must be mounted or attached to a building or attached to a pole, mast, arm or other structure. Banners may only be exhibited six times each calendar year for a period of not more than 14 consecutive days during each period. Banners shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the banner must be repaired or removed. 
(b)  Flag-type banners shall be limited to 32 square feet; only two flag-type banners per property or road frontage; and only permitted in C-1, C-2, C-3, I-N, I, A-G, and N-S zoning classifications, and it must be mounted or attached to a pole, mast or arm. Banners may only be exhibited six times each calendar year for a period of not more than 14 consecutive days during each period. Banners shall be maintained in good repair, and shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the banner must be repaired or removed. 
(c)  Moving signs, or signs with moving parts, shall be limited to 20 feet in height from the ground and 75 square feet of area and must be placed no closer than 20 feet from the back of curb. Air- or gas-filled devices may only be exhibited six times each calendar year for a period of not more than 14 consecutive days during each period. Air- or gas-filled devices shall be maintained free of defects such as holes, tears, fading, cracks, breaks or missing portions. Upon written notice of any such defects the air- or gas-filled devices must be repaired or removed. 
(d)  Permits are required for moving signs. Written application shall be made to the building official. The building official shall establish an application form and the permit fees. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-82. - Restrictions in residential zoning districts. 
    Following are the restrictions in residential zoning districts: 
(1)  Other than subdivision entrance signs allowed under section 74-83, parcels located in residential zoning districts, as defined by the city's zoning code as now or hereafter amended, shall not have an aggregate sign area greater than four square feet; and 
(2)  Signs indicating the name of an institution, church, or other place of worship or civic association, noncommercial clubs, lodges, and social and recreational centers, shall not have an aggregate sign greater than 20 square feet; and 
(3)  Signs having a height of greater than five feet above the grade level of the adjacent street to which the parcel on which the sign is located shall not be located in residential zoning districts. 
(Code 1986, § 5-180; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-83. - Residential subdivision entrance signs. 
    Platted residential subdivisions consisting of more than two parcels, including subdivisions which contain both single-family and multifamily residences, may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of five feet above the grade level of the adjacent street and shall not have a sign area greater than 25 square feet. Such entrance signs shall not count toward the maximum allowable signage on a residential parcel. 
(Code 1986, § 5-181; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-84. - Height requirements. 
    The following height requirements shall be applicable to signs located in nonresidential zoning districts: 
(1)  No sign shall exceed 25 feet in height at the highest point on the sign. 
(2)  Monument signs shall not exceed six feet in height. 
(3)  Hanging/shingle-type signs shall have no portion of the sign, which is less than seven feet eight inches above the sidewalk surface below. 
(4)  No sign, sign structure, or advertising device shall be located closer than two feet from the outside edge of a sidewalk. Where no sidewalk exists, a seven-foot setback from the street or curb will be required, except in the C-3 downtown general business district. All other utility restrictions shall apply. 
(Code 1986, § 5-182; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-06-06-19, 6-22-2006) 
Sec. 74-85. - General size and location requirements. 
(a)  Freestanding signs. No freestanding sign may be located within 30 feet of the intersection of street right-of-way lines extended. 
(b)  Consent of owner required. No sign shall be located on any building, fence, or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  Billboard signs. 
(1)  Billboard signs shall not exceed 240 square feet of sign area. Billboard sign faces shall not exceed 12 feet in height or 24 feet in length. Billboard signs may not exceed 35 feet in total height. 
(2)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(3)  Billboard signs shall only be located on parcels adjacent to designated state or federal highways. 
(4)  No billboard signs shall be located within 3,000 feet of another billboard sign. 
(5)  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet of residential zoned parcels. 
(6)  No billboard sign shall be located within 1,000 feet in any direction of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery; provided, however that such sign may be located within 1,000 feet of a public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area, or cemetery when the sign is separated by buildings or other obstructions so that the sign located within the 1,000-foot zone is not visible from the public park, public playground, public recreation area, public forest, scenic area or cemetery. 
(d)  Freestanding signs. 
(1)  One double-faced sign per lot. Maximum square footage for each sign face shall be 1-1/2 square feet for each linear foot of building frontage facing the public right-of-way, provided that no sign face may exceed 70 square feet. Maximum height for each sign structure shall be 25 feet. 
(2)  In shopping centers, one freestanding sign having a maximum area of 1-1/2 square feet for each linear foot of building frontage for the identification of a shopping center and the businesses therein shall be permitted. The maximum allowed signage for any shopping center (to identify the shopping center and businesses therein) shall be 300 square feet in area. Such a sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height from the ground level. Where a shopping center is located on a corner lot and where vehicle entrances are provided on two streets, the 300 square foot maximum may be divided between two signs, provided that the combined square footage of both signs does not exceed 300 square feet. 
(3)  In strip centers, one freestanding sign having a maximum area of 1-1/2 square foot for each linear foot of lot frontage for the identification of the strip center and the businesses therein shall be permitted. The maximum signage allowed for any strip center sign shall be 100 square feet in area. Such a sign shall not exceed 25 feet in height from the ground level. A portion of the allowed signage area may be utilized for a marquee-type sign. Where a strip center is located on a corner lot and where vehicle entrances are provided on two streets, the 100 square foot maximum may be divided between two signs, provided that the combined square footage of both signs does not exceed 100 square feet. 
(4)  Freestanding signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoning areas. 
(e)  Monument signs. Monument signs shall not exceed 60 square feet of total area, which shall include signage and structure. 
(f)  Wall and awning signs. 
(1)  Wall and awning signs shall not project above the parapet wall. 
(2)  Wall signs shall not project beyond the building face. Awning signs shall not project beyond the building face by more than four feet. 
(3)  Wall and awning signs are allowed at the rate of one square foot per linear foot of wall building frontage. 
(4)  Wall signs shall only be located on property in commercial or industrial zoned areas. 
(Code 1986, § 5-183; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-86. - Historic district signage. 
(a)  In addition to the general requirements herein and any other requirements contained herein, which may be applicable to signs located with the city's designated historic district, all signage in the city's designated historic district shall meet the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  Any sign attached to or painted upon any portion of a building in the national register of the city's historic district shall not cover, destroy, or otherwise alter the historic fabric or architectural features of the structure. 
(2)  Signs which have no historical basis or which create an appearance not in conformity with the city's historic district shall be prohibited. 
(3)  Signs shall be placed in the traditional signboard area, painted on windows, painted or sewn on awnings and/or on hanging or perpendicular signs, provided they comply with all other ordinances of the city which are or may be applicable thereto. 
(4)  Contemporary design of signs on existing or new structures shall not be discouraged when such signs do not destroy significant historical, architectural, or cultural material and such design is compatible with the size, scale, color, material, and character of the property, neighborhood, or environment where such signs are located. 
(5)  Historical markers or plaques may be placed on any historical building or site, provided the size and location are in compliance with all other requirements of this chapter. 
(6)  Any illumination or illumination device in or directed onto signs shall be installed and maintained so as not to detract from the historic district or any part thereof. 
(7)  No mobile signs are permitted in the city's designated historic district. 
(8)  There shall be no requirement that temporary signs, as defined in this chapter, must be submitted to the historic preservation commission for approval or disapproval. 
(b)  Applications for sign permits where the proposed sign is to be located in the historic district shall first be reviewed by the building official, and the application shall then be submitted to the historic preservation commission as an application for a certificate of appropriateness, which shall approve or disapprove such application under the same ordinances and rules as any other certificate of appropriateness is considered. 
(Code 1986, § 5-184; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-87. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All signs for which a permit is required under this chapter shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with the provisions of the city building code. 
(b)  Signs for which a permit is not required under this chapter that are constructed of degradable material may be posted for a maximum of 60 days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any such replacement signs may be posted for a maximum of 60 days. 
(Code 1986, § 5-185; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 74-88. - Illumination. 
(a)  Signs cannot be illuminated in the R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-3A zoning districts. Signs may be illuminated in all other districts, subject to the following provisions. 
(b)  Flashing or blinking illumination is not permitted. Except as expressly provided in this article, no sign may use images changing more frequently than once per minute; except as otherwise provided, no sign may display pictures changing more frequently than once per minute. No external or internal illumination that causes confusion with or distraction from any traffic signal or safety device shall be permitted. 
(c)  All externally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries, mounted in fixtures designed to direct the light and eliminate light trespass, such as light shining into residences or other neighboring structures. 
(d)  All internally illuminated signs shall utilize low wattage luminaries designed to reduce light glow. 
(e)  All illuminated signs over ten feet in height shall be internally illuminated or illuminated by external lighting fixtures located above the sign area, firing downward, and not visible to passing motorists. 
(f)  No sign shall give off light, which glares, blinds, or has any other adverse effect on traffic or adjacent properties. The light from an illuminated sign shall be established in such a way that adjacent properties and roadways are not adversely affected and that no direct light is cast upon adjacent properties and roadways. This shall be determined by measuring the footcandles (lumens per square foot) that fall on adjacent properties. No sign shall exceed one-half (0.5) footcandles at any adjacent property line in a residential district and two footcandles at any public right-of-way. 
(Code 1986, § 5-189; Ord. No. O-05-08-19, 8-18-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Sec. 74-89. - Multiple-message signs. 
(a)  Multiple-message signs are those which change the message or copy on the sign face mechanically or electronically by movement or rotation of panels or slates, or by changing electronic display on the sign face. Except as expressly provided in this article for multiple-message billboards, such signs are not permitted in the C-3, R-1, R-2, R-3, and R-3A zoning districts and the historic district, but are permitted in all other zoning districts. 
(b)  No multiple-message sign may change its message or copy, or any pictures or images that are part of the message, more frequently than once every minute, provided that multiple-message billboards shall be allowed to change the copy or images that are part of the message not more frequently than once every ten seconds. 
(c)  When the message of a multiple-message sign is changed mechanically, it shall be accomplished in three seconds or less. When the message of a multiple-message sign is changed in an electronic manner, through the use of light emitting diodes, back lighting or other light source, the transition shall occur within two seconds. 
(d)  Except as expressly provided in this article in regards to billboards, the portion of the sign face of a multiple-message sign which accommodates multiple-messages shall not exceed 50 percent of the total sign face area and may not change its message or copy, or any pictures or images that are part of the message, more frequently than once every minute; the remaining portion shall be static. 
(e)  When any multiple-message sign is located within 250 feet of any residential district, the display of multiple-messages shall discontinue between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.. and the sign shall be static and not display more than one message during that period. 
(f)  Multiple-message signs which are illuminated or which use electronic lighting to display message shall be subject to the restrictions and limitation applicable to illumination in this article. 
(g)  There shall be located no more than one multiple-message sign per lot, and such sign shall be permitted only on a ground sign or freestanding structure, and not on any wall sign or window sign. 
(h)  The total number of multiple-message billboards within the city shall be limited to eight sign faces. After the adoption of this article, new multiple message billboards shall only be permitted when both of the following location requirements are met: 
(1)  The proposed multiple-message billboard is to be erected on an existing billboard sign structure as of the date of the adoption of this article or at the location of and as a replacement for such an existing billboard sign structures. A list of such existing billboard sign structures known to the city is attached [by reference] as exhibit A to the ordinance adopting this article, and identified as "Billboards existing in the City of Americus, Georgia, as of July, 2015;" and 
(2)  The proposed multiple-message billboard will be located facing one of the following designated public right-of-way, which are deemed by the city council to be the only rights-of-way within the city where multiple-message billboards are appropriate. 
(i)  Multiple-message billboards constructed after the adoption of this article shall be located at least 5,000 feet from existing billboards using a multiple-message sign face, measured from the base of the billboard along the street frontage to the base of the nearest existing billboard using a multiple-message sign face on the same side of the street, and 3,000 feet from any existing billboard using a multiple-message sign face, measured along the shortest straight-line from sign structure to sign structure. 
(j)  No multiple-message sign shall be permitted in any historic district of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2015-9, Exh. A, 6-18-2015) 
Secs. 74-90-74-110. - Reserved. 
Chapter 78 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Owners with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Encroachments. 
(a)  No person, except by permission of the city council, shall make any encroachment upon, under or over any street, sidewalk or alley; nor, without such permission, place or erect any box, fence, railing, platform, steps, portico or shed, awning or other structure in, upon, over or under any street, sidewalk or alley in the city. Whenever such permission is granted, it shall give no right to interest in the land occupied or used, and the permission may be revoked at any time. In addition to the punishment prescribed in section 1-8, any person violating this section shall, upon notice, remove such encroachment, and, upon failure so to do, the city council may cause the same to be removed at the expense of the person so offending, and execution shall issue for the amount so expended. 
(b)  A restaurant, as defined in section 6-1, which is located in the city business improvement district, as established pursuant to chapter 22, article II of this Code, shall be authorized to place restaurant dining facilities, principally including tables and chairs, on the city sidewalk immediately in front of and adjacent to the restaurant's place of business for the purpose of serving restaurant patrons on the sidewalk in front of such business, provided that the following requirements are met by the restaurant: 
(1)  A clearance not less than 48 inches be maintained between the edge of the sidewalk where it abuts the street and the restaurant furniture located on the sidewalk so as not to obstruct the movement of pedestrian traffic along the sidewalk. 
(2)  The furnishings located on the sidewalk must be maintained in a safe manner and be constructed of heavy duty material so as not to be easily moved and must be in keeping with the general appearance of the downtown area. 
(3)  The number of persons to be served at such outside dining facilities shall in no event exceed the number of chairs available for such persons to be seated at such outside dining facilities. 
(4)  The restaurant owner shall be responsible for maintaining the area on and around the serving tables in a clean manner and shall also be responsible under the littering laws of the state and city littering ordinances for maintaining such area in a litter-free and clean condition at all times. 
(5)  All necessary approvals of such arrangement are obtained from the county board of health or such other governmental entities as may be required to approve such arrangements. 
Notwithstanding the provisions of chapter 6, article I or section 6-5 regarding open containers, any restaurant which complies with the terms of this section and locates serving tables on the sidewalk in front of such restaurant shall be authorized to serve alcoholic beverages at such outside tables which the restaurant is otherwise authorized to serve inside the restaurant building in accord with appropriate alcoholic beverage license or licenses issued by the city. 
(Code 1962, § 20-8; Code 1986, § 18-5; Ord. No. O-95-05-15, 5-18-1995; Ord. No. O-06-98-26, 8-24-2006) 
Sec. 78-2. - Lighting of obstructions and excavations at night. 
    No person shall leave rubbish, lumber, brick, barrels, mortar, or other building materials of any kind whatever on the open streets or sidewalks at night in quantities large enough to prevent persons or vehicles from going over with safety that part of the street or sidewalk, nor shall any person make and leave open any excavation on such street and sidewalks, without placing a sufficient number of red lights to warn travelers of the same between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(Code 1962, § 20-9; Code 1986, § 18-6) 
Sec. 78-3. - Erection of poles, wires, etc.-Permission required. 
    No person shall have the right or authority to place poles or wires in or on the streets, sidewalks or other public property of the city without permission of the city council. 
(Code 1962, § 20-3; Code 1986, § 18-7) 
Sec. 78-4. - Same-Authority of building official. 
(a)  The building official shall be the inspector of all wires on or in the streets, sidewalks and other public property of the city and shall direct any person to repair or remove, lower or elevate, any wires that such inspector may consider unsightly, or dangerous to life or property. 
(b)  All electric wires shall be properly insulated and kept at a regulation distance, all wires or cables to have a clearance of 25 feet. 
(Code 1962, § 20-4; Code 1986, § 18-8) 
Sec. 78-5. - Parades, marches and processions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade, march, or procession means a group or number of people or vehicles, or the combination thereof, consisting of five or more vehicles or 20 or more persons, or a combination of three or more vehicles and 15 or more persons, proceeding or moving in a body or in concert along the streets or sidewalks of the city. The term "parade" shall include picketing conducted on sidewalks. 
(b)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to be a part of or to engage in any parade, march, or procession or to march, parade, or proceed along any street or sidewalk in the city as a part of or a party to such parade, march, or procession without there having been first obtained a written permit from the chief of police for the holding of such parade, march, or procession. 
(c)  Application filing. Permits shall be secured from the chief of police by filing a written application therefor at least 48 hours prior to the time the proposed parade, march, or procession is desired to be held. Applications shall be filed on forms provided by the city and signed by the persons desiring to conduct such parade, march, or procession, or by the properly authorized agent of the organization, or persons who propose to conduct such parade, march, or procession. The application forms shall be filled out completely, giving all legal information as designated in such forms. 
(d)  Issuance of permit; conditions. The issuance of the permit by the chief of police shall show the time and place for beginning the parade, march or procession, the route it shall follow, and the destination thereof, all of which conditions shall be decided by the chief of police giving full consideration to the conditions contained in the request of the applicant, the condition and width of the streets or sidewalks along said proposed route, and the nature of traffic conditions as related to the number of participants and the number and type vehicles to participate in the parade, march, or procession as shown on the application for such permit. 
(e)  Considerations for issuance. The chief of police shall issue a parade permit when, from a consideration of the application and from such other information as may otherwise be obtained, he finds that: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection; 
(3)  The conduct of such parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the village other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to such assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of such parade will not interfere with the movement of firefighting equipment en route to fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause injury to persons or property, to provoke disorderly conduct or create a disturbance; 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product or goods and is not designed to be held purely for private profit. 
(f)  Police vehicle to precede parades, marches and processions. All parades, marches, or processions through the streets of the city shall be preceded by a police vehicle and conducted in such manner as to impede and interfere with the flow of traffic to the least possible extent. 
(g)  Funeral processions excepted. The terms of this section shall not apply to funeral processions. 
(Code 1962, § 15-27.01; Code 1986, § 20-13) 
Secs. 78-6-78-28. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUILDING NUMBERS 

Sec. 78-29. - Required. 
    Every person owning property within the city is required to place a number on either the building, mailbox, or curb, or any combination thereof, which is visible from the fronting street on which the house, dwelling, store, or other building designed for occupancy is located. Such number shall be the number assigned by the city pursuant to section 78-30. All numbers and letters identifying such property as required herein shall be at least three inches in height. 
(Code 1962, § 20-16; Code 1986, § 18-1; Ord. No. O-97-11-34, § 1, 11-20-1997) 
Sec. 78-30. - Assigned by building official. 
    It shall be the responsibility of the building official of the city to assign numbers to buildings within the city. 
(Code 1962, § 20-17; Code 1986, § 18-2; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992; Ord. No. O-97-11-34, § 2, 11-20-1997) 
Sec. 78-31. - Violation and enforcement. 
    Any person who fails or refuses to place a number for any building in the city as may be required by this chapter shall, upon conviction therefor, be punished as provided in section 1-8. The code enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue citations and summons in connection with the violation of section 78-29. 
(Code 1962, § 20-18; Code 1986, § 18-3; Ord. No. O-97-11-34, § 3, 11-20-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 78-32. - Action by city. 
    Should any person fail or refuse to number buildings as hereinbefore set forth, the building official shall have authority to place said number upon the building at the expense of the property owner; and the finance director is hereby directed to issue execution against the property for the payment of the cost of such number and the expense of placing the same on said building, which execution shall be issued under the same terms as tax executions are now issued by the city. 
(Code 1962, § 20-19; Code 1986, § 18-4; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Secs. 78-33-78-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PERMITS FOR SPECIAL ACTIVITIES 

Sec. 78-53. - Required. 
(a)  This policy statement of special activities covers all special activities and the commercial filming of locations and events in the city. Any organization wishing to sponsor or hold a special activity in the city will be required to complete the city's special activity permit application and obtain approval of such special activity as provided in this article. 
(b)  As required by this article a special activity within the city that will be conducted on the streets, in the parks, or in other public areas must be approved by the city manager of the city. Applications to conduct a special activity must be made in writing to the office of the city manager. Applications shall be available from the city clerk's office. Applications shall be submitted to the city clerk's office no later than 45 days prior to the date of the actual event. No special activity shall be permitted within the city unless such special activity is approved by the city manager of the city or the city council under the provisions of this article. 
(c)  The city may hold its own special activities, or it may contract with one or more organizations to perform special activity services, or it may jointly sponsor a special activity with one or more organizations. In such cases, the participating organization shall submit a special activity permit application that shall include a presentation of the city's financial participation and the financial participation of the related organizations. 
(d)  The city manager will undertake a complete review of any special activity application, including consultation with the applicant as may be reasonably necessary to resolve problems, at no charge to event sponsors. 
(e)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to alter, affect or repeal the provisions of this Code that require parade permits to be issued by the chief of police under the appropriate ordinances applicable thereto. 
(Code 1986, § 16-10; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-54. - Basis for city services. 
    The city will provide support to special activities on the following basis: 
(1)  City-operated activities. The city will operate certain special activities directly. The full cost of these special activities will be funded by the city. 
(2)  Co-sponsored activities. The city will co-sponsor certain activities with other organizations when the city manager determines that the activity is of general interest to the public and advances the city's public image. The city will provide financial support to these activities as determined in the annual budget appropriation. These activities must meet the requirements of the special activities policy and any city costs in excess of the support level authorized by the budget appropriation, must be reimbursed to the city by the city's co-sponsor. 
(3)  Other nonprofit activities. The city will provide one person, if necessary, to assist other special activities operated by nonprofit organizations. These activities must meet the other requirements of the special activities permit policy and must reimburse the city for any city costs in excess of this support level. 
(4)  Other for-profit activities. The city will allow other special activities operated by for-profit sponsors that are beneficial to the city and the public, subject to a rent charge for the use of the public property that is approved for each activity. These activities must meet the other requirements of the special activity permit policy and the sponsor must reimburse the city for any city costs in addition to the payment of established rent charges. 
(Code 1986, § 16-11; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-55. - Fees. 
    Fees shall be charged for city services provided to special activities as follows: 
(1)  Straight time shall be the hourly cost for any employee working on a special activity during the normal work day including the actual cost for fringe benefits. 
(2)  Overtime shall be the hourly cost for any employee working on a special activity during a time period that would be considered overtime for city payroll records, including the actual cost for fringe benefits. 
(3)  Purchased or rented materials shall include all direct costs for all materials purchased or rented by the city for use at the activity. 
(4)  Equipment charges shall be the current equipment rental rates charged by the city. In addition thereto, for any authorized special activity held in the Rylander parking lot or any special activity held at the gazebo at Rees Park where the applicant will utilize electricity, there shall be a charge of $25.00 per day. Such charge shall not be subject to waiver, and in the event that it is determined that the applicant utilized city electrical services without advising the city of its intent to do so in the application for a special activity permit, then the applicant shall pay the sum of $100.00 per day for the use of such electricity. 
(5)  An application fee in the amount established by ordinance is to be paid at the time of application unless the application seeks a waiver of such fee. If a waiver of such fee is sought, such waiver must be approved by the city manager at the time the application is approved. If no waiver is approved, the fee must be paid before any permit is issued for the special activity. In order to receive a waiver of such fee, the applicant must provide written proof to the city manager that the applicant is a then-current nonprofit corporation exempt from the payment of income taxes in accord with 26 U.S.C. § 501(c)(3). The application fee is intended to cover the city's expenses related to approval of the permit application and related expenses. 
(Code 1986, § 16-12; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-08-10-33, 10-23-2008; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-56. - Billing for special activities. 
    Special activity billings by the city shall be itemized as follows: 
Cost for services:  DPW employee straight time/overtime $ ____________  Police employee straight time/overtime $ ____________  Fire employee straight time/overtime $ ____________  Other employee straight time/overtime $ ____________ Equipment charges: $ ____________  Electricity charges (Rylander parking lot or the gazebo at Rees Park only) $ ____________  Purchased materials $ ____________  Rented materials $ ____________ Subtotal: $ ____________  Plus for-profit rent, if applicable $ ____________  Less amount of city support ($ ____________ ) Net total billing: $ ____________  
(Code 1986, § 16-13; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-08-10-33, 10-23-2008) 
Sec. 78-57. - Rental charges for private for-profit activities. 
    Special activities that are exclusively sponsored by private for-profit organizations shall be charged a reasonable rent for use of public areas, such as parks or streets, in addition to the special activity fees provided herein. The rent shall be set by the city manager of the city as part of the special activity application process. 
(Code 1986, § 16-14; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-58. - Civic organizations and merchants' participation encouraged. 
    It is the desire of the city council that local nonprofit organizations and local merchants in the vicinity of the special activity being held are given the opportunity to participate in the special activity to the greatest extent practical, consistent with the nature and purpose of the special activity. 
(Code 1986, § 16-15; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-59. - Video or film production coordination and costs. 
    Organizations which request any location in the city as a location for a commercial video or film production shall be required to coordinate the production with the office of the city manager. The city manager shall have the authority to grant permission for commercial video or film production in the city and to allow use of the city's facilities for this purpose. All commercial video or film productions shall be required to pay the actual costs of all straight time and overtime for all city employees and equipment. In addition, a rent shall be charged for the use of public areas, such as parks and streets. The rent shall be set by the city manager. 
(Code 1986, § 16-16; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-60. - Liability insurance requirements. 
(a)  In order to comply with the city's liability insurance carrier, the city shall require that all sponsors of special activities or commercial video or film crews carry liability insurance with coverage of at least $1,000,000.00, except for class I; low-hazard activities as defined in subsection (c) of this section. Where liability insurance is required, an activity sponsor shall be required to provide a valid certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional or named insured prior to the activity. The city manager may require higher levels of insurance based upon risk factors and past experience. 
(b)  The special activity review committee shall include the city manager, the city clerk, the finance director, and the community development director. The special activity review committee is intended to provide a review of proposed special activities and a risk control guide for the handling of any increased liability on the part of the city associated with special activities. Special activities are defined as activities which are not directly related to the day-to-day operations of the city, but which may occur on premises owned or controlled by the city. The special activity review committee shall make recommendations to the city manager regarding approval of the special activity, liability insurance requirements, and regarding any additional requirements that the committee deems it appropriate to be placed upon any special activity as a condition of the issuance of a permit for such activity. 
(c)  It shall be the policy of the city council to not routinely require insurance coverage for activities classified by the special activity review committee as class I; low-hazard. These would be activities that include no physical activity by participants and no substantial exposure to spectators. This waiver of the insurance requirements is meant to cover small gatherings or ceremonies that do not involve more than 50 people, are limited to passive participation by the public, and require no city services. All other activities are required to provide insurance as outlined in this policy. 
(d)  In making its recommendations to the city manager regarding each special activity permit, the special activity review committee may recommend additional requirements as a condition of permit issuance. Such additional requirements may include, but shall not necessarily be limited to, specific staffing levels for police, fire, public works, or other personnel in connection with the activity. Expenses incurred by the city in compliance with such requirements shall be billed to and paid by the sponsoring organization. Agreement by the sponsoring organization to pay such additional expenses may be made a condition of the issuance of the permit by the city manager. 
(e)  The special activity review committee will review each special activity permit application received and assess the potential liability risk of the city, based upon the following categories: 
(1)  Class I; low-hazard activities involve no physical activity by participants and no substantial exposure to spectators. Examples of activities in this category include, but are not limited to, meetings, seminars, social gatherings, theatrical performances, and weddings. 
(2)  Class II; moderate-hazard activities involve limited physical activity by participants and no substantial exposure to spectators. Activities in this category include, but are not limited to, downtown celebrations, dances, animal shows, political rallies, and picnics. 
(3)  Class III; high-hazard activities major participation and/or moderate exposure to spectators. Activities in this category include, but are not limited to, marathons or running races and circuses or carnivals. 
(4)  Class IV; severe-hazard activities involve substantial exposure to participants and/or spectators. Examples of activities in this category include, but are not limited to, rock concerts, vehicle races, and fireworks displays. 
(f)  The city manager shall consider the recommendations of the special activity review committee in connection with the approval or disapproval of the proposed special activity. The city manager shall be authorized to accept or reject the recommendations of the committee regarding approval of the proposed permit and regarding the placing of additional requirements, including liability insurance requirements, upon the activity as a condition for the issuance of the permit. The city manager shall also be authorized to place such additional restrictions or requirements as part of the permit as the city manager deems appropriate and in the best interest of the city. The city manager shall also be authorized to require a member or members of the special activity review committee to be available to meet with activity organizers to review any special conditions and to ensure that all such special conditions are met before or during the course of the activity. Some special activities may require that a member of the special activity review committee be on site during the course of the special activity. 
(Code 1986, § 16-17; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-61. - Traffic control and safety requirements. 
    The sponsor of the special activity shall be responsible for complying with all traffic control and safety procedures required by the city during the activity. The requirements will be indicated in the notice of approval, and additional requirements may be made by the city during the activity as may be necessary for the safety of the public. 
(Code 1986, § 16-18; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-62. - Participant waiver of liability. 
    The sponsor of the special activity shall be responsible for obtaining all signed indemnification agreements as required by the city. A sample of the basic agreement will be included in the application. 
(Code 1986, § 16-19; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-63. - Food vendor insurance and license required. 
    An activity that includes the serving of food must have all food vendors approved by the county health department. All food vendors must supply a valid certificate of insurance naming the city as an additional insured prior to opening of the food stand. All food vendors must post a valid temporary food license as authorized by the county health department. Food vendors are responsible for any and all fees related to obtaining a food license. 
(Code 1986, § 16-20; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-64. - Multiple applications for the same activity date. 
    In the event that two or more special activity permit applications are received for the same date and time prior to the approval of either activity, the date and time that each application was received by the city shall determine the order of preference. Once a special activity permit has been granted, it shall be the policy of the city council to not award further permits for the same date, time, and general location. 
(Code 1986, § 16-21; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-65. - Reservation of annual activity dates. 
    If an activity is intended to be an annual activity at regularly scheduled dates, the current year's application may include the following year's requested dates. Approval of the current year's application will include reservation of the next year's proposed dates. However, it will not constitute approval of next year's permit, which must have its own timely application submitted for city approval. In general, the city will not approve special activity permit dates more than one year in advance. 
(Code 1986, § 16-22; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000) 
Sec. 78-66. - Confirmation of city approval. 
    Upon approval of the special activity permit application, a written or oral confirmation as to the decision of the city manager will be forwarded by the city clerk to the individual or organization requesting the special activity permit. If there are any special conditions that must be met as a condition of the issuance of the permit, the confirmation must be in writing. The city special activity permit application form must be completed for all special activities that take place on public land or lands that are controlled by the city. 
(Code 1986, § 16-23; Ord. No. O-00-08-34, 8-24-2000; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 78-67. - Appeal of denial of special activity permit application. 
    In the event that the city manager denies an application for a special activity permit, the applicant shall be authorized to appeal such denial to the city council. Such appeal must be in writing and filed with the city clerk no later than ten calendar days from the date of the written notice to the applicant that such special activity permit was denied. Upon such appeal, the appeal shall be considered at the next regular monthly meeting of the city council. The city council shall, either uphold the city manager's decision, modify the city manager's decision, or overrule the city manager's decision. The city manager's decision shall only be overruled if the city council finds that there is no evidence to support such decision or that the city manager abused his discretion in denying of the application. Upon final decision of the city council regarding the appeal, there shall be no further appeals thereof. 
(Code 1986, § 16-24; Ord. No. O-05-05-14, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Secs. 78-68-78-92. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - EXCAVATIONS AND TUNNELS 

Sec. 78-93. - Permit-Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to tunnel under or to make any excavation in any street, alley or sidewalk or other public place in the city without having obtained a permit as herein required, or without complying with the provisions of this section or in violation of or variance from any term of such permit. No permit is required on state highways. 
(Code 1962, § 20-24(a); Code 1986, § 18-20) 
Sec. 78-94. - Same-Application. 
    An application for such permit shall be made to the utilities director, and shall describe the location of the intended excavation or tunnel, the size thereof, the purpose therefor, and the person doing the actual work and the name of the person for whom or which the work is being done, the date that the area will be fully restored to its original condition prior to any excavation or tunneling being done, and shall contain an agreement that the applicant will comply with all ordinances and laws relating to the work to be done. 
(Code 1962, § 20-24(b); Code 1986, § 18-21) 
Sec. 78-95. - Supervision. 
    The utilities director shall, from time to time, inspect or cause to be inspected, all excavations and tunnels being made in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the city to see to the enforcement of the provisions of this article. Notice shall be given to the city at least ten hours before the work of refilling any such tunnel or excavation commences. 
(Code 1962, § 20-24(i); Code 1986, § 18-25; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 78-96. - Manner of performing the work. 
    It shall be unlawful to make any such excavation or tunnel in any way contrary to or at variance with the terms of the permit therefor. Proper bracing shall be maintained to prevent the collapse of adjoining areas around; and in excavations, the excavation shall not have anywhere below the surface, any portion which extends beyond the opening at the surface. No damage shall be done to any pipes, cables or conduits in the making of such excavation or tunnel; and notice shall be given to the persons maintaining any such pipes, cables or conduits or to the city department or officer charged with the care thereof, which are or may be endangered or affected by the making of any such excavation or tunnel before such pipes, cables or conduits are disturbed. No unnecessary damage or injury shall be done to any tree or shrub or the roots thereof. 
(Code 1962, § 20-24(f); Code 1986, § 18-26) 
Sec. 78-97. - Restoring surface. 
    Any person making any excavation or tunnel in or under any public street, alley or other public place in the city shall restore the surface to its original condition if there was no pavement there. Refills shall be properly tamped down, and any bracing in such tunnel or excavation shall be left in the ground. Any opening in a paved or improved portion of a street shall be repaired and the surface relaid by the applicant by the date set out in the application that the excavation will be fully restored, in compliance with the ordinances of the city and under the supervision of the utilities director. 
(Code 1962, § 20-24(h); Code 1986, § 18-27; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 78-98. - Temporary sidewalks. 
    If any sidewalk is blocked by any such work, a temporary sidewalk shall be constructed or provided which shall be safe for travel and the convenience for users. 
(Code 1962, § 20-24(g); Code 1986, § 18-28) 
Secs. 78-99-78-124. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - VISUAL OBSTRUCTIONS 

Sec. 78-125. - Shubbery, obstructions for drivers. 
    Any person who plants, permits or maintains any shrubbery, or any other object upon any parkway or private property within the city adjacent to the intersection of any streets in the city, which obstructs the driving vision of the operator of any vehicle is hereby declared to be guilty of committing a nuisance. 
(Code 1962, § 23-15; Code 1986, § 20-8) 
Sec. 78-126. - Notice to owner of property to remove; duty to comply. 
    Whenever the chief of police, after investigation, shall determine that any shrubbery or other object upon any parkway or private property, in the city adjacent to a street intersection, obstructs the driving vision of the operators of vehicles passing over or through such street intersection, such officer shall cause to be served upon the owner or occupant of the property abutting such parkway, or the owner of the property upon which such trees, shrubbery or other objects exist in violation of section 78-125, a written notice requiring such owner or occupant to remove such shrubbery or other object, or to trim such shrubbery or reduce the height and width of other objects so as to comply with the provisions of such section. The notice herein provided for shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the property herein described and shall require the owner to comply with the directions contained in the written notice, within 15 days after the service of the notice. Such notice may and can be served by placing a copy thereof at a conspicuous place upon the property abutting the parkway, if the offending plant or object is thereon or upon the private property upon which the offending plant or object may exist. Said notice shall be issued by the city clerk. 
(Code 1962, § 23-16; Code 1986, § 20-9) 
Sec. 78-127. - Appeal. 
    The owner of any property affected by the directions of the notice in section 78-126 may, within the time specified in such notice, appeal to the city council and until the city council shall act upon such appeal, an appellant shall not be required to comply with the notice. 
(Code 1962, § 23-17; Code 1986, § 20-10) 
Sec. 78-128. - Failure of owner to comply with notice; removal or abatement by city. 
    If after the service of the notice as provided in section 78-126, the owner does not comply with the directions contained in the notice within the time specified, and if the traffic hazard can be removed by the trimming of the shrubbery, and the city shall trim the shrubbery to such dimensions as to terminate such traffic hazard. Should it become necessary in order to terminate such traffic hazard to remove shrubbery or other objects, such removal shall be made by the city. 
(Code 1962, § 23-18; Code 1986, § 20-11) 
Sec. 78-129. - Exemptions regarding the erection or maintenance of buildings. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall prohibit the owner of any property from erecting or maintaining buildings or structures as permitted by any laws or ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1962, § 23-19; Code 1986, § 20-12) 
Secs. 78-130-78-149. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NAMING OF STREETS 
DIVISION 1. - NAMING OF NEW STREETS 

Sec. 78-150. - Title. 
    This division shall be known as the "naming of new streets" division and may be referred to by that title. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-100, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-151. - Authority. 
    The governing body of the city shall have the sole power and authority to name new streets located within the incorporated limits of the city where such streets are owned by the City of Americus. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-101, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-152. - Procedures. 
    With respect to the naming of a new street owned by the city and located within the corporate limits of the City of Americus, the governing body shall be required to follow the following procedures with respect to the naming of such new street: 
(1)  By application of a citizen or group of citizens. 
a.  A citizen or group of city citizens may submit an application to name a new street hereunder. Such application shall be on forms prescribed by the city clerk. Such application shall not be considered unless at least 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting such new street submit a written application to the city clerk requesting that such street be named a particular name. 
b.  Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00, which is intended to cover administrative and other costs which are anticipated to be incurred by the city in connection with its consideration of the application. Such application fee shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. 
c.  The governing body of the city shall consider such application and act thereon in accord with this division no later than 90 calendar days after the date of submission of such application to the city clerk. In the event that the governing body does not act upon the application prior to the expiration of such 90 calendar day period, then the street shall be automatically renamed as requested in the application. 
d.  Upon receipt of the application by the city clerk, the city clerk shall proceed to validate the application. The city clerk shall validate the application by verifying that the proper number of signatures is contained on the application and that the persons signing the application are owners of real property abutting said street as required by this division. In the event that the city clerk determines that the application is invalid for any reason, or that the application does not contain sufficient signatures, the application shall be returned to the person or persons submitting such application, and it shall not be subject to further consideration by the governing body until such time as a new application is submitted and the city clerk validates the new application. 
e.  In determining the required percentage of the persons signing such application in connection with the validation thereof, where property abutting such street is owned by more than one person, the signature of only one such owner shall be counted in calculating such 75 percent. In addition, persons who rent or lease real property abutting such street may sign such application, but their signatures shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold for submission of the application to the governing body. Signatures on any such application signed more than 90 calendar days prior to the date of submission of the application to the city clerk shall be invalid and shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold. In the event that more than one application for naming a new street is presented to the city clerk, the city clerk shall validate such applications in the order received. The first application validated by the city clerk shall be presented to the governing body first, and only if the resolution to approve the application is denied shall the city clerk present the second or subsequent validated application to the governing body. 
f.  The application shall be in such form as established by the city clerk. At a minimum, the application shall indicate thereon the location of the street, the proposed name of the street, the printed name, street address, and signature of each property owner signing such application, and the date that each property owner signed the application. In addition, each such application shall include therewith a written statement which provides, in succinct detail, the reasons for the proposed street naming in honor of a particular person or business listed in the application. In providing such written statement, the criteria to be considered by the governing body regarding the naming of such street as more particularly established in this division shall be specifically addressed by the application in such written statement accompanying the street naming application. In addition, the application shall also list any public announcement or public recognition request that should accompany any official street naming ceremony undertaken by the city in connection with the naming of such street. 
g.  In the event that the city clerk determines that the application is valid, then prior to the submission of the application to the governing body, the city clerk shall undertake the following: 
1.  Provide notification of the application to and compile for review by the governing body responses to the application from the following: 
i.  All city agencies and departments, including, but not limited to; city police, city fire and EMS, city GIS system personnel, city building risk management risk department, and other city agencies or departments that the clerk deems appropriate; 
ii.  All other local, state, or national agencies which the city clerk determines may be affected by the naming of the street; 
iii.  All schools located in the immediate vicinity of the street; 
iv.  Any other persons or entities the city clerk deems, in his or her sole discretion, should receive notice of the proposed street naming. 
2.  Review existing public records for the purpose of establishing that the proposed street name does not duplicate any existing street name and is not confusingly similar to any existing street name in Americus or Sumter County. 
h.  Upon the completion of the foregoing, the city clerk shall be required to place consideration of the application on the agenda for the city council meeting occurring in the calendar month after the month in which the application was finally validated. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the tabling of such proposal by the governing body, but in no event shall consideration of such proposal by the city council be delayed beyond 90 calendar days after the validated application was filed with the city clerk. 
i.  Prior to the governing body considering or voting upon such application, the governing body shall hold a public hearing regarding such application. Notice of such public hearing shall be published once in the city's legal organ no later than the day prior to the date of the public hearing. Such public notice shall advise the public regarding the application, the proposed new street name, and the time and place of the scheduled public hearing before the governing body. Such public hearing shall be conducted with the same formality as that required of public hearings in connection with zoning and rezoning matters before the governing body. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the governing body shall be authorized to vote on the application. 
j.  In the event that the application is approved by an appropriate resolution of the governing body, the name of the street shall take effect at such time as is determined by the governing body in such resolution. 
k.  Upon adoption of the resolution by the governing body, the city clerk shall undertake the following: 
1.  Provide written notice to each property owner owning property abutting the street of the official name of the street as approved by the governing body; 
2.  Provide written notice of the name of the street to the United States Postal Service; 
3.  Provide written notice of the name of the street to the emergency 911 system in effect for the geographical area including the City of Americus. 
l.  Within 60 calendar days of the effective date of the resolution adopting the street name, the city utilities director shall have fabricated and installed appropriate signage regarding the name of the street at such locations as deemed appropriate by the utilities director. 
(2)  By the professional staff of the city. 
    The professional staff of the city, or a member of the city council, may submit an application to name a new street. The procedures to be followed by the governing body in the event that such an application is submitted shall be the same procedures as previously outlined in this section, except that no application fee shall be required, and the application shall not require the signatures of 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting the new street. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-102, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-153. - Determination of name. 
(a)  In making a determination as to the name to be given to a new street, if the street is proposed to be named after a natural person, the governing body shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)  Whether such person has resided for a long period of time on such street; 
(2)  Whether such person has made significant and long-lasting contributions to the city and its citizens; 
(3)  Whether such person is a national or internationally prominent figure who has or may have a direct or indirect connection to the city and its citizens; 
(4)  Whether such person has provided charitable or philanthropic contributions to the city and its citizens; 
(5)  Whether such person has brought honor, prestige, or recognition in a positive manner to the city and its citizens; 
(6)  Whether such person is a leader in local governmental, civic, educational, or public affairs; or 
(7)  Whether such person is a distinguished and accomplished scholar, scientist, educational leader, business leader, government leader, or civic leader. 
In order to be considered for having a street named after a person, such person may be either living or deceased at the time of the street naming. With respect to a deceased individual, the application shall not be submitted until at least one year after the date of death of such person. With respect to a living person, such person must have reached the age of 75 years at the time of the submission of the application, unless such age limitation is affirmatively waived by the governing body of the city within 30 calendar days after the filing of the application required by section 78-152. 
(b)  In the event that consideration is given to naming a new street after a business, an organization, or a nonprofit entity, the governing body of the city shall consider the following: 
(1)  Whether such entity is located upon such street; 
(2)  The length of time that such entity has been located on such street; 
(3)  The length of time that such entity has been located within the city; 
(4)  The civic, community, and educational contributions of the business to the city and its citizens; or 
(5)  The length of time that such entity is expected to remain in business under the same name on such street. 
No street shall be named after any ongoing business, organization, or nonprofit entity which is not located upon the street to be named in honor of such entity. 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing factors to be considered by the governing body in naming a new street, the governing body shall also be authorized to consider any and all other relevant factors that the governing body deems appropriate in making a street naming decision. 
(d)  Unless waived by the governing body, new streets which are obviously in alignment with streets already in existence and already named shall be given the name of the existing street. In addition, no applications proposing to change the name of only a portion of a street shall be accepted by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-103, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-154. - Prohibition. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with the right of the State of Georgia or the Georgia Department of Transportation to name roads or streets under their respective ownership or jurisdiction in such manner as they may be authorized to do in accord with Georgia law or regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-12, § 18-104, 3-22-2007) 
Secs. 78-155-78-179. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHANGING THE NAME OF EXISTING STREETS 

Sec. 78-180. - Title. 
    This division shall be known as the "changing the name of existing streets" division and may be referred to by that title. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-150, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-181. - Authority. 
    The governing body of the city shall have the sole power and authority to change the name of existing streets located within the incorporated limits of the city where such streets are owned by the City of Americus. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-151, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-182. - Procedures. 
    With respect to changing the name of an existing street owned by the city and located within the corporate limits of the City of Americus, the governing body shall be required to follow the following procedures with respect to changing the name of an existing street: 
(1)  By application of a citizen or group of citizens. 
a.  A citizen or group of city citizens may submit an application to change the name of an existing street hereunder. Such application shall be on forms prescribed by the city clerk. Such application shall not be considered unless at least 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting such existing street submit a written application to the city clerk requesting that the name of such existing street be changed. 
b.  Such application shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee of $100.00, which is intended to cover administrative and other costs which are anticipated to be incurred by the city in connection with its consideration of the application. Such application fee shall be deposited into the general fund of the city. 
c.  The governing body of the city shall consider such application and act thereon in accord with this division no later than 90 calendar days after the date of submission of such application to the city clerk. In the event that the governing body does not act upon the application prior to the expiration of such 90 calendar day period, then the street shall be automatically renamed as requested in the application. 
d.  Upon receipt of the application by the city clerk, the city clerk shall proceed to validate the application. The city clerk shall validate the application by verifying that the proper number of signatures is contained on the application and that the persons signing the application are owners of real property abutting said street as required by this division. In the event that the city clerk determines that the application is invalid for any reason, or that the application does not contain sufficient signatures, the application shall be returned to the person or persons submitting such application, and it shall not be subject to further consideration by the governing body until such time as a new application is submitted and the city clerk validates the new application. 
e.  In determining the required percentage of the persons signing such application in connection with the validation thereof, where property abutting such street is owned by more than one person, the signature of only one such owner shall be counted in calculating such 75 percent. In addition, persons who rent or lease real property abutting such street may sign such application, but their signatures shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold for submission of the application to the governing body. Signatures on any such application signed more than 90 calendar days prior to the date of submission of the application to the city clerk shall be invalid and shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold. In the event that more than one application for changing the name of an existing street is presented to the city clerk, the city clerk shall validate such applications in the order received. The first application validated by the city clerk shall be presented to the governing body first, and only if the resolution to approve the application is denied shall the city clerk present the second or subsequent validated application to the governing body. 
f.  The application shall be in such form as established by the city clerk. At a minimum, the application shall indicate thereon the location of the street, the proposed new name of the street, the printed name, street address, and signature of each property owner signing such application, and the date that each property owner signed the application. In addition, each such application shall include therewith a written statement which provides, in succinct detail, the reasons for the proposed street name change in honor of a particular person or business listed in the application. In providing such written statement, the criteria to be considered by the governing body regarding the changing of the name of such street as more particularly established in this division shall be specifically addressed by the application in such written statement accompanying the street name changing application. In addition, the application shall also list any public announcement or public recognition request that should accompany any official street name changing ceremony undertaken by the city in connection with the changing of the name of such street. 
g.  In the event that the city clerk determines that the application is valid, then prior to the submission of the application to the governing body, the city clerk shall undertake the following: 
1.  Provide notification of the application to and compile for review by the governing body responses to the application from the following: 
i.  All city agencies and departments, including, but not limited to; city police, city fire and EMS, city GIS system personnel, city building risk management risk department, and other city agencies or departments that the clerk deems appropriate; 
ii.  All other local, state, or national agencies which the city clerk determines may be affected by the changing of the name of the street; 
iii.  All schools located in the immediate vicinity of the street; 
iv.  Any other persons or entities the city clerk deems, in his or her sole discretion, should receive notice of the proposed changing of the street's name. 
2.  Review existing public records for the purpose of establishing that the proposed street name does not duplicate any existing street name and is not confusingly similar to any existing street name in Americus or Sumter County. 
h.  Upon the completion of the foregoing, the city clerk shall be required to place consideration of the application on the agenda for the city council meeting occurring in the calendar month after the month in which the application was finally validated. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the tabling of such proposal by the governing body, but in no event shall consideration of such proposal by the city council be delayed beyond 90 calendar days after the validated application was filed with the city clerk. 
i.  Prior to the governing body considering or voting upon such application, the governing body shall hold a public hearing regarding such application. Notice of such public hearing shall be published once in the city's legal organ no later than the day prior to the date of the public hearing. Such public notice shall advise the public regarding the application, the proposed new street name, and the time and place of the scheduled public hearing before the governing body. Such public hearing shall be conducted with the same formality as that required of public hearings in connection with zoning and rezoning matters before the governing body. Upon conclusion of the public hearing, the governing body shall be authorized to vote on the application. 
j.  In the event that the application is approved by an appropriate resolution of the governing body, the new name of the street shall take effect at such time as is determined by the governing body in such resolution. 
k.  Upon adoption of the resolution by the governing body, the city clerk shall undertake the following: 
1.  Provide written notice to each property owner owning property abutting the street of the official name of the street as approved by the governing body; 
2.  Provide written notice of the new name of the street to the United States Postal Service; 
3.  Provide written notice of the new name of the street to the emergency 911 system in effect for the geographical area including the City of Americus. 
l.  Within 60 calendar days of the effective date of the resolution adopting the new street name, the city utilities director shall have fabricated and installed appropriate signage regarding the new name of the street at such locations as deemed appropriate by the utilities director. 
(2)  By the professional staff of the city. 
    The professional staff of the city, or a member of the city council, may submit an application to change the name of an existing street. The procedures to be followed by the governing body in the event that such an application is submitted shall be the same procedures as previously outlined in section 78-152 of this division, except that no application fee shall be required, and the application shall not require the signatures of 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting the existing street. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-152, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-183. - Determination of renaming. 
(a)  In making a determination as to changing the name of an existing street, if the street is proposed to be renamed after a natural person, the governing body shall take into consideration the following: 
(1)  Whether such person has resided for a long period of time on such street; 
(2)  Whether such person has made significant and long-lasting contributions to the city and its citizens; 
(3)  Whether such person is a nationally or internationally prominent figure who has or may have a direct or indirect connection to the city and its citizens; 
(4)  Whether such person has provided charitable or philanthropic contributions to the city and its citizens; 
(5)  Whether such person has brought honor, prestige, or recognition in a positive manner to the city and its citizens; 
(6)  Whether such person is a leader in local governmental, civic, educational, or public affairs; or 
(7)  Whether such person is a distinguished and accomplished scholar, scientist, educational leader, business leader, government leader, or civic leader. 
(8)  In order to be considered for having an existing street renamed named after a person, such person may be either living or deceased at the time that the street name is changed. With respect to a deceased individual, the application shall not be submitted until at least one year after the date of death of such person. With respect to a living person, such person must have reached the age of 75 years at the time of the submission of the application, unless such age limitation is affirmatively waived by the governing body of the city within 30 calendar days after the filing of the application required by section 78-152. 
(b)  In the event that consideration is given to changing the name of an existing street so as to name such existing street after a business, an organization, or a nonprofit entity, the governing body of the city shall consider the following: 
(1)  Whether such entity is located upon such street; 
(2)  The length of time that such entity has been located on such street; 
(3)  The length of time that such entity has been located within the city; 
(4)  The civic, community, and educational contributions of the business to the city and its citizens; or 
(5)  The length of time that such entity is expected to remain in business under the same name on such street. 
(6)  No street shall be named after any ongoing business, organization, or nonprofit entity which is not located upon the street to be renamed in honor of such entity. 
(c)  In addition to the foregoing factors to be considered by the governing body in changing the name of an existing street, the governing body shall also be authorized to consider any and all other relevant factors that the governing body deems appropriate in making a street naming decision. 
(d)  No applications proposing to change the name of only a portion of a street shall be accepted by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-153, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-184. - Prohibitions. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit or interfere with the right of the State of Georgia or the Georgia Department of Transportation to name roads or streets under their respective ownership or jurisdiction in such manner as they may be authorized to do in accord with Georgia law or regulations promulgated thereunder. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-13, § 18-154, 3-22-2007) 
Secs. 78-185-78-200. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CITY SIDEWALK INSTALLATION 

Sec. 78-201. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the "city sidewalk installation article." 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-201, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-202. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, as follows: 
    City block is the smallest area that is surrounded by public streets within the incorporated area of the city. 
    Lot owners means the owner or owners of record of each lot abutting a proposed sidewalk, whether or not there is constructed on such lot a dwelling, house, commercial building or other structure. Such term shall include both personal and business owners of such lots of record. 
    Petition means a petition as more particularly described in section 78-203 of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-202, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-203. - Petition. 
(a)  Whenever any lot owner or owners located within the corporate limits of the city desire to request the city to install a sidewalk fronting the property owned by such lot owner or owners along one or more sides of a city block, then such lot owner or owners shall notify the city clerk, who shall provide the lot owner or owners with a pre-printed petition, which petition shall be for the purpose of ascertaining the level of support for the installation of such sidewalk. At the time of providing the petition to the lot owner or owners, the city clerk shall determine an estimated installation cost of the proposed sidewalk, which cost shall be assessed to each lot owner in a prorated amount as established in this article, and such estimated cost shall be provided to the lot owner or owners requesting the application. 
(b)  Such petition shall have typed thereon a title, which shall be "Petition Requesting the City of Americus to Install a Sidewalk Along the ____________ Side of ____________ Street from ____________ Street to ____________ Street." There shall further be typed thereon the following statement at the top of each page of the petition: 
The undersigned, by signing this petition, do hereby request the City of Americus to install a sidewalk as described above. The undersigned have been informed and do understand that if at least 75 percent of the record owners of lots abutting such proposed sidewalk sign this petition, the governing body of the city may authorize the installation of such sidewalk, and each record owner of a lot or lots abutting said sidewalk shall be required to pay the pro-rated cost of installation of such sidewalk as established by city ordinance. 
(c)  Such petition shall thereafter have spaces for the printed name and address, the legal signature, and the date of signing for each lot owner who signs such petition. Such petition shall be returned to the city clerk within 90 calendar days of the date that the petition was delivered by the city clerk to the lot owner or owners requesting such petition. No such petition shall be returned to or accepted by the city clerk until at least 75 percent of the record lot owners abutting the proposed sidewalk shall have signed the petition. For purposes of ascertaining the 75 percent threshold, the following shall apply: 
(1)  A lot owner may be counted as signing the petition only once, regardless of the number of lots such lot owner may own abutting said sidewalk. 
(2)  Where property is owned by more than one person, the signature of only one such owner shall be counted in calculating such 75 percent. 
(3)  Persons who rent or lease property abutting such proposed sidewalk may sign such petition, but their signatures shall not be counted toward the 75 percent threshold. 
(4)  Where the lot owner is a corporation or other legal entity, the petition shall only be signed by an authorized officer or agent of the corporation. 
(d)  Upon submission of said petition as a single petition to the city clerk, the city clerk shall cause the signatures thereon to be verified. The city clerk shall validate the petition by verifying that the proper number of signatures is contained on the petition and that the persons signing the petition are owners of real property abutting said proposed sidewalk as required by this article. In the event that the city clerk determines that the petition is invalid for any reason, or if the application does not contain sufficient signatures, the application shall be returned to the person or persons submitting such application, and it shall not be subject to further consideration by the governing body until such time as a new application is submitted and the city clerk validates the new application. Any persons who are not record 
owners of lots abutting the proposed sidewalk, or who are otherwise not authorized to sign such petition or have their signatures counted, shall have their names stricken from the petition and shall not be counted for purposes of ascertaining the 75 percent threshold. 
(e)  If, after verification of the signatures, the city clerk determines that at least 75 percent of the lot owners owning real property abutting the proposed sidewalk have signed the petition, then said petition shall be presented to the governing body of the city at its next regular monthly meeting for consideration. In the event that the petition contains the properly verified signatures of at least 75 percent of the persons owning real property abutting the proposed sidewalk, the city council shall be authorized to approve the installation of the sidewalk, but the city council shall not be required to approve such installation. 
(f)  If the installation of such sidewalk is approved by the city council, the appropriate city departments shall proceed with the installation of such sidewalk, which installation shall be performed in accord with applicable building and other codes. 
(g)  The city shall provide all labor and materials required for the installation of the sidewalk. At the conclusion of the installation, the city clerk shall determine the actual total installation cost incurred by the city, including, but not limited to; the cost of labor, materials, right-of-way acquisition, surveys, and engineering costs. Such cost shall be determined within 30 calendar days of the completion of the installation. The finance director shall then determine the cost of the installation per linear foot and shall cause each lot owner abutting such subdivision to be billed an amount equal to such cost per linear foot times the number of linear feet owned by such lot owner abutting the installed sidewalk. Such bills shall be paid by the lot owners within 30 days of submission by the city. In the event that it is requested by one or more lot owners and approved by the governing body, and in lieu of payment of such cost of installation in one payment, as to any lot owner or owners so requesting, the city shall be authorized to bill each lot owner for such lot owner's prorated cost over a 12-month period; provided, however, that any lot owner requesting to be billed over a 12-month period shall also pay interest equal to one percent per month on the unpaid principal balance until all payments are paid in full. The sale of the lot prior to the lot owner's payment of such prorated cost shall not relieve the lot owner of the obligation to pay such cost in full as required by this article. Failure to pay any installment when due shall entitle the city to terminate utility services to the lot owner in the same manner as if the lot owner had failed to pay a city utility bill. Nothing herein shall prohibit the city from including the billing for the pro-rata share of the installation of such sidewalk to the lot owners in the lot owner's monthly utility bill. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-203, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-204. - Application acceptance; right-of-ways. 
(a)  The city shall not be required to install such sidewalk unless the city obtains from each lot owner a deed to such real property as the city may require in order for the city to construct said sidewalk. Such right-of-way shall be conveyed to the city in fee simple and at no cost or expense to the city. 
(b)  No application for the construction of a sidewalk shall be accepted by the city clerk hereunder, unless such application includes the construction and paving of a sidewalk for the distance of at least one side of a city block. 
(c)  No application shall be accepted by the city clerk hereunder for the repaving of an existing paved sidewalk. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-204, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-205. - Maintenance and upkeep. 
    Upon completion of the installation of the sidewalk, the city shall assume responsibility for the maintenance and upkeep thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-205, 3-22-2007) 
Sec. 78-206. - Prohibition. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to prohibit the city from undertaking to construct sidewalks at such locations as the city may deem appropriate and in the best interest of the city and its citizens, regardless of whether a petition as described in section 78-203 hereof, has been submitted to the city. Any such construction by the city shall be undertaken and completed at the sole cost and expense of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-07-03-11, § 18-206, 3-22-2007) 
Secs. 78-207-78-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - IMPROPER USE OF PUBLIC OR PRIVATE PROPERTY 

Sec. 78-301. - Urban camping and improper use of public property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sleep, lie down, to reside upon, or to store personal property in any park, in any cemetery, upon any sidewalk, or in or upon any public property of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to use any public park, cemetery, public sidewalk, or public property for living accommodations or for camping, except in areas specifically designated for such use. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than the owner, tenant, employee, or other person with permission from the owner, to camp, sleep, reside, store personal property upon, or lie down outside upon any private property without the owner's permission to do so. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the provisions of this section, this section shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Persons sitting or lying down as a result of a medical emergency; 
(2)  Persons sitting in wheelchairs while using parks, sidewalks or other public places; 
(3)  Persons sitting down while attending parades for which valid permits have been issued; 
(4)  Persons sitting down while patronizing outdoor cafes; 
(5)  Persons sitting on chairs or benches supplied by a public agency or by an abutting private property owner; provided, however, that such exception shall not apply to persons sleeping, lying down, residing upon, or storing personal property upon such chairs or benches; 
(6)  Persons sitting down or lying down while attending sporting events, performances, festivals and concerts taking place in any park, or upon any street or sidewalk where such event is authorized by the city; 
(7)  Children under the age of 13 years sleeping in parks while being carried by or accompanied by another person over such age, or while sitting or lying in a baby stroller or carriage; 
(8)  Persons offering the sale of merchandise, food, vegetables, fruit, produce and similar items from the sidewalk in front of a business where such sale is otherwise authorized by the City Code. 
(e)  A person convicted of violating this Code section, or a person entering a plea of guilty or nolo contendre to a violation of this Code section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of the City Code. Each day that a person violates this Code section shall be considered to be a separate offense. In no event shall a violation of this Code section be considered or held to be a lesser included offense of the offense of loitering as provided in section 62-114 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. O-09-07-21, 7-23-2009) 
Chapter 82 - SUBDIVISIONS 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Definitions; street classifications. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alleys means minor ways used primarily for vehicular services access to the rear or sides of commercial or industrial properties. 
    Collector streets means a street used to carry traffic from minor streets to major streets, including the principal entrance streets to a neighborhood or group development and streets for circulation within such neighborhood or development. 
    Streets are as defined in section 1-2, and for the purposes of these regulations, streets are classified as follows: 
    Major streets means a street used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
    Minor streets means a street used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
    Subdivision. 
(1)  The term "subdivision" means any division of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or the future sale, legacy or building development, and includes any division of land involving a new street or a change in one or more existing streets and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided. 
(2)  Provided, however, the following are not included in this definition: 
a.  The subdivision of land for agricultural purposes provided no lot thereby produced is less than five acres or no new street is involved. 
b.  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created, and that the lots created are in accordance with other city regulations. 
c.  The division of land into parcels where no new street is to be established and the resulting lots are equal to or larger than the standard required in the city, and a zoning classification of resulting lots remains the same as the zoning classification of the land before such division; provided, however, that nothing herein shall be construed to prevent the rezoning, of such property on proper application and approval granted in accordance with this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 19-1; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-2. - Zoning; conflict of standards. 
(a)  No final plat of land within the force and effect of an existing zoning regulations will be approved unless it conforms with such regulations. 
(b)  Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or building code, or other official standards, the highest standard shall apply. 
(Code 1986, § 19-38; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-3. - Variances. 
    Where the subdivider can show that a provision of these standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the departure was justified set forth. 
(Code 1986, § 19-39; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-4. - Enforcement-Authorities designated; duties. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the community development director and the planning commission. The community development director shall: 
(1)  Receive all subdivision plats; 
(2)  In cooperation with the planning commission review and approve or disapprove subdivision plats; 
(3)  Inspect subdivisions for compliance with the requirement of this chapter and other applicable city ordinances. 
(Code 1986, § 19-2; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-5. - Same-Circumventing requirements; approval of plat required; access street required. 
(a)  The owner or agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided within the city who transfers or sells or agrees to sell negotiates to sell such land by reference to or exhibition of or by other use of a plat to subdivide such land before such plat has been approved by the planning commission and recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county, shall be denied all building permits, public services, and utility connections, and subject to punishment for ordinance violation and the description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the process of selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties. The city, through its attorney or other official designated by the city council, may enjoin such transfer or sale or agreement by appropriate action. 
(b)  No plat or plan of subdivision within the city shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county until it has been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission. 
(c)  No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the city unless the street giving access to the lot upon which said building is proposed to be placed shall be accepted or opened as, or shall have otherwise received the legal status of a public street prior to that time, or unless such street corresponds in its location and line with a street shown on a subdivision plat approved by said planning commission or with a street located and accepted by the city. Any building erected in violation of this section shall be deemed an unlawful structure, and the building official, city attorney or other official designated by the city council may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
(Code 1986, § 19-3; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-6. - Preliminary plat filing fee. 
    The developer shall be assessed a filing fee in the amount established by ordinance payable to the finance director at the time of filing the preliminary plat. 
(Code 1986, § 19-4; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 82-7-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PROCEDURES FOR PLAT APPROVAL 

Sec. 82-31. - Generally. 
(a)  The procedure for formal review and approval of a subdivision plat shall consist of the following three separate steps: 
(1)  The subdivider should consult early and informally with the community development director and/or other city technical staff for advice and assistance before the preparation of the preliminary sketch plat and its formal application for approval. This will enable the subdivider to become thoroughly familiar with these standards, the major street plan and other official plans or public improvements that might affect the area. Such informal review should prevent unnecessary and costly revisions. 
(2)  Prior to the making of any street improvement, or installations of utilities, the developer shall submit to the planning commission a preliminary plat of the proposed subdivision. After receiving the planning commission's approval of the preliminary plat and full concurrence and approval by the city, the developer may then proceed to grade the streets and install all improvements required by this chapter and any other applicable city ordinances. In lieu of the completion of all improvements prior to submission of the final plat, the developer may post a bond with the city, or certified check, in an amount and with surety satisfactory to the city and conditions satisfactory to the city, providing for and securing to the city the actual construction and installation of such improvements within a period specified by the planning commission and stated in the bond. 
(3)  After completion of the physical development of the subdivision or the posting of a bond or certified check to guarantee the same, the developer shall submit to the planning commission a final plat together with any required certificates. The final plat, along with any deed restrictions, becomes the instrument to be recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county. 
(b)  No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the planning commission or accepted for record by the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county until the required improvements listed shall be constructed in satisfactory manner and approved by the appropriate approving agent. 
(Code 1986, § 19-20; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-32. - Preliminary plat. 
(a)  At least ten days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission the subdivider shall submit to the building official's office three copies of the plat of the proposed subdivision drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet, along with a receipt for the filing fee from the finance director. 
(b)  The preliminary plat shall meet the minimum standards of design and general requirements for the construction of public improvements as set forth in article III of this chapter and shall give the following information insofar as possible: 
(1)  Description: 
a.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
b.  Name and address of subdivider. 
c.  Graphic scale, north point and date. The north point shall be identified as magnetic, true, or grid north. 
d.  Location sketch map showing the relationship of the subdivision site to the surrounding area, including directions and distances to readily identifiable landmarks in the surrounding area. 
e.  Acreage to be subdivided. 
(2)  Existing conditions: 
a.  Topography by contours at vertical intervals of not more than two feet, or as determined necessary by the city utilities director, when a new street is involved in a subdivision, including outline of wooded areas and classifications of land. 
b.  Zoning district classification on land to be subdivided and of adjoining land. 
c.  Names and addresses of adjoining property owners or subdivisions. 
d.  In case of resubdivision, a copy of existing plat with proposed resubdivision superimposed thereon. 
e.  Location of streams, lakes and swamps and land subject to flood as determined from past history of flooding (listed on appropriate FEMA map). 
f.  Location of existing and platted property lines, location, width and names of all platted roads, railroads, utility rights-of-way, public areas, existing buildings or structures. 
g.  Existing sewers, water mains, drains, culverts or other underground facilities within the tract or within the right-of-way of boundary roads, with sizes, grades and invert elevations from public records, or from field surveys, or other sources. All sizes and data on all utilities shall be provided. 
h.  Certification by the county health officer when individual sewage disposal or water systems are to be installed. 
(3)  Proposed conditions: 
a.  Layout of roads, alleys and public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations. 
b.  Layout of all lots and the area of each lot, including building setback lines and lot divisions with scaled dimensions and utility easements with width and use on all lots. 
c.  Preliminary plan of all utilities to be constructed. 
d.  Designation of all land to be reserved or dedicated for public use. 
(c)  Within 30 days after submission of the preliminary plat, the planning commission shall review it and indicate its approval, disapproval, or approval subject to listed modifications, as a basis for preparation of the final plat. If a plat is disapproved, reasons for such disapproval will be stated in the records of the planning commission. Failure of the planning commission to act on the preliminary sketch within 30 days will be deemed approval of this plat, unless the developer agrees to an extension of time. 
(d)  Approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance of the final plat and shall not be indicated on the preliminary plat. 
(e)  The approval of the preliminary plat shall lapse until a final plat based thereon is submitted within one year from the date of such approval, unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning commission. 
(f)  After the planning commission has reviewed and acted on the preliminary plat, one copy will be returned to the developer, one copy will go to the building official's office and one copy will be retained in the records of the planning commission. 
(g)  After the planning commission has approved the preliminary plat, construction plans should be submitted to the building official and include the following: 
(1)  Layout of roads, alleys and public crosswalks, with widths, road names or designations, grades and cross sections. 
(2)  Preliminary plan of sanitary sewers with grades, service, pipe size and points of discharge, together with certified copy of all load design factors and computations. 
(3)  Preliminary plan of storm drainage system with glade, pipe size and location of outlet, together with certified copy of all design factors and computations. 
(4)  Preliminary plan of water supply system with pipe sizes and location of hydrants, valves and all appurtenances. 
(Code 1986, § 19-21; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 82-33. - Final plat. 
(a)  At least ten days prior to the regular meeting of the planning commission the subdivider shall submit to the building official's office an original on reproducible Mylar or vellum, and three copies, of the final plat. The final plat shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat as approved and, if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the preliminary plat which such developer proposes to record and develop at the time, provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of these standards. 
(b)  The original shall be drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet on reproducible Mylar or vellum and shall correspond to plat book dimensions. It shall be the developer's responsibility to provide the clerk of superior court with a plat that will fit in the plat book/cabinet. When more than one sheet is required, an index sheet of the same size shall be filed showing the entire subdivision with sheets lettered in alphabetical order as a key. 
(c)  When the plat has been approved, the original will be returned to the developer with the approval of the planning commission certified thereon for filing with the clerk of the superior court of this county; one copy will be returned to the developer for such developer's records; one copy will be forwarded to the building official's office and one copy will be returned in the records of the planning commission. 
(d)  The planning commission shall approve or disapprove this final plat within 30 days after its submission to that body. Failure of the planning commission to act on this final plat within these 30 days shall be deemed approval of it. If the plat is disapproved, the grounds for disapproval shall be stated upon the records of the planning commission. 
(e)  Approval of the final plat by the planning commission shall not constitute acceptance by the public of the dedication of any streets or public ways or ground. 
(f)  The final plat shall comply with the plat act and shall give the following information: 
(1)  Certification that the applicant is the landowner, all parties with mortgage or lien interest to be included, and that applicant dedicates street rights-of-way and any sites for public use. 
(2)  Certification by a licensed surveyor to the accuracy of survey and plat and placement of monuments. 
(3)  Certification by the proper city officials that the developer has complied with the following: All improvements have been installed in accord with the requirements of this chapter and other applicable city ordinances. 
(4)  Protective covenants or deed restrictions, if any, shall be placed directly on the final plat or attached thereto in form for recording. 
(5)  Certificate on the plat to be signed by the secretary of the planning commission when the plat has been given final approval by the planning commission. 
(Code 1986, § 19-22; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-99-02-08, 2-18-1999) 
Sec. 82-34. - As-built construction plans. 
(a)  The as-built construction plans shall give the following information: 
(1)  Sufficient information to reproduce the plat on the ground, including tract boundary lines and their relation to established land lot lines, right-of-way, property lines of residential lots, and other sites with accurate dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth of a foot, bearings, and angles on all lines, radii, arcs, and central angles of all curves with readings to the nearest minute. 
(2)  Profiles of grades for streets when required by the city. 
(3)  Blocks designated by letter and lots by number or lots numbered consecutively. 
(4)  Location and description of monuments. 
(5)  Final plan of sanitary sewers with grade, pipe sizes, and point of discharge. 
(6)  Final plan of storm drains with grade, pipe sizes, and point of discharge. 
(7)  Final plan of water supply system with pipe sites and location of hydrants and valves. 
(b)  The as-built construction plans shall be furnished to the public works department on a 31/2-inch disk or CD and shall be in a .DWG or .DXF format. 
(Code 1986, § 19-23; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-34, 8-19-1999) 
Secs. 82-35-82-56. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - REQUIREMENTS AND STANDARDS 

Sec. 82-57. - Basic requirements; minimum standards. 
(a)  Land which the planning commission has found to be unsuitable for subdivision due to flooding, bad drainage, steep slopes, rock formations, or other features likely to be harmful to the safety, health, and general welfare of the future residents shall not be subdivided unless adequate methods approved by the planning commission are formulated by the developer for meeting the problems created by the subdivision of such land. 
(b)  Land subject to flooding shall not be platted for residential occupancy or for such other uses, as will not comply with chapter 34, article II, the danger to health, life and property unless such land is not to be used as a building site. In applying this provision, land liable to flooding as determined from past history shall be considered subject to flood. Fill shall not be used to raise the land in areas subject to flood unless the fill proposed does not restrict the flow of water and unduly increase flood heights. 
(Code 1986, § 19-30; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-58. - Streets. 
(a)  Conformity to the major street plan. The location and width of all streets and roads shall conform to the official major street plan; i.e., provision must be made for the location of thoroughfares as shown on the major street plan. 
(b)  Relation to adjoining street system. The proposed street system shall extend existing streets at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width. It shall connect with streets already dedicated in adjacent subdivisions or where no such streets exist, it shall follow the projection of streets in related subdivided tracts so that other subdivisions may connect therewith. The city reserves the right to require the developer to meet minimum road design standards. 
(c)  Restriction of access. When a tract fronts on an arterial street or highway, the planning commission may require all residential lots to be provided with frontage on a minor residential street. 
(d)  Street right-of-way widths. The minimum width of right-of-way, measured from lot line to lot line, shall be as shown on the major street plan, or if not shown on such plan, shall be not less than as follows: 
(1)  Arterial streets and highways: 80 to120 feet. 
(2)  Collector streets: 60 feet. 
(3)  Commercial and industrial streets: 80 feet. 
(4)  Minor residential streets: 
a.  Curb and gutter: 50 feet. 
b.  Ditches: 60 feet. 
For both of the above, a 15-foot utility drainage easement shall be provided on each side of the right-of-way. 
(e)  Exceptions. In cases where topography or other physical conditions made a street of the required minimum width impracticable, the planning commission may modify the above requirements. Through proposed business areas the street widths shall be increased ten feet on each side if needed to provide parking without interference to normal passing traffic. 
(f)  Additional width on existing street. Subdivisions that join existing streets shall dedicate additional rights-of-way if needed to meet the above minimum street width requirements. 
(1)  The entire right-of-way shall be provided where any part of the subdivision is on both sides of the existing street. 
(2)  When the subdivision is located on only one side of an existing street, one-half of the required right-of-way, measured from the centerline of the existing roadway shall be provided. 
(g)  Street grades and elevations. Grades on major streets shall not exceed seven percent and grades on other streets shall not exceed 12 percent. 
(h)  Horizontal curves. Where a deflection angle of more than two degrees in the alignment of a street occurs, a curve of reasonably long radius shall be introduced. On streets 60 feet or more in width, the centerline radius of curvature shall be not less than 300 feet; on other streets it shall not be less than 100 feet. 
(i)  Vertical curves. All changes in grade shall be connected by vertical curves of minimum length in feet equal to 15 times the algebraic difference in rates of grade for major streets, and one-half this minimum length for other streets. Profiles of all streets showing natural and finished grades drawn to a scale of not less than one inch equals 100 feet horizontally and one inch equals 20 feet vertically may be required by the planning commission upon recommendation of the city utilities director. 
(j)  Intersections. Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle of less than 60 degrees. Property line radii at street intersections shall not be less than 20 feet, and where the angle of street intersection is less than 75 degrees the planning commission may require a greater curb radius. To permit the construction of a curb having a desirable radius without curtailing the sidewalk at a street corner to less than normal width, the property line at such street corner shall be reduced or otherwise set back sufficiently to permit such construction. 
(k)  Tangents. A tangent of at least 100 feet long shall be introduced between reverse curves on all streets. 
(l)  Street jogs. Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall not be allowed. 
(m)  Dead-end streets. 
(1)  Minor terminal streets or courts designed to have one end permanently closed shall be no more than 600 feet long unless necessitated by topography. They shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 90 feet and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 110 feet for curb and gutter and 130 feet for ditches. 
(2)  Where phases may be proposed a temporary turnaround shall be provided. 
(n)  Private streets and reserve strips. There shall be no private streets platted in any subdivision. Every lot of subdivided property shall be served from a publicly dedicated street. There shall be no reserve strips controlling access to streets, except where the control of such strips is definitely placed with the city under conditions approved by the planning commission. 
(o)  Street names. Proposed streets that are obviously, in alignment with others already existing and named shall bear the names of existing streets. In no case shall the names for proposed streets duplicate names of existing streets, irrespective of the use of the suffix "street," "avenue," "boulevard," "driveway," "place" or "court." 
(p)  Alleys. Alleys shall be provided to the rear of all lots used for business purposes; alleys shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys. 
(q)  Construction requirements. 
(1)  Every subdivision developer shall be required to make adequate provision for handling drainage problems, to grade and improve streets and alleys, to install curbs or invert ditches and to install street name signs in accordance with specifications established by the city utilities director. 
(2)  All street design and construction and related matters shall be in strict accordance with Georgia Department of Transportation Standard Specifications, volume 1 "Construction of Roads and Bridges" and volume 2 "Materials for Roads and Bridges" and all revisions thereto. Where circumstances dictate variations from the standard specifications, the city utilities director may vary the requirements providing the design or materials accepted are in all ways commensurate with good practice. 
(3)  All materials, equipment, labor and other matters related to street construction shall be provided by the developer. The following is a summary of the improvements required: 
a.  Grading. All streets, roads and alleys shall be graded to their full width by the subdivider so that pavements and sidewalks, if installed in the future can be constructed on the same level plane. The preparation of the right-of-way before grading is started and the construction of cuts and fills shall be accomplished according to the specifications of the city. 
b.  Storm drainage. An adequate drainage system, including necessary curbs, pipes, culverts, headwalls, intersectional drains, drop inlets, bridges, swale ditches, etc., shall be provided for the proper drainage of all surface water. 
c.  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied all of the underground work (water mains, gas mains, etc. and all service connections) shall be installed completely and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. All driveways for houses to be built by the developer shall be cut and drained. 
d.  Roadway base. After preparation of the subgrade, the roadbed shall be properly based with one of the following: 
1.  A six-inch sand clay base (class B); 
2.  A six-inch graded aggregate base; or 
3.  Six-inch mixed in place soil cement base. 
e.  Roadway surfacing. The paved surface shall be a two-inch compacted asphalt plant mix. 
f.  Minimum pavement width. Minimum pavement including paved gutters between curbs shall be as follows: 
1.  Minor residential streets: 30 feet. 
2.  Access routes: 38 to 44 feet. 
3.  Arterial streets or through routes: As may be required. 
4.  Ditch sections: 24 feet. 
g.  Curbs. Where the subdivider elects to provide curbs or it is deemed essential and necessary by the city utilities director, a permanent six-inch Portland cement concrete curb and gutter with a longitudinal storm drain system shall be installed. Backfill shall slope toward the curb to ensure drainage of surface water into the storm drainage system. 
h.  Rural ditch section. Where the developer does not install curb and gutter, a rural ditch section shall be provided. Said ditch shall be constructed with a minimum of 3:1 slope on both sides of the ditch. And shall have a minimum channel width of at least two feet. All rural ditch sections shall be designed and constructed to accommodate a 25-year flood. No rural ditch section shall be constructed within a right-of-way less than 60 feet wide with a 15-foot utility/storm drainage easement, on both sides. All rural ditch sections shall be seeded or sodded to provide for a permanent stand of grass. 
i.  Outfall ditches. Outfall ditches shall be piped 130 feet from the right-of-way. 
(Code 1986, § 19-31; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-59. - Blocks. 
(a)  In general, blocks shall be not less than 400 feet, nor more than 1,200 feet in length, except where topography or other conditions peculiar to the site make such dimensions impracticable. 
(b)  Blocks shall be wide enough to allow two tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topography conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning commission will approve a single tier or lots of minimum depth. 
(Code 1986, § 19-32; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-60. - Lots. 
(a)  Arrangement. Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines. Each lot shall front upon a public street or road that is not less than 50 feet in width. Each lot shall be at least 30 feet in width at the front property line. 
(b)  Minimum size. The size, shape and orientation of lots shall be such, as the planning commission deems appropriate for the type of development and use contemplated. Where a public sanitary sewer is reasonably accessible, the subdivider shall connect with such sewer and provide a connection to each lot. Where a public sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal may be used when meeting all applicable public health regulations. 
(1)  Residential lots served by a public sewer system shall be not less than 60 feet wide at the building setback line, nor less than 7,000 square feet in area. Where a rural ditch section is used, each lot shall maintain a 100-foot width at the setback line, not less than 13,000 square feet in size, and maintain a minimum frontage at the right-of-way line of 50 feet. Where a cul-de-sac is constructed using the rural ditch section method, the maximum number of lots on a cul-de-sac shall be five lots, with a minimum right-of-way diameter of 130 feet, and a minimum paving diameter being 90 feet. 
(2)  For residential lots not served by a public sewer system, the planning commission shall require that data from percolation tests be submitted as a basis for approving subdivisions dependent upon septic tanks as a means of sewage disposal, and no lot shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building line, nor less than 15,000 square feet in area. 
(3)  For residential lots not served by a public water supply or a public sewer system, no lot shall be less than 100 feet wide at the building line, nor less than one acre in size except upon approval of the county health officer and in no case shall any lot be less than one-half acre in size. 
(4)  The minimum size of residential lots to be served by a private source of water supply shall be determined by the county health officer after investigations of soil conditions, proposed sewer system and depth of groundwater. 
(5)  Size of properties reserved or laid out for commercial or industrial properties shall be adequate to provide for the off-street service and parking facilities required by the type of use and development contemplated. Platting of individual lots shall be avoided in favor of an overall design of the land to be used for such purposes. 
(6)  The size and widths of lots shall in no case be less than the minimum requirements of the zoning regulations in effect. 
(c)  Building setback lines. The minimum depth of building setback lines from any street shall be 30 feet. If, however, suitable provision is made in connection with the plat or restrictions pertaining to the plat, building lines may be varied, provided such variation does not reduce the setback more than five feet. Where rural ditch section construction for a subdivision is used the minimum building setback line from any street right-of-way shall be 50 feet for any zoning district. 
(d)  Corner lots. Corner lots shall be sufficiently wider and larger to permit the additional side yard requirements of the zoning regulations or building setback lines outlined above. 
(Code 1986, § 19-33; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-61. - Utilities. 
(a)  Water. Water mains for both domestic use and fire protection shall be properly connected with the city water system. The lines shall conform with accepted standards of good practice for municipal water systems, and shall meet, as a minimum, the requirements of the state environmental protection division and the city. All materials, labor, equipment, and other matters related to the water distribution system shall be provided by the developer. 
(b)  Sewer. When the subdivision is located within the service area of a public sewer system, sanitary sewers shall be installed in such a manner as to serve adequately all lots with connection to the public system. Where lots cannot be economically connected with a sewer system, they must contain adequate area for the installation of approved septic tank and disposal fields and must be approved in writing by the county health officer. All materials, equipment, labor, and other matters related to the sanitary sewer system shall be provided by the developer and all sewer facilities shall be installed in accordance with the standards of the department of human resources of the state and standards of the city. 
(c)  Installation of utilities. After grading is completed and approved and before any base is applied to the street, all of the underground work, water mains, gas mains, etc., and all service connections shall be installed completed and approved throughout the length of the road and across the flat section. Where the utility mains are off the pavement, the developer may elect to omit the installation of service connections providing that at such time as these service connections are needed, they may be jacked across the street without breaking or weakening the existing pavement. 
(d)  Easements for utilities. Except where alleys are permitted for that purpose, the city may require easements for poles, wires, conduits, storm and sanitary sewers, gas, and water mains or other utility lines, along rear lot lines or side lot lines, if, in the opinion of the city utilities director such action is desirable. Easements of the same or greater width may be required along the line of or across lots, where necessary for the extension of existing or planned utilities. Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, channel or stream, there shall be provided a stormwater easement or drainage right-of-way along each side for the purpose of widening, depending, relocating, improving or protecting such drainage easement. 
(e)  Street lighting. Either underground or overhead electrical service shall be provided by the developer of a subdivision, through a public utility. All subdivisions with underground electrical lines shall have placed appropriate utility poles for street lighting. The installation of streetlights shall adhere to the following requirements: streetlights shall be installed at each street intersection and streetlights that are to be installed along the proposed blocks shall be equally spaced between street intersections. However, the maximum distance between any two streetlights shall not exceed 400 feet in length. After construction has been completed for an accepted phase or for an entire subdivision, and where the streets have been dedicated to the city, the city will be responsible for the costs associated with the operation of the streetlights. Streetlight design, size, and wattage must be approved by the city as part of the preliminary platting process. For example, a block 800 feet in length, it would be necessary to install three streetlights. For a block 1,100 feet in length, four streetlights would be necessary. 
(Code 1986, § 19-34; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-62. - Monuments. 
    Concrete monuments four inches in diameter or square, four feet long, with a flat top, shall be set at all street corners at all points where the street lines intersect the exterior boundaries of the subdivision, and at angle points and points of curve in each street. The top of the monument shall have an indented cross to identify properly the location and shall be set flush with the finished grade. All other lot, corners shall be marked with iron pipe not less than three-fourths inches in diameter and 24 inches long and driven so as to be flush with the finished grade. 
(Code 1986, § 19-35; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-63. - Large tracts. 
    When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged so as to allow for the opening of future streets and logical further resubdivision. 
(Code 1986, § 19-36; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Sec. 82-64. - Group housing developments. 
    A comprehensive group housing development, including the large scale construction of housing units together with necessary drives and ways of access, may be approved by the planning commission although the design of the project does not include standard street, lot and subdivision arrangements, if departure from the foregoing standards can be made without destroying their intent. The developer shall provide proof that adequate access is provided for emergency vehicles. 
(Code 1986, § 19-37; Ord. No. O-97-03-05, 3-20-1997) 
Chapter 86 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Traffic generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; adoption of uniform rules of the road by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - State law-Adoption by reference. 
    Pursuant to chapter 6 of title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated (Code §§ 40-6-372-40-6- 376, Code §§ 40-6-1-40-6-397) of that chapter known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the City of Americus with like effect as if recited herein. 
(Code 1962, § 23-152(a); Code 1986, § 20-1; Ord. No. O-2013-4, § 1, 2-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-2. - Same-Penalty. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Code 1962, § 23-153; Code 1986, § 20-2; Ord. No. O-2013-4, § 2, 2-21-2013) 
Sec. 86-3. - Riding on outside of vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to ride on the fenders, bumpers or any other portion of any motor vehicle, except on the inside thereof. 
(Code 1962, § 23-27; Code 1986, § 20-30) 
Secs. 86-4-86-24. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-25. - Authority of police and fire department officials. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police to enforce this chapter and all other traffic laws of this city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in this city. 
(b)  Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the chief of police, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand, or signal in conformity with traffic laws, provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. 
(c)  Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic threat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1962, § 23-9; Code 1986, § 20-4) 
Sec. 86-26. - Authority of chief of police to delegate power and duties. 
    The chief of police shall have the power to delegate to any other officer in the police department the duties and responsibilities conferred on such chief by this chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 23-10; Code 1986, § 20-5) 
Sec. 86-27. - Authority of utilities director. 
(a)  Signs on one-way streets. Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of this city designates any one-way street or alley, the utilities director shall place and maintain signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulation shall be effective unless such signs are in place. Signs indicating the direction of lawful traffic movement shall be placed at every intersection where movement of traffic in the opposite direction is prohibited. 
(b)  Speed signs. The police chief shall cause to be erected and the utilities director shall erect throughout the city signs indicating the maximum speed limit and/or such other information as will be informative to drivers of motor vehicles as it pertains to traffic control regulations at said location or in the city. 
(c)  Turn signs. The police chief is hereby authorized to determine those intersections at which drivers of vehicles shall not make a right or left turn. The utilities director shall place proper signs at such intersections. The making of such turns may be prohibited between certain hours of any day and permitted at other hours, in which event the same shall be plainly indicated on the signs, or they may be removed when such turns are permitted. 
(d)  Turn markers. The utilities director is authorized to place markers, buttons, and signs within or adjacent to intersections indicating the course to be traveled by vehicles turning at such intersection, and such course to be traveled as so indicated may conform to or be other than as prescribed by this chapter or other law or ordinance. 
(e)  Marking crosswalks, safety zones, traffic lanes. The utilities director is hereby authorized: 
(1)  To designate and maintain, by appropriate devices, marks or lines upon the surface of the roadway, crosswalks at intersections where there is particular danger to pedestrians crossing the roadway and at such other places as such engineer may deem necessary. 
(2)  To establish safety zones of such kind and character and at such places as may be necessary for the protection of pedestrians. 
(3)  To make lanes for traffic on street pavements at such places as may be advisable, consistent with this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city. 
(f)  Stop signs. Whenever this chapter or any ordinance of the city designates and describes a through street it shall be the duty of the utilities director to place and maintain a stop sign or yield right-of-way sign on each intersection of such through street or intersection of that portion described and designated as such by this chapter or any ordinance of this city. 
(g)  Hazardous locations. The police chief is hereby authorized to determined and designate intersections where particular hazards exist upon streets other than those designated by this chapter or any other ordinance of this city as through streets, and to place at such determined and designated hazardous intersections at one or more entrances to any such intersection either a stop sign or yield right-of-way sign. 
(Code 1962, §§ 23-12, 23-32, 23-54, 23-55, 23-64, 23-118, 23-119; Code 1986, § 20-6; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 86-28. - Temporary traffic rules. 
    Where the traffic upon the streets becomes congested, and upon occasions of parades, at theaters and other public places where large numbers of vehicles are assembled, the police may make temporary rules regulating the traffic in such congested districts. 
(Code 1962, § 23-62; Code 1986, § 20-17) 
Sec. 86-29. - Play streets; authority to establish. 
    The police chief shall have authority to declare any street or part thereof a play street and to place appropriate signs or devices in the roadway indicating and helping to protect the same. 
(Code 1962, § 23-71; Code 1986, § 20-40; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Secs. 86-30-86-46. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 86-47. - Owner liable for parking violation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow, permit, or suffer any vehicle registered in such person's name to stand or park in any street, in violation of this chapter or any other ordinance of the city regulating the parking of vehicles. Such person shall be equally liable with the operator for such violation and in addition thereto may have the vehicle impounded; provided, however, this shall not apply in those instances described in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207. 
(Code 1962, § 23-144; Code 1986, § 20-80) 
Sec. 86-48. - Presumption in reference to illegal parking. 
(a)  In any prosecution charging a violation of any law or regulation governing the standing or parking of a vehicle proof that the particular vehicle described in the complaint was parked in violation of any such law or regulation, together with proof that the defendant named in the complaint was at the time of such parking the registered owner of such vehicle, shall constitute in evidence a prima facie presumption that the registered owner of such vehicle was the person who parked or placed such vehicle at the point where, and for the time which, such violation occurred; provided, however, this shall not apply in those instances described in O.C.G.A. § 40-6-207. 
(b)  The foregoing stated presumption shall apply only when the procedure in section 86-49 has been followed. 
(Code 1962, § 23-142; Code 1986, § 20-81) 
Sec. 86-49. - Notice on illegally parked vehicle. 
    Whenever any motor vehicle without a driver is found parked or stopped in violation of any of the restrictions imposed by this chapter or other ordinance of this city or by state law, the officer finding such vehicle shall take its registration number and may take other information displayed on the vehicle which may identify its user, and shall conspicuously affix to such vehicle a notice in writing, on a form provided by the city clerk for the driver to answer to the charge at the time and place specified in the notice. 
(Code 1962, § 23-143; Code 1986, § 20-82) 
Sec. 86-50. - When summons for arrest to be issued. 
    In the event any person fails to comply with a notice given to such person or attached to a vehicle or fails to make appearance pursuant to a summons, or if any person fails or refuses to deposit bail as required and within the time permitted by ordinance, the city clerk shall forthwith secure and issue a summons for such person's arrest. 
(Code 1962, § 23-146; Code 1986, § 20-83) 
Sec. 86-51. - When warrants for arrest to be issued. 
    When it shall be made to appear to the municipal court that any person has been lawfully served with a copy of charges to appear in such court for trial and shall fail to appear at the time and place set forth in such copy of charges, it shall be the duty of the municipal judge to forthwith issue a warrant for the arrest of such person and deliver same to the chief of police. 
(Code 1962, § 23-150; Code 1986, § 20-86) 
Secs. 86-52-86-75. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - VEHICLE OPERATION 

Sec. 86-76. - Maximum speed limits-Generally. 
    Motor vehicles shall not be driven at a higher rate of speed than 30 miles per hour in the city, nor a higher rate of speed than ten miles per hour in any park or cemetery owned and maintained by the city. 
(Code 1962, § 23-28; Code 1986, § 20-31) 
State Law reference- Speed limits generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-181. 
Sec. 86-77. - Same-In school zones. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive a motor vehicle on streets adjoining school property during school days, in excess of 15 miles per hour. 
(Code 1962, § 23-31; Code 1986, § 20-32) 
Sec. 86-78. - Speed zones established. 
    The following speed zones are established for vehicles upon the following streets within the corporate limits of the city, as follows: 
(1)  On-system. Signs to be erected by the state department of transportation: 
a.  State Route 3 from the south city limits (Mile Point 10.62) to a point 500 feet south of McGarrah Street (Mile Point 11.82), a distance of 1.20 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
b.  State Route 3 from a point 500 feet south of McGarrah Street (Mile Point 11.82) to State Route 30 (Mile Point 12.24), a distance of 0.42 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
c.  State Route 3 from State Route 30 (Mile Point 12.24) to north city limits (Mile Point 13.08), a distance of 0.84 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
d.  State Route 27 (Lamar Street) from State Route 3 (Mile Point 12.53) to Dudley Street (Mile Point 12.90), a distance of 0.37 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
e.  State Route 27 (Lamar Street) from Dudley Street (Mile Point 12.90) to Prince Street (Mile Point 13.32), a distance of 0.42 miles, to be zoned for 25 miles per hour. 
f.  State Route 27 (Lamar Street) from Prince Street (Mile Point 13.32) to State Route 30 (Presidential Route) (Mile Point 14.63), a distance of 1.31 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
g.  State Route 27 (Lamar Street) from State Route 30 (Presidential Route) (Mile Point 14.63) to east city limits (Mile Point 14.88), a distance of 0.25 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
h.  State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) from State Route 27 (Lamar Street) (Mile Point 0.00) to State Route 49 (Mile Point 0.65), a distance of 0.65 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
i.  State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) from State Route 49 (Mile Point 0.65) to Price Street (Mile Point 1.41), a distance of 0.76 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
j.  State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) from Prince Street (Mile Point 1.41) to Dudley Street (Mile Point 1.83), a distance of 0.42 miles, to be zoned for 25 miles per hour. 
k.  State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) from Dudley Street (Mile Point 1.83) to State Route 3 (Mile Point 2.17), a distance of 0.34 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
l.  State Route 30 from west city limits (Mile Point 12.40) to State Route 3 (Mile Point 12.90), a distance of 0.50 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
m.  State Route 30 runs in common with State Route 3 for 0.89 miles. 
n.  State Route 30 from State Route 27 (Mile Point 15.87) to east city limits (Mile Point 16.03), a distance of 0.16 miles, to be zoned for 45 miles per hour. 
o.  State Route 49 from State Route 27 (Lamar Street) (Mile Point 16.54) to east city limits (Mile Point 17.65), a distance of 1.11 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
p.  State Route 377 from south city limits (Mile Point 8.61) to Rose Avenue (Mile Point 9.40), a distance of 0.79 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
q.  State Route 377 from Rose Avenue (Mile Point 9.40) to State Route 27 Dual (Forsyth Street) (Mile Point 11.21), a distance of 1.81 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
(2)  Off-system. Signs to be erected by the city: 
a.  Armory Drive from State Route 30 to Patton Drive, a distance of 0.80 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
b.  Carter Street from North Lee Street to Southerfield Road, a distance of 0.22 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
c.  Cotton Avenue from Forsyth Street to McGarrah Street, a distance of 0.56 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
d.  East Oglethorpe Avenue from Mayo Street to State Route 49, a distance of 1.36 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
e.  Elm Avenue from State Route 377 to Seaboard Coastline Railroad, a distance of 0.75 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
f.  Elm Avenue from Seaboard Coastline Railroad to Taylor Street, a distance of 0.32 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
g.  Felder Street from the east city limits to Reese Park, a distance of 1.87 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
h.  Glessner Street from Oak Avenue to Wheatley Street, a distance of 0.94 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
i.  Hancock Drive from Daniel Street to College Street, a distance of 0.86 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
j.  Harrold Avenue from Glessner Street to College Street, a distance of 0.63 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
k.  Jackson Street from Forsyth Street to Northside Drive, a distance of 1.17 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
l.  Magnolia Street from State Route 3 to State Route 30, a distance of 0.79 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
m.  Mayo Street from Lamar Street to Johansen Street, a distance of 0.83 miles, to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
n.  Mayo Street from Johanson Street to Railroad Street, a distance of 0.32 miles, to be zoned for 40 miles per hour. 
o.  McGarrah Street from Cotton Avenue to State Route 3, a distance of 0.45 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
p.  North Lee Street from State Route 377 to Rucker Street, a distance of 1.20 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
q.  Oak Avenue from Pecan Drive to College Street, a distance of 0.76 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
r.  Park Row from State Route 3 to Magnolia Street, a distance of 0.33 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
s.  Money Street from Rucker Street to north city limits, a distance of 0.40 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
t.  Rose Avenue from State Route 377 to Glessner Street, a distance of 1.70 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
u.  Rucker Street from State Route 3 to Northside Drive a distance of 0.37 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
v.  Tripp Street from Felder Street to State Route 27 (Lamar Street), a distance of 0.66 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
w.  West Church Street from Spring Street to Reese Street, a distance of 1.90 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
x.  West Patterson Street from North Lee Street to State Route 3, a distance of 0.46 miles, to be zoned for 30 miles per hour. 
y.  Spring Street from its intersection with the city limits to its intersection with South Dudley Street to be zoned for 35 miles per hour. 
(Code 1986, § 20-33; Ord. No. O-87-04-07, 4-27-1987; Ord. No. O-92-03-16, 3-23-1992; Ord. No. O-95-01-01, 1-26-1995; Ord. No. O-95-06-22, 6-22-1995; Ord. No. O-96-03-13, 3-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-11-39, 11-19-1998; Ord. No. O-02-07-18, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-03-09-24, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-01-03, 1-22-2004; Ord. No. O-04-10-20, 10-21-2004; Ord. No. O-04-11-24, 11-18-2004) 
State Law reference- Local alteration of speed limits, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-9, 40-6-183. 
Sec. 86-79. - Driving in a procession generally. 
    Each driver in a funeral or other procession shall drive as near to the right-hand edge of the street or roadway as practicable and shall follow the vehicle ahead as close as is practicable and safe. 
(Code 1962, § 23-42; Code 1986, § 20-35) 
Sec. 86-80. - Vehicles comprising funeral procession. 
(a)  Vehicles of a funeral procession shall have the right-of-way over all other vehicles, except authorized emergency vehicles, provided each shall identify itself by burning regular headlights, and by keeping in close formation. 
(b)  When the lead vehicle in a funeral procession has entered an intersection on a green light, all other cars in the procession may proceed through the intersection, even though such signal may change to red. 
(Code 1962, § 23-34; Code 1986, § 20-36) 
Sec. 86-81. - Driving through funeral or other procession. 
    No driver of a vehicle shall drive between the vehicles comprising a funeral or other authorized procession while they are in motion and when such vehicles are conspicuously designated as required in section 86-80. 
(Code 1962, § 23-41; Code 1986, § 20-37) 
Sec. 86-82. - Signal to leave parking space. 
    Whenever vehicles are parked parallel to the curbing, before the operator of a parked vehicle or a vehicle stopped or standing at the edge of the street or roadway as prescribed in this chapter, shall execute a movement into any portion of the street or roadway normally used for moving traffic, such person shall signal the intention to do so by first giving the signal as prescribed in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-123-40-6-125, and shall start such movement only when the operator can do so with reasonable safety and without creating a hazard to other traffic moving lawfully within the street or roadway. 
(Code 1962, § 23-38; Code 1986, § 20-39) 
State Law reference- Starting parked vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-122. 
Sec. 86-83. - Designated play streets. 
    Whenever authorized signs are erected indicating any street or part thereof as a play street, no person shall drive a vehicle upon any such street or portion thereof except drivers of vehicles having business or whose residences are within such closed area, and then any such driver shall exercise the highest degree of care in driving upon any such street or portion thereof, and at no time shall such driver's speed exceed five miles per hour. 
(Code 1962, § 23-40; Code 1986, § 20-41) 
Sec. 86-84. - Towing. 
    No vehicle shall tow more than one other vehicle, nor shall the connection between vehicles exceed 16 feet in length. 
(Code 1962, § 23-45; Code 1986, § 20-43) 
Sec. 86-85. - Vehicle colliding with object. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall operate same, in such manner so as to collide with any object legally placed upon or adjacent to any street or highway. 
(Code 1962, § 23-47; Code 1986, § 20-44) 
Sec. 86-86. - Vehicle involved in collision with parked vehicle. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall operate same, in such a manner so as to collide with any vehicle properly parked. 
(Code 1962, § 23-49; Code 1986, § 20-45) 
Sec. 86-87. - Vehicle leaving street or roadway. 
    No driver of any vehicle shall operate same, in such a manner as to enter or leave any street or highway except at an intersection or at an alley or private drive. 
(Code 1962, § 23-48; Code 1986, § 20-46) 
Sec. 86-88. - One-way streets. 
(a)  East and west. Traffic upon the streets designated shall move as follows in one direction only: 
(1)  On Forsyth Street in a westerly direction from the Vienna Road to Highway 19. 
(2)  On Lamar Street in an easterly direction from Highway 19 to the Vienna Road. 
(3)  On East Peppermint Way in an easterly direction from its intersection with North Lee Street to its intersection with Montgomery Street. 
(b)  North. 
(1)  Between Forsyth Street to the north and Forsyth Street to the south, traffic upon the following street shall be one-way north: Windsor Avenue. 
(2)  Jones Lane, from its intersection with Patterson Street to its intersection with Peppermint Way, shall be a one-way street in a northerly direction. 
(3)  Oak Avenue from Glessner Street to Bell Street shall be a one-way street in a northerly direction on Friday nights when Americus High School is hosting home football games. 
(c)  South. 
(1)  On Harrold Avenue, traffic shall be one-way south from Bell Street to Glessner Street from 7:00 a.m. until 8:30 a.m. during the time that Americus High School is in session. 
(2)  On Harrold Avenue, traffic shall be one-way south from Bell Street to Glessner Street from 3:00 p.m. until 4:30 p.m. during the times that Americus High School is in session. 
(d)  West. 
(1)  Peppermint Way between North Jackson Street and North Lee Street shall be a one-way street in a westerly direction. 
(2)  Sheffield Street from Quincy Drive to Jackson Street shall be a one-way street in a westerly direction. 
(3)  Glessner Street from Harrold Avenue to Oak Avenue shall be a one-way street in a westerly direction on Friday nights when Americus High School is hosting home football games. 
(e)  Other streets. Traffic on all other streets, unless otherwise indicated, shall be two-way traveling in both directions. 
(Code 1962, § 23-58; Code 1986, § 20-48; Ord. No. O-96-08-33, 8-22-1996; Ord. No. O-02-02-07, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. O-03-09-26, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-07-13, 7-22-2004; O-2012-13, 5-24-2012) 
State Law reference- Authority to establish one-way streets, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(4); one-way streets, O.C.G.A. § 49-6-47. 
Sec. 86-89. - Stop when traffic obstructed. 
    No driver shall enter an intersection or a marked crosswalk unless there is sufficient space on the other side of the intersection or crosswalk to accommodate the vehicle he is operating without obstructing the passage of other vehicles or pedestrians, notwithstanding any traffic control signal indication to proceed. 
(Code 1962, § 23-120; Code 1986, § 20-49) 
Sec. 86-90. - Criminal trespass by a motor vehicle. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass by a motor vehicle when the person, after having been requested not to do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner or an authorized agent of the owner, parks or stands an occupied or unoccupied motor vehicle in, or repeatedly drives a motor vehicle through or within, a parking area which is located on privately owned property and is provided by a merchant, a group of merchants, or a shopping center or other similar facility for customers if: 
(1)  The parking area identified by at least one sign as specified in this section, and if the parking area contains more than 150 parking spaces then by at least one such sign for every 150 parking spaces, each sign containing the following information in easy-to-read printing: 
a.  Notice of the elements of the crime of criminal trespass by motor vehicle; 
b.  Identification of the property that is reserved for customers' use only; 
c.  Identification of the merchant, group of merchants, or shopping center or other similar facility providing the parking area; and 
d.  Warning that violators will be prosecuted. 
(2)  The motor vehicle is parked, is standing, or is being operated other than for the purpose of: 
a.  Transporting some person to or from the interior of the place of business of a merchant identified by the sign or signs in the parking area, or to or from the interior of the shopping center or other facility so identified; 
b.  Making use of a telephone, vending machine, automatic teller machine, or other similar facility located in the parking area; 
c.  Meeting the requirements of a situation in which it has unexpectedly become impossible or impractical for the motor vehicle to continue to travel on the public roads; or 
d.  Carrying out an activity for which express permission has been given by the owner of the parking area of an authorized representative of the owner. 
(b)  Any person violating this section shall be subject to a monetary fine as follows: 
(1)  Not to exceed $50.00 for the first such violation; 
(2)  Not to exceed $100.00 for the second such violation; 
(3)  Not to exceed $150.00 for the third or subsequent such violation. 
(Code 1986, § 20-50; Ord. No. O-87-06-11, 6-22-1987) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-252. 
Sec. 86-91. - Four-way stop intersections. 
    There shall be established and enforced a four-way stop traffic regulation at the following intersections: 
(1)  Oglethorpe Avenue and Jefferson Street. 
(2)  Freida Lane and Jefferson Street. 
(3)  Douglas Circle and Ridge Street. 
(4)  Hancock Avenue and Bell Street. 
(5)  Lorraine Avenue and Peggy Ann Drive. 
(6)  Edgewood Avenue and Anthony Drive. 
(7)  Hancock Street and Furlow Street. 
(8)  Harrold Street and Furlow Street. 
(9)  Hill Street and Jackson Street. 
(10)  Hill Street and Harrold Avenue. 
(11)  Hancock Street and Hill Street. 
(12)  Douglas Drive and Pinecrest Drive. 
(13)  Jackson Avenue and Furlow Street. 
(14)  North Jackson Street with J. R. Campbell Drive. 
(15)  Alice Street and John Street. 
(Code 1986, § 20-51; Ord. No. O-87-06-13, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. O-89-6-17, 6-26-1989; Ord. No. O-89-7-23, 7-24-1989; Ord. No. O-91-07-23(a), 7-29-1991; Ord. No. O-91-10-36, 10-28-1991; Ord. No. O-96-03-11, 3-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-11-41, 11-19-1998; Ord. No. O-99-04-16, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. O-99-11-45, 11-18-1999; Ord. No. O-05-07-17, 7-21-2005; Ord. No. O-07-08-23, 8-23-2007; Ord. No. O-07-08-24, 8-23-2007; Ord. No. O-11-12-31, 12-15-2011) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
Sec. 86-92. - Three-way stop intersections. 
    There shall be established and enforced a three-way stop traffic regulation at the following intersections: 
(1)  Church Street and Brown Street. 
(2)  East Jefferson Street and Oglethorpe Avenue. 
(3)  GSW State University Drive and Wheatley Street. 
(4)  Taylor Street and Barlow Street. 
(Code 1986, § 20-52; Ord. No. O-00-07-31, 7-20-2000; Ord. No. O-04-02-04, 2-19-2004; Ord. No. O-06-04-11, 4-20-2006; Ord. No. O-07-09-31, 9-20-2007) 
State Law reference- Authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 
Sec. 86-93. - One-way stop intersections. 
    There shall be established and enforced a one-way stop at the intersection of East Jefferson Street and Oglethorpe Street in the city. The existing stop signs requiring a stop on Oglethorpe Avenue shall be removed. The city shall be authorized to install signage preceding the new stop sign advising motorists that the traffic on Oglethorpe Avenue traveling both east and west shall not be required to stop at such intersection. 
(Ord. No. O-10-11-40, 11-18-2010) 
Sec. 86-94. - Two-way stop intersections. 
    There shall be established and enforced a two-way stop traffic regulation at the following intersections: 
(1)  North Jackson Street and Tom Hall Circle. 
(Ord. No. O-12-04-08, 4-19-2012) 
Secs. 86-95-86-112. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200 et seq.; authority to regulate or prohibit stopping, standing or parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 86-113. - Park within markings. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle on any portion of the streets within the city that have been or are, at the time of such parking, marked in sections indicating by such marking where and how vehicles shall be parked, otherwise than in conformity to such markings, leaving all the wheels of such parked vehicle clearly within the space indicated by such marks for parking of vehicles. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to commercial vehicles over 25 feet in length delivering or receiving cargo from buildings not equipped with off-street loading and unloading capabilities, providing said vehicles park in such manner for no more than 15 minutes, block only one lane of traffic, and that such vehicle is moved upon demand of any motorist whose exit from parking may be blocked by the delivery vehicle. 
(Code 1962, § 23-79; Code 1986, § 20-60; Ord. No. O-92-06-18, 6-22-1992) 
Sec. 86-114. - Parking in alley. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver or operator of any vehicle to park the same in any public alley within the city except where such motor vehicles are being loaded or unloaded or are awaiting loading or unloading of wares, goods or merchandise from or to the buildings or adjacent property to be served by said alley. 
(Code 1962, § 23-82; Code 1986, § 20-61) 
Sec. 86-115. - Parking of certain tractor-trailer rigs on residential streets. 
    No tractor-trailer rig or motor vehicle with a gross vehicle weight of 21,000 pounds or more shall be parked on a public street within the city, which public street has adjoining property which is zoned R-1 district or R-2 district. 
(Code 1962, § 23-83; Code 1986, § 20-62) 
Sec. 86-116. - Parking spaces for disabled in downtown. 
(a)  There is hereby established parking spaces in the downtown area of the city for use by persons with disabilities such parking spaces to be located as follows: 
(1)  On the west side of Jackson Avenue in the space immediately north of the cross walk; 
(2)  On the south side of Forsyth Street in the space immediately east of Windsor Avenue. 
(b)  The police chief, or his designee, shall be authorized to acquire and install appropriate signage at such parking spaces to indicate that they are reserved for the use of disabled citizens in accord with this section. 
(Code 1986, § 20-63; Ord. No. O-92-08-26, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 86-117. - Report of violation; fine. 
(a)  In each violation of this article, it shall be the duty of the police officers to report to the chief of police: 
(1)  The state license of such vehicle. 
(2)  The time of day or night the officer detected such violation of the provisions of this article. 
(3)  Any other facts, knowledge of which is necessary to a thorough understanding of the circumstances attending such violation. 
(b)  Each police officer shall also attach to such vehicle a notice to the owner or operator thereof that such vehicle has been parked in violation of a provision of this article and instructing such owner or operator to report at the office of the chief of police, in regard to such violation. Each such owner or operator may, within 24 hours of the time such notice was attached to such vehicle, pay to the municipal court, as a penalty for and in full satisfaction of such violation, the sum of $1.00. The failure of such owner or operator to make such payment to the municipal court, within 24 hours, shall render such owner or operator subject to the penalties provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1962, § 23-98; Code 1986, § 20-64) 
Sec. 86-118. - Successive violations, separate offenses. 
    When any vehicle shall remain parked for one hour beyond the time of the original notice of violation attached to the vehicle, such person shall be guilty of a violation of this article. Each such violation shall be punishable in accordance with section 1-8. It is the intention of this section that each hour that any vehicle shall be parked without complying with the provisions of this article shall be a separate offense and that time is the gravamen of the offense insofar as the successive violations shall occur. 
(Code 1962, § 23-97; Code 1986, § 20-65) 
Sec. 86-119. - Parking prohibited at certain times; illegal parking. 
(a)  No person employed by or operating a business or profession in that part of the city in the downtown area which is hereinafter more particularly designated shall park a privately owned or company-owned motor vehicle on any public right-of-way, whether it be an alley or a street, for the purpose of using such parking space while the owner or operator performs his duties at his regular place of employment in such downtown area. The provisions of this section shall be effective between 10:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday of each week. 
(b)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (a) of this section, and notwithstanding the provisions of section 86-116, a disabled person who has a handicap parking permit, who is employed by or who operates a business or profession in that part of the city in the downtown area which is hereinafter more particularly designated, shall be authorized to park in a designated disabled parking space in said downtown area at any time. The location of such parking space shall be designated by the city police with appropriate signage and markings. 
(c)  The parking area of the downtown area of the city wherein such parking by employees or operators of businesses or professions during said time periods shall be prohibited shall be as follows: 
(1)  Along the northerly and southerly sides of West Lamar Street, from its intersection with South Hampton Street and North Hampton Street to its intersection with South Lee Street and North Lee Street. 
(2)  Along the southerly side of East Lamar Street, from its intersection with South Lee Street to its intersection with South Price Street. 
(3)  Along the northerly and southerly sides of West Forsyth Street, from its intersection with North Hampton Street to its intersection with North Lee Street. 
(4)  Along the easterly and westerly sides of South Jackson Street, from its intersection with Church Street to its intersection with West Lamar Street. 
(5)  Along the easterly and westerly sides of North Jackson Street, from its intersection with West Lamar Street to its intersection with West Jefferson Street. 
(6)  Along the westerly side of Cotton Avenue, from its intersection with West Lamar Street to its intersection with West Forsyth Street. 
(7)  Along the easterly and westerly sides of Cotton Avenue, from its intersection with West Forsyth Street to its intersection with West Jefferson Street. 
(8)  Along the westerly side of Windsor Avenue, from its intersection with West Lamar Street to its intersection with West Forsyth Street. 
(9)  Along the westerly side of North Lee Street, from its intersection with West Forsyth Street to its intersection with West Jefferson Street. 
(d)  Upon conviction, a plea of guilty or plea of nolo contendere to a violation of the provisions of this section, the violator shall pay a fine of not less than $35.00 in addition to any other punishment or penalty which may be lawfully imposed by the municipal court of the city. 
(e)  The provisions of this section shall apply to the parking of motor vehicles by persons residing in upper floor residential areas as authorized by chapter 94. 
(Code 1986, § 20-66; Ord. No. O-87-06-12, §§ A-C, 6-22-1987; Ord. No. O-89-10-29, 10-23-1989; Ord. No. O-89-12-43, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. O-97-08-31A, 8-21-1997) 
Sec. 86-120. - No parking zones. 
(a)  There are hereby established the following no parking zones: 
(1)  Harrold Avenue, east side, from its intersection with Dodson Street to its intersection with Virginia Avenue. 
(2)  Harrold Avenue, west side, from its intersection with the driveway leading to the Americus High School Gymnasium south to its intersection with the northerly property line of the first residential house now located on the west side of Harrold Avenue. 
(3)  Virginia Avenue, north and south sides, from its intersection with Harrold Avenue to its intersection with Turner Street. 
(4)  Bell Street, from its intersection with Harrold Avenue to its intersection with South Jackson Street, on both sides of said Bell Street. 
(5)  Reddick Drive on the south side for the entire length of said street. 
(6)  Wild Street, south side, between Cotton Avenue and Jackson Street, with Wild Street, north side, to be designated for passenger pickup and dropoff. 
(7)  Elmo Street, along the south side thereof, from its intersection with Mayo Street to its intersection with Reese Street. 
(8)  Hampton Street, east and west sides, from its intersection with Church Street to its intersection with Lamar Street. 
(9)  Habitat Street, east side, from its intersection with Church Street to its intersection with Spring Street. 
(10)  North Jackson Street, east side, from its intersection with Rucker Street to its intersection with Hope Street. 
(11)  West Church Street along the north curb of the street beginning at the northwest corner of West Church Street and South Lee Street and continuing west to the northeast corner of Church Street and Habitat Street. 
(12)  East Church Street along the north curb of the street beginning at the northwest corner of East Church Street at its intersection with Reese Street and continuing to the northeast corner of Church Street and Brown Street. 
(13)  Taylor Street beginning at the northwest corner of Taylor Street at its intersection with Jones Street and continuing west to a point 50 feet west of Elm Avenue. 
(14)  Taylor Street on the northwest curb thereof beginning 30 feet east of Barlow Street and continuing west to its intersection with Brown Street, including the traffic island located at "Taylor's Place." 
(15)  Taylor Street at the northeast corner of Taylor Street and South Lee Street extending 20 feet east on Taylor Street. 
(16)  East Church Street, north side from its intersection with Prince Street to its intersection with the Harvey's Supermarket driveway that enters and exits from East Church Street. 
(17)  Spring Street on the North side from the Northwest intersection of the curb on the north side of Spring Street with the west curb of the driveway entering into the west side of the Summer County Courthouse for a distance of 120 feet. 
(18)  South Jackson Street, East side, on both sides of the southernmost access drive to the Public Safety Building for a distance of 40 feet south and 40 feet north, and on South Jackson Street, east side, on the south side of the northernmost access drive to the Public Safety Building for a distance of 40 feet south. 
(19)  Felder Street, both sides, from its intersection with Bosworth Drive to its intersection with Hill Street. 
(20)  Dodson Street, on both the North and South sides thereof, from its intersection with Harrold Avenue to its intersection with Hancock Drive during school hours from 7:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m. Monday through Friday while Americus-Sumter High School is in session. 
(21)  The north and west sides of Tom Hall Circle from its intersection with North Jackson Street to its intersection with the north right-of-way of Harvey Lane and on the west and south sides of Tom Hall Circle from its intersection with the south right-of-way of Harvey Lane to its intersection with North Jackson Street. 
(22)  Simmons Street, both sides, from its intersection with Felder Street to its intersection with Anthony Street. 
(23)  Ashby Street from its intersection with North Lee Street to the intersection with the private driveway located at 112 Ashby Street. 
(24)  South Lee Street from its intersection with Elm Avenue for a distance of 60 feet north along the east side of South Lee Street. 
(25)  The eastern side of Elm Avenue where Rees Park abuts Elm Avenue at such locations as may be marked by yellow painted curbing at such locations as are authorized by the chief of police of the city. 
(26)  The south side of Anthony Drive from Perimeter Road to GSW Drive at such locations as may be marked by yellow painted curbing at such locations as are authorized by the chief of police of the city. 
(b)  The utilities director shall provide for notice of such no parking zones and the times of operation thereof by appropriate yellow markings and signs. 
(c)  In the event of the establishment of no parking zones by the city council, the utilities director shall designate the same by appropriate yellow markings and signs, and any person violating such no parking zone shall be punishable and any person violating such no parking zone shall be guilty of an offense. 
(Code 1986, § 20-67; Ord. No. O-88-03-11, 3-28-1988; Ord. No. O-93-04-15, 4-26-1993; Ord. No. O-94-05-14, 5-19-1994; Ord. No. O-94-07-24, 7-21-1994; Ord. No. O-94-12-40, 12-22-1994; Ord. No. O-95-06-23, 6-22-1995; Ord. No. O-96-03-12, 3-21-1996; Ord. No. O-96-06-20, 6-20-1996; Ord. No. O-01-10-37, 10-18-2001; Ord. No. O-01-04-15, 4-19-2001; Ord. No. O-03-05-10, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. O-03-08-18, 8-21-2003; Ord. No. O-03-11-36, 11-20-2003; Ord. No. O-04-10-21, 10-21-2004; Ord. No. O-05-07-15, 7-21-2005; Ord. No. O-05-08-20, 8-19-2005; Ord. No. O-05-09-29, 9-22-2005; Ord. No. O-08-08-19, 8-21-2008; Ord. No. O-08-10-34, 10-23-2008; Ord. No. O-09-07-23, 7-23-2009) 
Sec. 86-121. - Parking zones on Windsor Avenue. 
    There is hereby established along Windsor Avenue, from its intersection with Forsyth Street to its intersection with Lamar Street, a restricted parking zone such that there shall be no parking by any person along Windsor Avenue between 10:00 a.m. and 2:00 p.m. Monday through Friday of each week. Parking along said Windsor Avenue at times other than set out above shall not be restricted except as otherwise provided in this Code. 
(Code 1986, § 20-68; Ord. No. O-90-06-16, 6-28-1990) 
Sec. 86-122. - Fifteen-minute parking zones. 
    There is hereby established a 15-minute parking zone for the two parking spaces on the north side of West Lamar Street, immediately in front of the Windsor Hotel property, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park any type of vehicle for a period longer than 15 minutes in either or both of said parking spaces. 
(Code 1986, § 20-69; Ord. No. O-91-10-35, 10-28-1991) 
Secs. 86-123-86-142. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOADING ZONES 

Sec. 86-143. - Authority of police chief. 
    The police chief shall be authorized to designate, establish and maintain, by appropriate markings, loading zones for the purpose of loading and unloading commercial vehicles in the downtown area of the city; provided that there shall be no more than one loading zone per city block, that such loading zones shall be clearly delineated by appropriate markings and signs, and that such loading zones shall be located in such positions as will not interfere with the normal traffic flow. 
(Code 1986, § 20-91; Ord. No. O-88-03-13, 3-28-1988; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Sec. 86-144. - Parking prohibited; exceptions. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any vehicle in a loading zone as designated by authority of the police chief, unless such vehicle is a commercial vehicle from which property or merchandise is being loaded or unloaded, and in no event shall such commercial vehicle park in said loading zone for a period of time longer than 30 minutes. For purposes of this article, the term "commercial vehicle" shall be defined as an automobile, truck, trailer, tractor, wagon or any other motor vehicle designed or used as a vehicle of conveyance in the furtherance of or as a part of any commercial activity or enterprise, whether or not such vehicle is used solely in such commercial activity or enterprise or is used only intermittently in such commercial activity or enterprise. 
(Code 1986, § 20-92; Ord. No. O-88-03-14, 3-28-1988; Ord. No. O-92-03-15, 3-23-1992) 
Secs. 86-145-86-171. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - ABANDONED VEHICLES 

Sec. 86-172. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned motor vehicle means a motor vehicle, which has been parked or left standing on the public streets of the city for more than five days in a nonoperating state of repair. 
    Abandonment means the act of the owner leaving the vehicle on the streets or sidewalks of the city for a period in excess of five days, when the owner of the vehicle does not own the property abutting the street or sidewalk upon which the vehicle is parked and does not reside, room, have a place of business, lease, rent, or otherwise exercise control and dominion over the abutting real estate. 
    Hazard to normal flow of traffic means a vehicle parked on the public streets of the city in a nonoperational condition and is hereby defined to be a hazard to the normal flow of traffic on the streets of the city. 
    Nonoperational vehicle means a vehicle that will not start, run and move under its own power in its existing condition. 
    Vehicle means any automobile, truck, trailer, motorcycle, wagon, or other artificial contrivance used, or capable of being used, as a means of transportation on land. 
(Code 1962, § 23-106; Code 1986, § 20-70) 
State Law reference- Similar definitions, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1. 
Sec. 86-173. - Unlawful to abandon vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful to abandon any vehicle upon the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1962, §§ 23-107, 23-108; Code 1986, § 20-71) 
Sec. 86-174. - Maximum parking time. 
    No vehicle shall be parked upon the streets for a period of more than 24 hours unless such vehicle is owned by or in the custody, care and control of the property owner abutting said street or sidewalk where such vehicle is parked. 
(Code 1962, § 23-109; Code 1986, § 20-72) 
Sec. 86-175. - Abandoned vehicle to be moved within 24 hours following receipt of notice. 
    All such abandoned or overparked vehicles shall be moved by the owner or person in charge thereof within 24 hours following receipt of notice from the police chief or designee or any member of the police force of the city requiring such vehicle to be removed. 
(Code 1962, § 23-109.1; Code 1986, § 20-73) 
Sec. 86-176. - Removal of abandoned vehicle or vehicle constituting a hazard authorized. 
    Any vehicle which shall be abandoned, or parked so as to constitute a traffic hazard, on the streets of the city may be taken into the custody of the police department and towed or removed to a garage or parking lot either by the police chief or designee. 
(Code 1962, §§ 23-110, 23-112; Code 1986, § 20-74) 
State Law reference- When police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-206, 40-11-3. 
Sec. 86-177. - Impounding parked vehicles, removal of, authorized. 
    Any vehicle parked on the streets of the city in such a manner that it is a traffic hazard may be moved by the police department or towed under the custody and control and the charge for towing made and collected as herein provided. 
(Code 1962, § 23-112; Code 1986, § 20-75) 
Secs. 86-178-86-207. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - WEIGHT AND LOAD LIMITS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Weight limits, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-20 et seq. 

Sec. 86-208. - Motor trucks or trailers prohibited from traversing certain areas during designated hours. 
    It shall be unlawful for any motor truck or motor-drawn trailer to traverse any street or part of the area of the city during periods hereafter specifically designated by the city council by resolution or ordinance. Whenever said streets or areas are designated, nothing in this section shall prevent any truck, when not accompanied by a trailer, from traversing any of the streets or areas solely for the purpose of making delivery or for the purpose of picking up or receiving goods, wares or merchandise for transportation; but this shall not include permission for trailers to enter, park or stand in such areas for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Code 1962, § 23-6; Code 1986, § 20-15) 
Sec. 86-209. - Limitations as to weight of vehicles on city streets. 
(a)  The governing body of the city shall have the right to proclaim by ordinance or resolution the maximum weight of any vehicle, including tractors and trailers, which may be driven upon certain designated streets of the city. 
(b)  There are hereby established certain truck routes in the city. Those trucks shall be located upon the following streets: 
Brady Road 
Carter Street 
Cotton Avenue 
East Furlow Street to Elm Avenue 
East Lester Street from McGarrah to Davis 
Elm Avenue 
Felder Street 
Forrest Street 
Glessner Street 
Industrial Boulevard 
Industrial Drive 
Jefferson Street (downtown) 
Lee Street to Carter Street 
Mathews Drive 
Mayo Street 
McGarrah Street 
North Dudley Street 
North Hampton (from Lamar north) 
North Jackson to Prince Street (but not between Lamar and Forsyth) 
Oak Avenue (from West Glessner north) 
Patterson Street from McGarrah to Davis 
Perimeter Road-Georgia Southwestern State University 
Prince Street 
Railroad Street 
Reese Street 
Simmons Street 
Southerfield Road 
Spring Street 
Swett Avenue 
Tripp Street 
Warren Avenue 
West Church Street 
(c)  No truck, including tractor-trailer trucks, or other motor vehicles, which weigh over 36,000 pounds gross weight, shall travel any public street within the city except for those streets listed above, unless it is necessary for such truck, tractor-trailer, or other motor vehicle to pick up or deliver a cargo on streets other than those listed above. 
(d)  The city shall post appropriate signs along the streets designated as truck routes. Any street not posted as a truck route shall not be considered a truck route for purposes of this section. 
(Code 1962, § 23-8; Code 1986, § 20-16; Ord. No. O-91-06-18, 6-20-1991; Ord. No. O-91-08-25, 8-26-1991; Ord. No. O-91-10-34, 10-28-1991; Ord. No. O-92-03-12, 3-23-1992; Ord. No. O-06-07-22, 7-20-2006; Ord. No. O-07-07-21, § 20-16, 7-19-2007; Ord. No. O-10-05-16, 5-20-2010; Ord. No. O-10-08-25, 8-19-2010) 
Sec. 86-210. - Use of engine brakes and compression brakes prohibited. 
(a)  For purposes of this section the terms "engine brake" or "compression brake" shall mean a device used primarily on trucks for the conversion of the engine from an internal combustion engine to an air compressor for the purpose of braking without the use of wheeled brakes, said devices being commonly referred to as "air brakes", "Jacob's brakes" or "jake brakes". 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person in actual physical control of a motor vehicle, including, but not limited to; a truck or a tractor-trailer truck, to use an engine brake or compression brake while traveling along the streets of the city unless such engine brake or compression brake is used solely to effect an emergency stop of the motor vehicle. 
(c)  Upon conviction, the penalty for a violation of this section shall be as provided in section 1-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. O-07-07-20, § 20-16.1, 7-19-2007) 
Chapter 90 - UTILITIES 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Discontinuance of city services when charges remain unpaid. 
    Any person failing for any reason or refusing to pay timely the monthly water, gas, sewerage or refuse collection charges provided in this Code set by the city after having been duly billed for same by the city shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this chapter, and all water service, gas service, sewerage service and refuse collection service provided by the city to the premises for which the monthly charges are past due shall be terminated by the city; provided, however, should not more than one of the monthly water charges, gas charges, sewerage charges and refuse collection charges remain unpaid, any person may make application to the finance director to have the city services restored that are not in arrears provided such person submits a monthly repayment plan to the finance director to pay for the particular services that are in arrears within a three-month period of time from the date of such application; and provided that the person abides by each proposed monthly payment within said three-month time period. 
(Code 1962, § 10-22; Code 1986, § 13-1; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-2. - Refunds of utility payments. 
(a)  In the event that a city utility customer claims that he has overpaid a utility bill or that he has been charged more than was legally due for the use of city utilities, then such customer may file a claim for a refund with the finance director at any time within three years after the date of the payment of the amount for which a refund is claimed. The claim for refund shall be in writing, and shall be in a form and contain the information required by the finance director. Such claim shall include a summary statement of the grounds upon which the customer relies in claiming the refund. The customer may be required to provide such additional information as may be requested by the finance director in order for the clerk to consider the claim. 
(b)  Upon receipt of the claim, and any additional information required from the customer by the finance director, the finance director shall consider the claim and determine whether or not the customer is entitled to a refund, but in no event shall any refund be provided for any payments made more than three years prior to the date of filing the claim for refund. The finance director shall only grant the claim for refund if the finance director determines that the amount for which the refund is sought was billed to the customer erroneously or illegally. 
(c)  The finance director shall notify the customer of the finance director's decision regarding the refund claim within 30 days from the date that the finance director receives all information necessary in order for the finance director to make a determination regarding the refund claim. 
(d)  Any customer whose claim for refund is denied by the finance director may appeal such denial to the city council within 30 days of the date of the finance director's decision. The city council shall authorize such refund only in the event that it finds that the funds for which the refund is sought were billed to the customer either erroneously or illegally. The decision of the city council regarding the claim for refund shall be final. 
(Code 1986, § 13-2; Ord. No. O-97-11-36, 11-20-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Secs. 90-3-90-22. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BACKFLOW CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, adopted Nov. 17, 2011, amended art. II in its entirety to read as herein set out, with the exception of § 90-32, which remains unchanged. Former art. II, §§ 90-23-90-32, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from: Code 1986, §§ 13-40-13-48; Ord. No. O-85-07-16, §§ 1-3, adopted June 27, 1985; and Ord. No. O-95-11-35, adopted Nov. 30, 1995. 

Sec. 90-23. - Definitions. 
    The definitions found in the city plumbing code for backflow, cross-connections, and backflow prevention devices shall be those used in this article. In addition, the following definitions shall apply: 
    Air gap means a physical separation sufficient to prevent backflow between the free-flowing discharge end of the potable water system and any other system. Physically defined as a distance equal to twice the diameter of the supply side pipe diameter but never less than one inch. 
    Approved means accepted by the director of public works as meeting an applicable specification stated or cited in this regulation, or as suitable for the proposed use. 
    Auxiliary water supply means any water supply on or available to the premises other than the city's approved public water supply. These auxiliary waters may include water from another purveyor's public potable water supply or any natural sources such as a well, spring, river, stream, harbor, etc., or used waters or industrial fluids. These waters may be contaminated or polluted or they may be objectionable and constitute an unacceptable water source over which the city does not have sanitary control. 
    Backflow means the flow of water or other liquids, mixtures, or substances under positive or reduced pressure in the distribution pipes of a potable water supply from any source other than its intended source. 
    Backflow preventer means a device or means designed to prevent backflow or backsiphonage. Most commonly categorized as air gap, reduced pressure principal assembly, double-check valve assembly, pressure vacuum breaker, atmospheric vacuum breaker, hose bibb vacuum breaker, residential dual check and barometric loop. 
    Containment means a method of backflow prevention which requires a backflow preventer at the water service entrance. 
    Contaminant means a substance that will impair the quality of the water to a degree that it creates a serious health hazard to the public, leading to poisoning or the spread of disease. 
    Contamination means an impairment of the quality of the potable water by sewage, industrial fluids or waste liquids, compounds or other materials to a degree which creates an actual or potential hazard to the public health through poisoning or through the spread of disease. 
    Cross-connection means a connection or potential connection between any part of a potable water system and any other environment containing other substances in a manner that, under any circumstances, would allow such substances to enter the potable water system. Other substances may be gases, liquids or solids, such as chemicals, waste products, steam, water from other sources (potable or nonpotable), or any other matter that may change the color and/or add odor to the water. 
    Cross-connection control by containment means the installation of an approved backflow prevention device at the water service connection to any customer's premises where it is physically and economically infeasible to find and permanently eliminate or control all actual or potential cross-connections within the customer's water system; or, it shall mean the installation of an approved backflow prevention device on the service line leading to and supplying a portion of a customer's water system where there are actual or potential cross-connections which cannot be effectively eliminated or controlled at the point of the cross-connection. 
    Cross-connection, controlled means a connection between a potable water system and a nonpotable water system with an approved backflow prevention device properly installed and maintained so that it will continuously afford the protection commensurate with the degree of hazard. 
    Customer means a person or entity receiving water or sewer services from the City of Americus Public Works Department. 
    Department means the City of Americus Public Works Department. 
    Double-check backflow preventer means an assembly of two independently operating spring-loaded check valves with tightly-closing shut off valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks allowing for the testing of each check valve on each line, specifically a double-check valve assembly (DCVA) or a double-check detector assembly (DCDA). 
    Hazard assessment means a hazard determination conducted pursuant to Section 608 of the Georgia State Minimum Standard Plumbing Code. 
    Hazard, degree of, means the term is derived from an evaluation of the potential risk to public health and the adverse effect of the hazard upon the potable water system. 
    Hazard, health, means any condition, device, or practice in the water supply system and its operation which could create, or in the judgment of the building official, may create a danger to the health and well-being of the water consumer. 
    Hazard, plumbing, means a plumbing-type cross-connection in a consumer's potable water system that has not been properly protected by an approved air gap or approved backflow prevention device. 
    Hazard, pollutional, means an actual or potential threat to the physical properties of the water system or to the potability of the public or the consumer's potable water system but which would constitute a nuisance or be aesthetically objectionable or could cause damage to the system or its appurtenances, but would not be dangerous to health. 
    Hazard, system, means an actual or potential threat of severe damage to the physical properties of the public potable water system or the consumer's potable water system or of a pollution or contamination which would have a protracted effect on the quality of the potable water in the system. 
    Industrial fluids system means any system containing a fluid or solution which may be chemically, biologically or otherwise contaminated or polluted in a form or concentration such as would constitute a health, system, pollutional or plumbing hazard if introduced into an approved water supply. This may include, but is not limited to: Polluted or contaminated waters; all types of process waters and used waters originating from the public potable water system which may have deteriorated in sanitary quality; chemicals in fluid form; plating acids and alkalies; circulating cooling water connected to an open cooling tower and/or cooling towers that are chemically or biologically treated or stabilized with toxic substances; contaminated natural waters such as from wells, springs, streams, rivers, bays, harbors, seas, irrigation canals or systems, etc.; oils, gases, glycerine, paraffins, caustic and acid solutions and other liquid and gaseous fluids used in industrial or other purposes or for firefighting purposes. 
    Owner means any person who has legal title to, or license to operate or inhabit, a property upon which a cross-connection inspection is to be made or upon which a cross-connection is deemed likely by the City of Americus Public Works. 
    Permit means a document issued by the department which allows the installation of a backflow preventer. 
    Person means any individual, partnership, company, public or private corporation, political subdivision or agency of the state department, agency or instrumentality or the United States or any other legal entity. 
    Pollutant means a foreign substance that, if permitted to get into the public water system, will degrade its quality so as to constitute a moderate hazard or impair the usefulness or quality of the water to a degree that does not create an actual hazard to the public health, but which does adversely and unreasonably affect such water for domestic use. 
    Reduced pressure principle backflow preventer means an assembly consisting of two independently operating approved check valves with an automatically operating differential relief valve located between the two check valves, tightly-closing shut-off valves on each side of the check valves and properly located test cocks allowing for the testing of the check valves and the relief valve on each line, specifically a reduced pressure principal assembly (RP) or a reduced pressure principal detector assembly (RPDA). 
    Residential dual check means an assembly of two spring loaded, independently operating check valves without tightly closing shut-off valves or test cocks. Generally employed immediately downstream of the water meter to act as a containment device. 
    Water service connection means the terminal end of a service connection from the public potable water system, i.e., where the water purveyor loses jurisdiction and sanitary control over the water at its point of delivery to the customer's water system. If a meter is installed at the end of the service connection, then the term "service connection" shall mean the downstream end of the meter. There shall be no unprotected takeoffs from the service line ahead of any meter or backflow prevention device located at the point of delivery to the customer's water system. Service connection shall also include water service connection from a fire hydrant and all other temporary or emergency water service connections from the public potable water system. 
    Water used means any water supplied by the city from the public potable water system to a consumer's water system after it has passed through the point of delivery and is no longer under the sanitary control of the city water department. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-24. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to: 
(1)  Protect the public potable water supply of the city from the possibility of contamination or pollution by containing within the customer's internal distribution systems or the customer's private water systems such contaminates or pollutants which could backflow into the public water system through an undiscovered or uncontrolled cross-connection on said premises; 
(2)  Promote the elimination or control of existing cross-connections, actual or potential, between the customer's in-plant potable water systems and nonpotable water systems, plumbing fixtures and industrial piping systems; and 
(3)  Provide for the maintenance of a continuing program of cross-connection control which will systematically attempt to prevent the contamination or pollution of all potable water systems. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-25. - Protection of system; fees and charges; installation of assemblies. 
(a)  In accordance with the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act of 1974, and the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water Section 391-3-5-.13, the Water Purveyor, City of Americus Public Works, has the primary responsibility for preventing water from unapproved sources, or any other substances, from entering the public potable water system. 
(b)  The City of Americus is authorized to charge a nominal fee to water customers for the purpose of funding the cross-connection control program. The City of Americus is also authorized to charge an additional fee to businesses for funding the cross-connection control program and the associated inspections. Should a water customer fail to comply with the requirements set out herein, the City of Americus has the authority to install, test, and repair backflow prevention assemblies and pass on costs to the customer associated with the work, including, but not limited to, labor, parts and administration. The City of Americus Public Works Department has the authority to hire or designate an on-call or consulting engineer to offer support with tasks associated with upkeep of the cross-connection control program. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-25.1. - Obligations and responsibilities. 
    The following obligations shall be undertaken and performed by the named persons or entities: 
(1)  Purveyor. The Director of Public Works for the City of Americus, Georgia, or a designee on his or her behalf, as authorized through this article, is primarily responsible for preventing contamination and pollution of the public water supply by instituting the cross-connection control program, as approved by the Georgia Environmental Protection Division. Such responsibility begins at the point of origin for the public potable water supply, includes all of the distribution system, and terminates at the service connection for the customer's water system. In addition, the director shall exercise reasonable vigilance to ensure that the customer adheres to this policy and these procedures as stated and outlined herein. 
(2)  Customer. The business and residential customers will be responsible for all work and costs related to installing, certifying and maintaining the required backflow assemblies. The required customer-supplied backflow prevention assembly at the service connection shall provide maximum protection for locations deemed "high hazard" (reduced pressure principal backflow preventer - RP, RPDA or air gap), or minimum protection for locations deemed "low hazard" (double-check backflow preventer - DCVA, DCDA) as directed by the department or an authorized representative thereof. 
(3)  Building code official. The building inspection department is primarily responsible for enforcing the State of Georgia Plumbing Code to prevent contamination and pollution within the customer's water system in accordance with applicable plumbing and building codes requiring that all outlets terminate through an approved air gap or be controlled by an approved mechanical backflow prevention device. Such responsibility begins at the service connection to the premises and extends to the extremities of the customer's potable water supply. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011; Ord. No. O-12-04-09, 4-19-2012) 
Sec. 90-26. - Water system components. 
    The water system shall be considered as made up of two parts: The utility system and the customer system. 
(1)  Utility system. The utility system shall consist of the source facilities and the distribution system and shall include all those facilities of the water system under the complete control of the city, up to the point where the customer's system begins. 
a.  Source facilities. The source shall include all components of the facilities utilized in the production, treatment, storage and delivery of water to the distribution system. 
b.  Distribution system. The distribution system shall include the network of conduits used for the delivery of water from the source to the customer's system. 
(2)  Customer's system. The customer's system shall include those parts of the facilities beyond the termination of the utility distribution system which are utilized in conveying utility-delivered domestic water to points of use. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-27. - Connection policy. 
(a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained by the city unless the water supply is protected as required by state law and regulations and this article. The City of Americus shall either discontinue service of water to any premises or take appropriate steps by installing, testing or maintaining a backflow prevention assembly if one is required by this article and state law and has not been tested and maintained, or if it is found that a required backflow prevention assembly has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. In the event of disconnection, service will not be restored until such conditions or defects are corrected. Compliance with applicable requirements for backflow prevention shall be verified by the department before water service is reinstated. 
(b)  The customer's system shall be open for inspection at all reasonable times to the department or authorized representatives of the department to determine whether cross-connections or other structural or sanitary hazards, including violations of these regulations, exist. When such a condition becomes known, the department shall either immediately discontinue service to the premises by providing for a physical break in the service line until the customer has corrected the conditions in conformance with state statutes and city ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies, and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto, or take appropriate steps by installing, testing or maintaining the assembly to correct the conditions in conformance with state statutes and city ordinances relating to plumbing and water supplies, and the regulations adopted pursuant thereto. All costs incurred shall be passed directly to the customer. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-28. - Installation of assembly in service line. 
    An approved backflow prevention assembly shall also be installed on each service line to a customer's water system at or near the property line or immediately inside the building being served; but, in all cases, before the first branch line leading off the service line wherever the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Auxiliary water supply. In the case of premises having an auxiliary water supply which is not or may not be of safe bacteriological or chemical quality and which is not acceptable as an additional source by the building official, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by eliminating the connection between the two systems. 
(2)  Industrial fluid or hazardous substances. In the case of premises on which any industrial fluid or any other objectionable substance is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line appropriate to the degree of hazard. This shall include the handling of process waters and waters originating from the utility system which have been subject to deterioration in quality. 
(3)  Connection issues. In the case of premises having: 
a.  Internal cross-connections that cannot be permanently corrected and controlled; 
b.  Intricate plumbing and piping arrangements; or 
c.  Where entry to all portions of the premises is not readily accessible for inspection purposes, making it impracticable or impossible to ascertain whether or not dangerous cross-connections exist. 
The public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by installing an approved backflow prevention assembly in the service line. 
(4)  Water heating or pressure producing device. In the case of premises having any water heating device or any other pressure-producing device connected to the customer's system, a thermal protection device, either a thermal expansion tank or a calibrated pressure-relief valve set at 80 psi, will be required in order to protect against damage caused by thermal expansion of a system closed with backflow preventer. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-29. - Type of assembly. 
    The type of protective assembly required under subsections 90-28(1)-(3) shall depend upon the degree of hazard which exists as follows: 
(1)  Auxiliary water supply. In the case of any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply as stated in subsection 90-28(1) and it is not subject to any of the following rules, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. 
(2)  Objectionable substances. In the case of any premises where there is water or substance that would be objectionable, but not hazardous to health, if introducted into the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved double-check valve assembly. 
(3)  Hazardous substances. In the case of any premises where there is any material dangerous to health which is handled in such a fashion as to create an actual or potential hazard to the public water system, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or any approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly. Examples of premises where these conditions will exist include sewage treatment plants, sewage pumping stations, chemical manufacturing plants, hospitals, mortuaries and plating plants. 
(4)  Connection issues. In the case of any premises where there are uncontrolled cross-connections, either actual or potential, the public water system shall be protected by an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly at the service connection. 
(5)  Other prohibitions or restrictions. In the case of any premises where, because of security requirements or other prohibitions or restrictions, it is impossible or impractical to make a complete in-plant cross-connection survey, the public water system shall be protected against backflow from the premises by either an approved air gap separation or an approved reduced pressure principle backflow prevention assembly on each service to the premises. 
(6)  Unknown hazards. In the case of any premises where there is no known pollutional or contaminant hazard, as described or covered in subsections (1) through (5) of this section, the public water system shall be protected by an approved residential dual-check valve at the service connection. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-30. - Approved backflow prevention assembly. 
    Any backflow prevention assembly device assembly required herein shall be a model and size approved by the building official. The term "approved backflow prevention assembly" shall mean an assembly that has been manufactured in full conformance with the standards established in the city and state plumbing codes. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-31. - Tests; repair of assemblies. 
(a)  Periodic testing. Annual testing shall be performed by a tester certified by one of the approved programs. This testing will be coordinated by the owner and performed at the owner's expense. Assemblies shall also be tested immediately following installation, repair or relocation of an assembly. Test reports must be submitted within seven days from the date that the test is performed. Any backflow preventer that fails during a periodic test will be repaired or replaced. When repairs are necessary, upon completion of the repair, the assembly will be retested at the customer's expense to insure correct operation. In situations where the public water system is not deemed by the department to be immediately threatened by a health or pollutional hazard, a compliance date of not more than 30 days after the test date will be established. If a customer does not comply with installation, testing or repair within 60 days of notifications, the department may perform installation, testing or repair and bill the customer for the cost of the work, parts, and any associated administrative costs. 
(b)  Backflow assembly testers. In accordance with the State of Georgia Environmental Protection Division requirements, backflow testers for the City of Americus must be certified by one of the State of Georgia approved agencies in order to test backflow assemblies. Certification is valid for up to three years or until such time as his or her certification expires, whichever comes first. In order to certify backflow prevention assemblies for the City of Americus, testers must complete an application, including, but not limited to, a copy of his or her current tester certificate from one of the approved agencies, a copy of the current calibration certificate of the approved backflow gauge to be used by the tester, and the business license under which he or she will be practicing. A list of testers will be published and made available to customers who require a backflow assembly test. 
(c)  Backflow assembly repairs. All backflow assembly repairs shall be performed by a person or persons working under a current plumber's license. 
(d)  Backflow assembly installation. In accordance with State of Georgia's Cross-Connection Control requirements, all installations of backflow assemblies shall be performed by a person or persons working under a current plumber's license. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-31.1. - Installation of residential dual-checks. 
    Residential dual-checks shall be installed by the department or a designee thereof. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-25, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-32. - Nonconforming devices. 
    All presently installed backflow prevention devices which do not meet the requirements of this section, but were approved devices for the purposes described herein at the time of installation and which have been properly maintained, shall, except for the inspection and maintenance requirements under section 90-31, be excluded from the requirements of these rules so long as the building official is assured that they will satisfactorily protect the utility system. Whenever the existing device is moved from the present location or requires more than minimum maintenance or when the building official finds that the maintenance constitutes a hazard to health, the unit shall be replaced by an approved backflow prevention device meeting the requirements of this section. 
(Code 1986, § 13-49; Ord. No. O-85-07-16, § 3.2.7, 6-27-1985; Ord. No. O-95-11-35, 11-30-1995) 
Secs. 90-33-90-52. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - WATER AND SEWER LINE EXTENSIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-53-90-77. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COMMERCIAL AREAS 

Sec. 90-78. - Authority to extend; service charges. 
(a)  The city council shall be authorized to extend or cause to be extended water main lines and sewer main lines into commercial areas, both inside and outside the city limits where the city council deems it appropriate and in the best interest of the city to do so. 
(b)  In considering the extension of such water mains and sewer mains, the city council shall take into consideration past commercial business growth patterns and anticipated commercial business growth patterns, both inside and outside the city limits. The city council shall also weigh the net cost to the city of such extensions against the potential increased revenues to the city realized or anticipated to result from such extensions due to increased economic development activity. 
(c)  In the event that the city council determines that it is appropriate to extend water mains and sewer mains into commercial areas, either inside or outside the city limits, the city shall be authorized to charge to new water and sewer customers, in addition to tap charges, service deposits, meter costs and monthly water and sewer rates, an amount determined by the city which will reimburse the city for all reasonable costs of extending such water mains and sewer mains based upon the linear front footage of the property to be served by such water main and sewer main extensions. Such costs need not be paid by a property owner or owners until such time as the property owner or owners desire to purchase city water and city sewer services, and such charges may be paid as part of the initial tap charges otherwise authorized in this Code. In addition to the foregoing, the city shall be authorized to charge interest on such amounts from the date that such water and sewer service becomes available to the date that such charges are paid in an amount to be determined by the city. 
(d)  The charges authorized hereunder shall be in addition to all other charges authorized to persons or businesses who utilize city water and city sewer services, whether inside or outside the city limits. 
(e)  The commercial business shall be required to pay the full cost of installing water and sewer lines from the main line to a commercial business building or buildings located on the premises, and the city shall have no responsibility or liability therefor. 
(f)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to residential subdivisions, or to the extension of water mains and sewer mains by the city to serve a single residence or a single commercial business. Under such circumstances, the city shall be authorized to undertake such extensions and shall be authorized to charge the full cost of such extensions to such residential or commercial customer. 
(Code 1986, § 13-150; Ord. No. O-96-04-15, 4-18-1996) 
Secs. 90-79-90-99. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RESIDENTIAL AREAS 

Sec. 90-100. - Authority to extend. 
    The city council shall be authorized to extend or cause to be extended water main lines and sewer main lines into residential areas, both inside and outside the city limits, where the city council deems it appropriate and in the best interest of the city to do so. For purposes of this division, the term "residential areas" shall include all areas inside and outside the city limits which are zoned for any type of residential development. 
(Code 1986, § 13-161; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 1, 1-21-1999) 
Sec. 90-101. - Investigation; survey; estimated costs. 
(a)  In the event that the utilities director shall determine that there is an area within the city or outside the city limits which should have access to city water and city sewerage, the utilities director shall conduct a preliminary investigation of the area to determine the estimated cost, feasibility, and if appropriate, the time frame within which water mains and sewer mains could be installed to serve such area. The utilities director shall then make a written report of his findings to the city manager of the city, who shall review such findings and submit them to the city council for review. 
(b)  Upon review of the findings, the city council shall be authorized to undertake one of the following three options: 
(1)  The council can determine that the proposed installation of water and sewer lines in such area is not feasible, not cost effective, or is a project that the city should not undertake at the present time. 
(2)  In the event that the area studied is an area where residential property has already been developed, then the city council shall be authorized to direct the city manager of the city to undertake a survey of the property owners in the area to determine whether or not they desire the construction of such improvements in the area. An estimated cost of such extension that would have to be paid by such property owners, if any, shall be submitted to said property owners as part of such survey. Unless the city council shall determine that public health and safety concerns exist so as to require such installation, in the discretion of the city council, no such extension shall be undertaken by the city unless at least 60 percent of the property owners in the subject area respond affirmatively to such survey. 
(3)  In the event that the subject area has not been developed as a residential area, then the city council shall direct the city manager to conduct a survey, as referred to in subsection (b)(2) of this section, of the property owners in the subject area in the same manner. Unless the city council shall determine that public health and safety concerns exist so as to require such installation, in the discretion of the city council, no such extension shall be undertaken by the city unless 100 percent of the property owners in the subject area respond affirmatively to such survey. 
(Code 1986, § 13-162; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 2, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-102. - Completion of survey; determination of special or general benefits. 
(a)  The survey shall be completed within 90 days after the city manager is directed to commence such survey. In the event that the required percentage approval from the property owners is met as a result of the survey, or in the event that the city council determines that public health and safety concerns exist so as to require the installation of the water and sewer improvements, the city council shall determine whether or not a special benefit will accrue to those property owners gaining access to the city's water and sewer system. In the event that such a special benefit will accrue as determined by the city council, the city council shall compare such special benefit with the general benefit derived by taxpayers of the city in general as a result of such improvements. If the comparison of the special benefit to the general benefit derived by taxpayers of the city in general results in a conclusion that the special benefit to the taxpayers of the subject area in expanding the water and sewer system to said area will outweigh the general benefit derived by taxpayers of the city in general, then in such event, the city council shall determine what portion of the cost of extending the city's water and sewer line to the subject area will be paid by the city, if any. If the city council determines that the general benefit to be derived by taxpayers of the city in general outweighs the special benefit to the property owners in the subject area, then the city shall pay the total cost of the extension of the water and sewer line. 
(b)  In the event that the city determines there is a special benefit to the property owners in the subject area, the city shall determine what portion of such cost each property owner shall pay for such water and sewer extension. If finally approved, the portion of the cost of the water and sewer line extension payable by the property owners in the subject area shall be paid to the city in accord with the provisions of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 13-163; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 3, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-103. - Boundary of subject area; total costs; assessment. 
(a)  At the next regular meeting of the city council after completion of the survey and the tabulations of the results thereof, or at such other time as the city council may determine. The city council may consider a resolution establishing the boundary of the subject area to be served by the water and sewer extensions and identifying all of the property or properties in the subject area which will benefit from access to such extension. Such resolution shall also provide the following: 
(1)  The total cost of the proposed project; 
(2)  The proposed method of assessment as to each property owner; 
(3)  A good faith estimate of the proposed assessment against each property; and 
(4)  A date, place, and time for a public hearing to be held on the merits of the project and on any objections thereto. 
(b)  Such resolution, if approved by the city council, shall be deemed to conditionally approve the project under the terms and conditions as set out in the resolution, but such project shall not proceed until after the public hearing and after the city council has approved a final resolution approving the project in accord with the terms of such final resolution. 
(c)  Notice of the public hearing, referred to in subsection (b) of this section, shall be given to every property owner identified in the preliminary resolution as potentially benefiting from access to the proposed water and sewer line improvements. Such notice shall be given in writing and mailed to such property owners by certified mail, return receipt requested, at the address shown on the city tax digest for the mailing of tax notices. Such notices shall be mailed at least 15 days prior to the date of the public hearing and shall include a copy of the preliminary resolution as approved by the city council. Such notice shall also specify the date, time, and location of the hearing and advise such property owners of their right to attend said hearing and to testify at said hearing. Such notice shall also be published by the city manager or his designee at least once a week for two consecutive weeks in the legal organ of the city. The time fixed for the public hearing shall be not less than five nor more than ten days after the date of the last publication of such notice. 
(d)  The city council shall hold the public hearing on the date, time, and place specified for the purpose of hearing supporting comments, complaints, objections that may be made by any interested persons concerning the project, including, but not limited to, the need for such water and sewer extension, the basis of apportioning costs between the city and the property owners, or the amount of the proposed assessment. The city council shall consider such comments and shall also be authorized to accept written comments from interested parties. 
(e)  At the next regular meeting of the city council, or at such other time as the city council may direct, the city council shall be authorized to consider a final resolution authorizing the project. Such resolution shall not be approved at the meeting at which it is first read without unanimous consent of the members of the city council, but shall be voted upon by the city council at the time of the second reading of such resolution. Such resolution shall include, but shall not be limited to, the following determinations. 
(1)  The boundary of the subject area to be served by the water and sewer extension; 
(2)  The projected cost of the improvements; 
(3)  The proposed method of assessment of such costs against the property owners; 
(4)  A good faith estimate of the proposed assessment against each property owner; and 
(5)  The date on which such assessments shall be due and payable to the city. 
(Code 1986, § 13-164; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 4, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-104. - Notice of assessment. 
(a)  The city manager of the city, or his designee, shall, not less than 30 days before the date on which the payment of an assessment shall be due, cause written notice of such assessment to be sent to each affected property owner by certified mail, return receipt requested. The notice shall inform the property owner of the amount of the assessment, that the assessment is payable to the finance director of the city, that if paid on or before the due date, such assessment shall be without interest, and that if such assessment is not paid by the due date, the amount of such assessment shall be a lien against the lot or tracts of land subject to the assessment, and such lien shall continue in force until the assessment and all interest is fully paid. The interest to be charged on assessments not paid when due shall be determined by the city council in the final resolution in section 90-103. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing notice of the property owner's right to pay such assessment in installments, as provided in this division, shall also be contained in the notice required under this section. 
(Code 1986, § 13-165; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 5, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-105. - Action to enjoin or contest assessments. 
    No action shall be authorized to set aside any assessment, to enjoin the collection of any assessment, to enjoin the issuance of any execution therefor, or to contest the validity of an assessment on any legal or equitable grounds, unless such action is commenced within 30 days after the receipt of the notice provided for in section 90-104. 
(Code 1986, § 13-166; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 6, 1-21-1999) 
Sec. 90-106. - Payment of assessment by installments. 
    When an assessment is imposed against a property owner for the installation of water and sewer lines as set out in this division, and the property owner desires to pay the assessment in installments, the property owner shall be authorized to pay such assessment in installments if notice of such election shall be given by the property to the chief administrator officer of the city on or before the due date of the assessment, subject to the following terms: 
(1)  The assessment may be amortized over such length of time as requested by the property owner, but no such assessment may be amortized over more than seven years. 
(2)  The interest rate to be charged to a property owner shall be based upon the cost of funds to the city in connection with such project, plus administrative expenses and costs incurred by the city in administering the payments. Notwithstanding the foregoing, in the event that the water and sewer line extension project is paid for with cash funds from the city's water and sewer fund, the interest rate to be charged to property owners who amortize their assessment shall be the rate that the money expended for such extension would have earned if such money had been invested in one-year certificates of deposit, plus administrative expenses and costs incurred by the city in administering the payments. 
(3)  Each assessment amortized, as provided in this section, shall be repaid in equal monthly installments of principal and interest according to an amortization schedule provided by the city manager. Such assessments shall be evidenced by a promissory note and such other documents as may be deemed necessary or appropriate to evidence such indebtedness and to secure the repayment thereof. In the event that the property owner is a utility customer of the city, the city shall be authorized to add the monthly installment to the monthly utility bill of the property owner. In the event the property owner is not a utility customer of the city, a monthly installment shall be billed to the property owner by the city. 
(4)  The amount of the assessment shall be a lien against the property of the property owner subject to such assessment until such time as all principal and interest are fully paid. Such liens shall be levied, enforced, and collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of city taxes. 
(5)  In the event that any installment is not paid in full when due, the finance director of the city shall be authorized to notify the property owner that the assessment is in default and such officer shall be further authorized to declare the entire unpaid balance, with interest, costs, and expenses, immediately due and payable. 
(6)  Upon the sale, donation, gift, or other transfer by operation of law of any real property subject to such a lien, such assessment shall be due and payable in full at the time of such transfer; provided, however, that transfers of property solely for the purpose of securing a bona fide indebtedness of the property owner shall not require payment in full of such lien upon such transfer. 
(7)  Notwithstanding the other provisions of this section regarding the repayment of such assessments amortized over a period of years, in the event that the subject area has no residential dwellings located on it at the time of the approval of the final resolution approving the project as provided in this division, then, in such event, the property owners shall be authorized to enter into an agreement with the city to provide that such assessment shall be paid, with interest as aforesaid, at the time that each lot in the proposed development is sold, provided that the entire assessment, whether or not all lots subject to such assessment have been sold, shall be paid no later than seven years from the initial due date of the assessment. All other provisions of this division relating to interest rates, liens for assessments, and default shall be applicable to such property owners. 
(Code 1986, § 13-167; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 7, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-107. - Special fund for assessments. 
    All assessments levied and collected under this division shall be retained by the finance director of the city in a special fund to be used and applied for the payment of expenses incurred in installing and extending water and sewer lines for the project identified in the final resolution referred to in this division. No money in said special fund shall be used for any other purpose until such time as all costs of such project have been paid in full. In the event that any funds remain in the special fund after the project has been paid for in full, then such remaining funds shall be transferred to the city water and sewer fund. 
(Code 1986, § 13-168; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 8, 1-21-1999; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-108. - Property required to connect and pay monthly usage cost. 
    Upon approval of the final resolution referred to in this division authorizing the commencement of the project in the subject area, the city shall be authorized to require that each property in the subject area which is to benefit from the extension of the water and sewer lines as a result of such project shall be required to connect to such water and sewer lines and pay the monthly usage cost as established under this chapter, in addition to the payment of such assessments as may be levied under the terms of this division. 
(Code 1986, § 13-169; Ord. No. O-99-01-03, § 9, 1-21-1999) 
Sec. 90-109. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - ANNEXATION OF RESIDENTIAL AND COMMERCIAL AREAS 

Sec. 90-110. - Annexation application; utility extensions. 
    Upon any property owner submitting an application for annexation of such property owner's property into the city under any applicable method of annexation, if the property to be annexed is not being served by city water service or city sanitary sewer service at the time of the filing of such annexation petition, and if the property to be annexed has already been developed to the extent that it already has constructed on it residential or commercial buildings, then, as a part of the annexation process, the governing body of the city shall be authorized to consider proceeding in accord with the terms of this article with respect to the extension of water mains, sewer mains, water taps, and sewer taps to the property which is the subject of the annexation in accord with the terms of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-111. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this division, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    "Annexation" means the annexation of real property into the incorporated limits of the City of Americus pursuant to any method authorized by Georgia law. 
    "Project" means the construction of water line extensions, sewer line extensions, installation of water tap fees, or installation of sewer tap fees, or all of the above. 
    "Property owner" means the person or entity which owns fee simple title to the subject property and is the annexation applicant with respect to the subject property. 
    "Qualified property" means subject property which is situated such that existing city water services and existing city sewer services can be lawfully extended to such property without excessive costs, without placing an undue burden upon the capacity of the utility system, and without permanently disrupting utility service to existing city utility service customers. 
    "Sewer line extension costs" means the cost to be incurred by the city is extending existing city sewerage line from the existing city sewerage system to a location from which the subject property could be served. Such cost shall include, but shall not be limited to, the cost of easement or right-or-way acquisition. 
    "Subject property" means the improved real property located outside the incorporated limits of the city which the property owner is seeking to annex into the city. 
    "Water line extension costs" means the cost to be incurred by the city in extending existing city water lines from the existing city water system to a location from which the subject property could be served. Such cost shall include, but shall not be limited to, the cost of easement or right-or-way acquisition. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-112. - Initial review of application. 
    If the property to be annexed is "qualified property" as defined in this division, and if the property owner makes appropriate application for the extension of water and sewer services to the property to be annexed under this division, then the community development department, working in conjunction with the city utilities department and the city fire and emergency services department, shall undertake an initial review of the application. If such departments determine, as a result of such initial review, that the property to be annexed is "qualified property" under this division, then the departments shall jointly determine whether it is economically feasible from a financial standpoint for the governing body to provide the property owner, as a condition of annexation, reduced costs and fees for water line extensions, sewer line extensions, water tap fees, and sewer tap fees. No such cost or fee reductions shall be authorized unless the net cost of such project shall result in a financial benefit to the city. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-113. - Financial benefit determination. 
    In determining financial benefit to the city in connection with such project, said departments shall perform a cost analysis to determine the cost of water line extensions, sewer line extensions, water tap fees, and sewer tap fees to the subject property. Such analysis shall include consideration of the following: 
(1)  Cost to extend water lines; 
(2)  Cost to extend sewer lines; 
(3)  Cost for project engineering; 
(4)  Cost of water tap fees; 
(5)  Cost of sewer tap fees; 
(6)  Cost of stormwater fees; 
(7)  Estimated revenue to city from ad valorem property taxes, water service fees, sewer service fees, garbage fees, and stormwater fees; and 
(8)  Any other information that either department deems appropriate to include in connection with such analysis. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-114. - Recommendation to city council. 
    The departments shall jointly recommend to the governing body of the city the actual amount of fee reductions, if any, that would be authorized for the proposed project based upon such calculations conditioned upon the subject property being annexed into the city; provided, however, that in no event shall fee reductions exceed a seven-year payback to the city which shall be calculated solely based upon increased ad valorem tax revenue to the city generated by the subject property. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Sec. 90-115. - Payment of fees in installments under certain circumstances. 
    With respect to any water line extension costs, sewer line extensions costs, water tap fees, or sewer tap fees which are to be paid by a property owner annexing property into the city: (i) where the subject property is not qualified property as defined in section 90-111; (ii) where all or a portion of such fees are not subject to a reduction under section 90-114 above; or (iii) where the governing body of the city does not approve a fee reduction with respect to a particular application, the property owner may apply to the city to pay such costs and fees in installments. The property owner's application to pay such costs and fees, or a portion thereof, in installments may be authorized if approved by the governing body of the city, subject to the following terms: 
(1)  The governing body of the city must determine, based upon the financial benefit determination, that the project would bring economic development to the city in the form of increased private sector employment, increased ad valorem tax revenue to the city, or increased net revenue to the city's utility system. 
(2)  The costs and fees may be amortized over such length of time as approved by the governing body of the city, but the repayment of such costs and fees may not be amortized over a period of more than seven years. 
(3)  The interest rate to be charged to a property owner in connection with the payment of such installment payments shall be as determined by the governing body of the city, taking into account the cost of funds to the city in connection with the project, current prevailing interest rates in the private sector, plus administrative costs and expenses incurred and to be incurred by the city in collecting and administering such installment payments. 
(4)  Such costs and fees to be paid in installments shall be repaid in equal monthly installments of principal and interest according to a written amortization schedule. At the time that the city and the property owner agree to the monthly repayment amounts, the property owner shall execute and deliver to the city the property owner's promissory note and such other documents as may be deemed necessary or appropriate to evidence such indebtedness and to secure the repayment thereof. In the event that the property owner is a utility customer of the city, the city shall be authorized to add the monthly installment payment to the monthly utility bill of the property owner or the property owner's tenant in the case of leased property. 
(5)  Prior to any installment payment being authorized under this section, the property owner must be determined by the governing body to be sufficiently creditworthy to insure to the governing body, to the extent reasonably possible, that the property owner will have the financial ability to pay such indebtedness within the term established by the city. 
(6)  The amount of the costs and fees to be paid in installments shall constitute a lien against the property of the property owner benefitted by such utility services until such time as all principal and interest are paid in full. Evidence of such lien shall be executed by the property owner and shall be recorded in the deed records in the Office the Clerk of the Superior Court of Sumter County, Georgia. The city clerk shall be authorized to cancel such lien upon the full payment thereof. Such liens shall be levied, enforced, and collected in the same manner as provided for the collection of city ad valorem taxes. 
(7)  Upon the sale, donation, gift, foreclosure, or the transfer of or operation of law of all or a portion of the real property subject to such lien, any remaining unpaid amounts of such costs and fees shall be due and payable in full at the time of such transfer unless the governing body of the city approves the assumption of such remaining obligations by the person or entity acquiring all or a portion of the subject property. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-24, 9-19-2013) 
Secs. 90-116-90-129. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - WATER SYSTEM 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-130. - Access to private property; discovery of violations. 
    The public works employees, their agents and assistants may enter the premises of any water taker at any reasonable time to examine the pipes and fixtures, the quantity of water used; and the manner of its use and in case of fraudulent representation on the part of any water taker, or unnecessary waste of water, the payment will be forfeited and the supply of water stopped. 
(Code 1962, § 26-7; Code 1986, § 13-30) 
Secs. 90-131-90-158. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 90-159. - Meters-Required; installation and maintenance; cut off of service. 
(a)  All buildings, structures or premises supplied with water by the city waterworks shall be controlled by a meter. 
(b)  The meter shall be of the design and type to be approved by the utilities director or his designee, and shall be provided and installed by the city water department at a charge adequate to cover the purchase and installation costs of said meter. After installation, such meter shall be under the control of the water department of the city; and if such meter becomes damaged by the negligence of the property owner or tenant, the expense of any replacement or repair to such meter by the city water department shall be borne by the property owner; otherwise, the city water department shall replace any such meter at the city's expense when, in the judgment of the utilities director, or his designee, such meter is defective or in need of replacement. 
(c)  If any person shall refuse to comply with the provisions of this section, the supply of water to such service shall be cut off. 
(Code 1962, 26-11; Code 1986, § 13-20; Ord. No. O-92-08-24, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 90-160. - Same-Separate connections; definitions; service charge formula for multiple use. 
(a)  Each house, store, building, place of business, or residential premises which desires to have water service shall have a separate meter and be separately connected to said meter, except as hereinafter provided. 
(b)  The term "residential premises" means: 
(1)  A single-family apartment unit; 
(2)  A single-family dwelling house; 
(3)  A single-family mobile home dwelling unit. 
(c)  Where a multiple residential premises is served through a master meter, the owner of the multiple residential premises shall be required to pay a base water charge for each single-family residential premises, and, in addition thereto, the owner shall also pay all charges for actual water used at the premises to be calculated based upon the current city water rate schedule as approved by the city council. 
(d)  Where a multiple residential premises is served through a master meter, the bill for such water charge, shall be to the owner of the property served by such master meter. 
(e)  The term "business premises" means a premises upon which a business is being conducted. 
(f)  The term "multiple-business premises" means a premises upon which two or more businesses are located. 
(g)  Where a multiple-business premises is served through a master meter, the owner of the multiple-business premises shall be required to pay a base water charge for each separate business location constituting said multiple business premises, whether occupied or not, located upon the multiple business premises, and, in addition thereto, said owner shall also pay all charges for actual water used at the premises to be calculated based upon the current city water rate schedule as approved by the city council. 
(h)  Where a multiple-business premises is served through a master meter, the bill for such water charge shall be to the owner of the property served by such master meter. 
(i)  A master meter will not be allowed to serve a multiple residential or business premises except in those instances where all of the premises of such multiple premises are under a single ownership. 
(j)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, where a newly constructed or renovated multiple residential premises is served through a master meter, for each unit actually rented during the first two months after completion of such construction or renovation, the owner shall only be required to pay a base water charge, plus payment for any water used. Such two-month period is to begin on the date the owner makes application for a sanitation receptacle for such premises. The electric utility providing service to the premises shall be contacted each month during such two-month period by the finance director's office to verify the actual number of units having electric power on the meter reading date. Such number of units having electric power on the meter reading date shall be deemed to be units actually rented for the purposes of this section. At the conclusion of said two-month period, the owner shall be required to pay a base water charge, plus any water used above or in excess of such base charge, for all units located at the premises, whether or not such units are rented. For purposes of this section, the term "renovated multiple residential premises" means a multiple residential premises renovated to such an extent that all tenants thereof were required to vacate the premises being renovated during the renovation process. 
(Code 1962, § 26-6; Code 1986, § 13-21; Ord. No. O-91-03-08, 3-25-1991; Ord. No. O-92-08-24, 8-24-1992) 
Sec. 90-161. - Same-Tampering with meter or lock. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter in the city so as to cause said meter to misregister or fail to register the volume of water furnished to the owner or user of water through said meter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any water meter or water meter lock in the city so as to cause the service to be cut back on when the city has terminated the service for a reason. 
(Code 1962, § 26-5; Code 1986, § 13-22; Ord. No. O-10-09-31, 9-20-2010) 
State Law reference- Theft of services, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 90-162. - Tap charges and relocation of water meters. 
(a)  Water tap charges are as established by ordinance. The cost of installing a meter other than those listed by ordinance will be charged according to actual installation costs. 
(b)  There shall be a charge in the amount established by ordinance payable by the city's water customer any time that a water meter two inches or smaller in diameter is moved from one location to another location on such customer's property at the request of the customer. Such charge shall be paid by the customer at the time such service is provided, or shall be billed to the customer with the customer's regular monthly water bill, whichever is deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  In the event that a customer seeks to move a water meter from one location to another on such customer's water, and such water meter is two inches in diameter or greater, then such water meter must be moved, upon the approval of such a move by the city, by a private contractor licensed to undertake such activity. Such private contractor shall be either, hired by the customer or, if the customer so requests, the city will hire such private contractor. In the event that the city hires such private contractor, then the city will bill the customer on said customer's water bill for the contractor's charges for such work. In the event that the customer hires the contractor directly, then the customer shall pay the contractor's charges directly to the contractor. 
(Code 1962, § 26-1; Code 1986, § 13-23; Ord. No. O-89-03-06, 3-27-1989; Ord. No. O-90-12-31, 12-26-1990; Ord. No. O-00-07-32, 6-23-2000; Ord. No. O-03-08-19, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-11-29, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-163. - Service deposit-Nonsingle-family, commercial and industrial customers; nonprofit organizations. 
(a)  All categories of consumers of water in the city other than single-family residences shall be required to pay a service deposit in the amount established by ordinance before water service is made available, and in the case of all existing commercial, industrial and other residential water customers an average will be taken of the previous customer's six months' water usage and the deposit required will be one month's bill to be computed and rounded off to the nearest dollar amount; and provided further, however, in the case of a previous consumption history not being available for a new commercial, industrial or nonsingle-family residential water customer, a monthly figure will be estimated, based on a similar type commercial, industrial or nonsingle-family water customer, and a followup computation will be done after six months' water usage to ascertain the accuracy of such estimated deposit amount charged, and an adjustment either up or down will be made at that time, based on the average six months' water usage. 
(b)  Nonprofit organizations shall be required to pay a service deposit calculated in the same manner as set out in subsection (a) of this section; provided, however, that the finance director shall be authorized to waive such service deposit for nonprofit organizations where the nonprofit organization has established its credit worthiness from such documentation or other information presented to the finance director. 
(c)  No facilities owned or operated by a government entity shall be required to pay any advance water service deposit. The term "facilities owned or operated by a government entity" shall include any such facilities owned or operated by a government and any boards, authorities, or divisions appointed or established by any governmental entity for the provision of public services as authorized by the constitution or laws of the state or federal government. 
(Code 1962, § 26-2; Code 1986, § 13-24; Ord. No. O-87-12-27, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. O-95-03-10, 3-23-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-05-07-18, 7-21-2005) 
Sec. 90-164. - Same-Exceptions, refunds. 
(a)  An advance service deposit is required before water service is made available to consumers of water in the city. 
(b)  All residents except, those who have presented a letter from another utility company establishing their credit worthiness or has or have had a utility account in good standing with the city. For these customers, the advance service deposit may be waived by the finance director. 
(c)  The service deposit required of residential customers under subsection (a) of this section shall be refunded after the customer has maintained service at the same address for a minimum of 24 months with no delinquencies. The city utility billing department shall accomplish the refunding at least annually by applying the customer's deposit to his bill and notifying the customer when it has been done. 
(Code 1986, § 13-25; Ord. No. O-87-12-27, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-165. - Water service rates-Inside city limits. 
(a)  Residential, small commercial, and large commercial users. Rates in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for users inside the city limits for water service furnished to them by the city. 
(b)  Industrial users. Rates in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for users inside the city limits for water service furnished to them by the city. 
(c)  Qualifying senior citizens. There shall be a ten percent discount applied to the rates referenced in subsection (a) of this section for qualifying senior citizens. A qualifying senior citizen is one who meets all of the following qualifications: 
(1)  They shall be 62 years of age or older. 
(2)  They shall have a total household income from all sources not exceeding $15,000.00. 
(3)  They shall complete and sign an application attesting certain required information. 
(4)  They shall have the utility account in the name of the qualifying senior citizen. 
(Code 1962, §§ 26-3, 26-22; Code 1986, § 13-26; Ord. of 12-22-1986, § (a); Ord. No. O-88-02-09, 2-22-1988; Ord. No. O-92-01-01, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-93-01-02, 1-26-1993; Ord. No. O-93-02-07, 2-22-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-04, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-98-01-01, 1-22-1998; Ord. No. O-99-01-05, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-01-01-03, 1-18-2001; Ord. No. O-01-01-05, 1-18-2001; Ord. No. O-02-01-02, 1-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-01-01, 1-23-2003; Ord. No. O-06-01-03, 1-19-2006) 
Sec. 90-166. - Same-Outside the city limits. 
(a)  In accord with the provisions of state law and the City's Charter, the city shall be authorized to provide water service to residential, small commercial, large commercial, and industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The water rates to be charged by the city for water service provided by the city to residential, small commercial, large commercial, and industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city shall be two times the rates charged for similar services to city water customers whose premises are located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  The provision of such water services to premises located outside the corporate limits of the city shall only be authorized upon the occurrence of the following: 
(1)  The city shall have entered into an intergovernmental contract with the county authorizing the provision of water services in the unincorporated areas of the county as required pursuant to article IV, section II, paragraph III, subsection (b) of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, as such may be now or hereafter amended; and 
(2)  The owner of the premises to which such water services are proposed to be provided executes and delivers to the city a written contract between the city and such property owner, which contract shall provide, at a minimum, the method by which the property owner shall pay the city for base charges and water usage at the premises, the terms and conditions for the provision of such water services, and such other terms and conditions as the parties may deem appropriate in connection with such contract. In addition thereto, and as further consideration for the city's provision of water services to the property owner's premises outside the corporate limits of the city, said contract shall provide that in the event that the property owner's premises, or any portion thereof, becomes subject to annexation pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 36, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-20 et seq.), annexation pursuant to application by 100 percent of landowners, then the property owner shall, within 90 calendar days after such premises become subject to such annexation, apply to the city for annexation of such premises into the city. Each party to the contract shall be responsible for undertaking all proceedings necessary in order to effect such annexation in accord with state law. Such contract shall also provide that upon the completion of such annexation, the water rates charged for the provision of water services to the premises shall be the same water rates as those rates charged to residential, small commercial, large commercial, or industrial users, as the case may be, which are located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the rates for any water services provided by the city to facilities owned or operated by a government which are located outside the corporate limits shall be the same as such rates for water service customers located inside the corporate limits of the city. For such purposes, the term "facilities owned or operated by a government" shall include any such facilities owned or operated by a government or any boards, authorities, or divisions appointed or established by such government, for the provision of public services as authorized by the Constitution and the laws of the state or federal government. 
(e)  This section shall be applicable to any residential, small commercial, large commercial, or industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city that commence the use of city water services after August 1, 2005. For residential customers whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city who are already city water customers prior to August 1, 2005, the rates for such water service provided by the city to such residential customers shall continue to be two times the rate charged for similar services for customers residing within the corporate limits of the city, but no contract or other agreement with respect to the provision of such services shall be required. 
(Code 1962, § 26-4; Code 1986, § 13-27; Ord. No. O-85-05-12, 5-27-1985; Ord. No. O-89-03-05a, 3-27-1989; Ord. No. O-92-01-04, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-05-07-18, 7-21-2005; Ord. No. O-05-08-22, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 90-167. - Same-Water purchased in bulk. 
(a)  The rate that shall be charged for users of city water purchased in bulk shall be as established by ordinance. 
(b)  Purchases of city water in bulk under this section shall only be allowed at fire station # 1. 
(c)  Any person desiring to purchase water under this section shall obtain permission from the fire chief or utilities director of the city on each occasion such person purchases water under this section. 
(d)  Any person who shall use or take city water from a fire hydrant without being authorized to do so by the utilities director or the fire chief shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as set out in section 1-8. 
(e)  Any person who shall use or take water from the fire hydrant must first get permission from the fire chief or the utilities director and must also use a meter provided for this purpose by the city public works department. Meter readings shall be taken on the meter before use and again after use. The meter readings, consumption, and all billing information will be forwarded to the finance director's office for billing. 
With respect to a meter provided by the city public works department under this subsection, the person or entity to whom such meter is provided shall pay, at the time the meter is provided, a refundable deposit. In the event that the meter is returned to the city without any damage thereto, the city shall be authorized to refund the refundable deposit. In the event that the meter is damaged, then the city shall use all or a portion of the refundable deposit to make repairs to such meter. In the event that the meter is totally destroyed, or is not returned to the city within the time period directed by the city at the time the water meter is delivered to the person or entity utilizing it, then the city shall be authorized to retain the refundable deposit. The amount of the refundable deposit shall be as established from time to time in chapter 46, section 46-401 of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Americus. 
(Code 1962, § 26-4.1; Code 1986, § 13-28; Ord. No. O-92-09-29, 9-25-1992; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004; Ord. No. O-10-01-02, 1-21-2010) 
Sec. 90-168. - Same-Sprinkler system. 
    There shall be a monthly charge in the amount established by ordinance for each separate building in the city that is connected to the city water system for the purpose of a sprinkler system regardless of whether any water is used. 
(Code 1962, § 26-12; Code 1986, § 13-29) 
Sec. 90-169. - Notice of discontinuance by consumer. 
    Any person wishing to discontinue the use of water supplied from the city must give notice thereof at the utility billing department office, and such person will be charged for use of water until such notice is given. 
(Code 1962, § 26-8; Code 1986, § 13-31) 
Sec. 90-170. - Discontinuance of service for failure to pay bill; reconnection charge. 
    All water charges must be paid promptly or water will be shut off and a reconnecting fee in the amount established by ordinance will be charged before turning on again and also the current advance water service payment required shall be paid in full to the city before the city shall turn water on again. 
(Code 1962, § 26-9; Code 1986, § 13-32; Ord. No. O-98-01-04, 1-22-1998) 
Sec. 90-171. - Reconnection of water services after business hours. 
    In addition to the provisions of section 90-170 of this article, any person whose water service has been turned off for nonpayment, or for other violation or violations of the City Code, and who requests reconnection services which must be performed after normal business hours, which are Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., shall be required to sign an "after hours service agreement" with the city before the reconnection services will be performed by the city. Such agreement shall provide that the customer requesting reconnection services must pay the service agreement fee, reconnection fees, and any past due amounts by 10:00 a.m., on the next business day. In the event that the customer does not pay such amounts within such time frame in violation of the agreement, the city shall be authorized to disconnect the water service for such customer again, and the charges incurred for the reconnection shall be added to the customer's water service account. In the event that the customer fails to pay the amounts due under the after hours service agreement prior to the deadline for payment thereof, service shall not be reinstated for the customer until all amounts owed by the customer to the city in connection with the customer's water service are paid in full. In the event that the original disconnection is deemed to be an error on the part of the city, the service agreement fee and the reconnection fees will be waived. The amount of the service agreement fee and reconnection fees shall be established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-09-03-07, 3-19-2009) 
Secs. 90-172-90-193. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - WATER RESTRICTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. O-10-08-26, adopted Aug. 19, 2010, repealed §§ 90-195-197 of the former div. 3, and enacted a new title for div. 3, as set out herein. The former div. 3 was entitled "Water Shortages" and pertained to similar subject matter. Sections 90-195-90-197 derived from: Code 1986, §§ 13-201-13-203; Ord. No. O-04-06-11, adopted July 22, 2004; and Ord. No. O-08-06-13, adopted June 19, 2008. 

Sec. 90-194. - Outdoor watering restrictions imposed. 
(a)  There is hereby imposed, as to all water customers of the city, restrictions as to any outdoor watering. 
(b)  Persons may irrigate outdoors daily for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining groundcover, trees, shrubs, or other plants only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m. 
(c)  Subsection (b) of this section shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor watering uses: 
(1)  Commercial agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations adopted pursuant thereto; 
(4)  Use or reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the department to provide reclaimed wastewater; 
(5)  Irrigation of personal food gardens; 
(6)  Irrigation of new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Handwatering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Irrigation of horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Irrigation of athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(d)  Violations of the provisions of this section shall subject the violator to punishment in accord with the provisions of section 1-8 of the Code of Ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. O-10-08-26, 8-19-2010) 
Secs. 90-195-90-197. - Reserved. 
Sec. 90-198. - Exemptions. 
(a)  This division shall not apply to the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable local ordinances. 
(2)  Refuse of gray water in compliance with applicable state law and local ordinances. 
(b)  The following established landscape water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this division: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of personal food gardens. 
(c)  Newly installed landscapes, in place less than 30 days, are subject to the following: 
(1)  Irrigation of newly installed landscapes is allowed any day of the week, but only during allowed hours for the drought response level in effect, for a period of 30 days following installation. No such watering is allowed during drought response level four. 
(2)  For new landscapes installed by certified or licensed professionals, commercial exemptions established in subsection (e) of this section apply. 
(d)  The following golf course outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this division: 
(1)  Use of reclaimed wastewater by a designated user from a system permitted by EPD to provide reclaimed wastewater. 
(2)  Irrigation of fairways during times of nondrought and declared drought response level one. 
(3)  Irrigation of tee box areas during times of nondrought and declared drought response levels one, two, and three. 
(4)  Irrigation of greens. 
(e)  The following commercial outdoor water uses are exempt from the outdoor water use schedules of this division: 
(1)  Professionally certified or licensed landscapers, golf course contractors, and sports turf landscapers, during installation and 30 days following installation only. Professional landscapers must be certified or licensed for commercial exemptions to apply. 
(2)  Irrigation contractors, during installation and as needed for proper maintenance and adjustments only. 
(3)  Sod producers. 
(4)  Ornamental growers. 
(5)  Fruit and vegetable growers. 
(6)  Retail garden centers. 
(7)  Hydroseeding. 
(8)  Powerwashing. 
(9)  Construction sites. 
(10)  Producers of food and fiber. 
(11)  Carwashes. 
(12)  Other activities essential to daily business. 
(13)  Watering in of pesticides and herbicides on turf. 
(Code 1986, § 13-204; Ord. No. O-04-06-11, 7-22-2004) 
Sec. 90-199. - Penalties. 
(a)  The first violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor, and the offender shall be issued a warning advising of such offense by the appropriate city official. The second and any subsequent violation of this division shall be a misdemeanor. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing penalties which may be imposed by the municipal court of the city, in the event that any water customer of the city is cited for violation of this division three or more times, the city water department shall be required to discontinue water service to such water customer's premises where such violations occurred for not less than five consecutive calendar days. 
(Code 1986, § 13-25; Ord. No. O-04-06-11, 7-22-2004) 
Secs. 90-200-90-221. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SEWERS AND SEWAGE DISPOSAL 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-222-90-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 90-251. - Purpose and objectives of division; administration. 
(a)  The purpose of this division is to regulate the use of public and private sewers and drains, private wastewater disposal, the installation and connection of building sewers, and the discharge of waters and waste into the public sewer system and to provide penalties for violations thereof in the city. All connections of lateral or other sewer lines to the sewerage system of the city service area, whether within or without the city limits, shall be made subject to such terms and conditions as the city may prescribe. This division enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws required by the Clean Water Act of 1977 and the General Pretreatment Regulations 40 CFR 403. 
(b)  The objectives of this division are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system which will interfere with operations of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the municipal wastewater system, which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(3)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludges from the system; 
(4)  To enable the city to comply with its national pollutant discharge elimination system permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the POTW is subject; 
(5)  To provide for the regulation of direct and indirect contributors to the municipal wastewater system through issuance of permits to certain nondomestic users and through enforcement of general requirements for the other users; and 
(6)  To authorize monitoring and enforcement activities, user reporting, and provide for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided herein, the utilities director shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this division. Any powers or duties granted to or upon the utilities director may be delegated to a duly authorized representative. 
(Code 1986, § 13-80; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-252. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act or the Act means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq. 
    Authorized representative of the user means: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having a gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding $25,000,000.00, in second quarter 1980 dollars, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1)-(3) of this section may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for the environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under EPA approved laboratory procedures in five days at 20 degrees centigrade, expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    Building drain means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. (Also called house connection or service connection.) 
    Categorical standards means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with section 307(b) and (c) of the Act, 33 USC 1317 which applies to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405-471. 
    Combined sewer means a sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Composite means the makeup of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of sewage or industrial wastes. 
    Easement means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Effluent means the discharge flow of a pretreatment facility. 
    Equalizing unit means those devices or structures constructed to regulate evenly, either or both, the strength and volumes of wastes. 
    Flammable shall be defined by existing fire regulations. 
    Floatable oil means oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. 
    Flush toilet means the common sanitary flush commode in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
    Health officer means the director of the board of health or other person designated and their duly appointed assistants. 
    Hours of operation mean the normal number of hours per day that an industry or commercial establishment operates. 
    Indirect discharge means the discharge or the introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under section 307(b) and (c) of the Act into the POTW, otherwise known as publicly owned treatment works (including holding tank waste). 
    Industrial or commercial user means all users not embraced within the definition of a residential or domestic user as herein defined are declared to be industrial or commercial users. 
    Infiltration or inflow means groundwater and surface water which leaks into the sewers through cracked pipes, joints, manholes, or other openings. 
    Interference means a discharge which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    National prohibitive discharge standard means any regulation developed under the authority of 307(b) of the Act and 40 CFR 403.5. 
    Natural outlet means any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface water or groundwater. 
    New source means: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
b.  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity, as the existing source should be considered. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather then a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of subsections (1)b. or c. of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source means or has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin as part of a continuous on-site construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts, which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies that do not constitute a contractual obligation under this definition. 
    Pass through means a discharge, which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES permit. 
    PH means the logarithm (base 10) of the reciprocal of the concentration of hydrogen ions. 
    Pit privy means a shored vertical pit in the earth completely covered with a flytight slab on which is securely located a flytight riser covered with hinged flytight seat and lid. 
    Polluted water means that wastewater leaving the user's premises to which contaminants have been added so as to render the water nonpotable. 
    POTW or publicly owned treatment works means any devices and systems used in the storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. This includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant. 
    POTW treatment plant means that portion of the POTW, which is designed to provide treatment, including recycling and reclamation of municipal or industrial waste. 
    Pretreatment or treatment means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater to a less harmful state prior to or in lieu of discharge or otherwise introduction of such pollutants into a POTW. 
    Properly shredded garbage means the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that has been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Public sewer means a sewer, which is owned and controlled, or controlled by the city. 
    Receiving waters means those waters into which wastes are discharged. 
    Sanitary sewer means a sewer that carries liquid and waterborne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwater, and surface water that are not intentionally admitted. 
    Septic tank means a surface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(1)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(2)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified liquid from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
    Sewer means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
    SIC means and is an acronym for standard industrial classification. 
    Significant industrial user means : 
(1)  Any industrial user of the city's wastewater disposal system who is: 
a.  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
b.  A user that discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW, excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater; contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(2)  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in subsection (1)b of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Slug means any discharge of water or wastewater, which in concentration of any given constituent, or in quantity of flow, which adversely affects the collection system or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
    Storm sewer means a sewer, which carries stormwater, surface water and drainage, but excludes sanitary or polluted industrial wastewater. 
    Superintendent means the water and wastewater superintendent or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    Suspended solids means solids that either float on the surface of, or are in suspension in, wastewater or other liquids and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS) means and is an acronym for all solids contained in sewage except colloidal and dissolved solids. 
    Utilities director means the current utilities director of the city or his duly authorized representative. 
    Wastewater means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of the source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water borne wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present. The equivalent term is sewage. 
    Watercourse means a natural or artificial channel for the passage of water either continuously or intermittently. 
(Code 1986, § 13-81; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-253. - Use of public sewers required. 
(a)  All premises shall be provided by the owner thereof with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept clean and in a sanitary working condition. 
(b)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow to any open drain or well-penetrating, water-bearing formation, except where suitable treatment has been provided in accordance with subsequent provisions of the division. 
(d)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(e)  The owners of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the city's jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the city is hereby required at the owners' expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this division, within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(f)  All sinks, dishwashing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer. 
(Code 1986, § 13-82; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-254. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section 90-253, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of the city and the state department of human resources. 
(b)  Septic tanks shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged, and maintained in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the health officer. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(c)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank unless he shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the health officer. The health officer may withhold the issuance of such a permit pending the inspection and approval by the health officer of the site and location of the proposed work. Before any septic tank or any part thereof may be covered after it has been constructed, repaired, altered, or enlarged, it shall be inspected and approved by the health officer. 
(d)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of a private wastewater disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state department of human resources. No permit shall be issued for any private wastewater disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than that allowed by the health officer. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any natural outlet. 
(e)  No septic tank or other subsurface disposal facility shall be installed where a public sewer is accessible within 100 feet to the premises involved, nor in any place where the health officer deems the use of same to be a menace to human health or well-being. 
(f)  At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 30 days after notice. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(g)  The owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(h)  Flush toilets shall be provided at all times with sufficient running water under pressure to flush the toilet clean after each use. 
(i)  No pit privy shall be installed in the following locations: 
(1)  Where a public sewer is accessible to the premises involved; 
(2)  In areas where the health officer deems the use of pit privies to constitute a nuisance or menace to the public health; 
(3)  Where a pit privy may pollute any water supply; or 
(4)  Where the use of pit privies is not in keeping with the standard of sanitation in adjacent areas. 
(j)  Any premises that has a septic tank, privy, or any other sewage, industrial waste, or liquid waste disposal system, located thereon that does not function in a sanitary manner shall be corrected within 30 days from the receipt of written notification from the health officer. 
(k)  Premises with private water systems shall not be connected with the public sewerage system. 
(l)  No statement contained in this division shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the health officer. 
(Code 1986, § 13-83; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-255. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city. 
(b)  The owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgment of the utilities director. A permit and inspection fee as specified in the fee schedule shall be paid at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city for any loss or damage to the public sewer system that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every property except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway. The front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the utilities director, to meet all requirements of this division. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of building sewer, and the method to be used in construction shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or in amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the American Society for Testing (ASTM) and Water Pollution Control Federation (WPCF) Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Additionally, the following materials and methods shall apply to building sewers within the city: 
(1)  The building sewer shall be cast iron soil pipe, ASTM Specification A74, latest revision, or equal; ductile iron pipe, American National Standards Institute (ANSI) Specification A21.51, latest revision, or equal; or polyvinyl chloride (PVC) sewer pipe, ASTM Specification D3034, latest revision. All joints shall be tight and waterproof. 
(2)  Any part of the building sewer that is located within ten feet of a water service pipe shall be constructed of cast iron soil pipe or ductile iron pipe, with bolted mechanical joints. If installed in filled or unstable ground, the building sewer shall be of cast iron soil pipe, except that plastic pipe may be acceptable if it is laid on a suitable concrete bed or cradle as approved by the utilities director. 
(3)  The size and slope of the building sewer shall be subject to the approval of the utilities director, but in no event shall the diameter be less than four inches. The slope of such four-inch pipe shall not be less than one-eighth inch per foot. Furthermore, the appropriate requirements of the Occupational Health and Safety Act (OSHA) shall be followed. 
(4)  The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from frost, and the building sewer shall be laid at uniform grade and with straight alignment insofar as possible. Changes in direction shall be made only with properly curved pipe and fittings. Building sewers shall not be placed in the same trench with water service lines. 
(5)  An excavation required for the installation of a building sewer shall be open trench work unless otherwise approved by the utilities director. Pipe-laying and backfilling shall be performed in accordance with ASTM Specification C12, latest revision, except that no backfill shall be placed until the work has been inspected and approved by the utilities director. 
(6)  All joints and connections shall be made gastight and watertight. Requirements are as follows: 
a.  Push-on joints for cast iron soil pipe shall have neoprene gaskets in accordance with the requirements of ASTM C-564. 
b.  Push-on joints for ductile iron pipe shall also have neoprene gaskets and be installed according to the manufacturer's recommendations. 
c.  PVC pipe joint material shall be of the bell and spigot type, sealed with a rubber O-ring gasket, having a composition and texture which is resistant to the common ingredients of sewage, industrial wastes, including oils and groundwater, and which will endure permanently under the conditions likely to be imposed by this use. Installation of the gasket shall be done in accordance with the pipe manufacturer's instructions using all the necessary materials, lubricants, and equipment recommended by the manufacturer. 
d.  Other jointing materials may be used only when approved by the utilities director. 
(h)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall be made at the "Y" branch, if such a branch is available at a suitable location. If the public sewer is 12 inches in diameter or less, and no properly located "Y" branch is available, the city shall, at the owner's expense, cut a neat hole into the public sewer, with entry in the downstream direction at an angle of about 45 degrees, and install a 45-degree elbow with the spigot end cut so as not to extend past the inner surface of the public sewer. The invert of the building sewer at the point of connection shall be at an elevation of at least one-tenth of a foot above the invert of the public sewer. A neat smooth joint shall be made, and the connection made secure and watertight by encasement in concrete. Special fittings may be used for the connection only when approved by the utilities director. 
(i)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. No building sewer shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall, which might thereby be weakened. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(j)  No person shall make connection of roof downspouts, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer or a building drain, which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(k)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the utilities director when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the utilities director or his representative. 
(l)  All excavations for building sewer installation shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(m)  The city will define the availability of sewers and any costs associated with sewer permits or construction. 
(n)  The connection of the property sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city or the procedure set forth in appropriate specifications of the ASTM and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gastight and watertight and verified by proper testing, any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials, must be approved by the utilities director before installation. 
(o)  If any private sewer permits the entrance of infiltration or inflow to the public sewer, the city may: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair the private sewer; 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property; or 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the city sewer system. 
(Code 1986, § 13-84; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-256. - Restricted use of public sewers; prohibitions. 
(a)  A user may not introduce into any public sewer any pollutants that cause passthrough or interference of the POTW. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in subsection (d) of this section apply to each user introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment standards or any national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(c)  Stormwater and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as combined sewers or storm sewers or to a natural outlet. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process water may be discharged, upon approval of the state environmental protection division, to a storm sewer, combined sewer or natural outlet. 
(d)  Specific prohibitions. Except as herein provided, no person shall discharge any of the following described waters or wastes into any public sewer: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, wastestreams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees Celsius using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Pollutants, which cause corrosive or structural damage to the POTW, but in no case discharges with pH lower than five; 
(3)  Solids or viscous pollutants in amounts which cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference; 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants such as BOD, etc., released in a discharge at a flow rate or pollutant concentration, which cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Heat in amounts which inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference, but in no case heat in such quantities that the temperature at the POTW plant influent exceeds 40 degrees Celsius or 104 degrees Fahrenheit; 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil that will cause interference or passthrough at the POTW; 
(7)  Pollutants which will result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute worker health and safety problems. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, capable of creating a public nuisance or preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance, inspection, and repair; 
(8)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW; 
(9)  Any water or waste, which contains more than 100 mg/l of fat, oil, or grease, of animal or vegetable origin; 
(10)  Any water or waste containing in excess of one mg/l of any of the following hazardous or dangerous gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, or nitrous oxide; 
(11)  Any nondomestic waters, wastes or materials containing toxic organic and inorganic priority pollutants, unless issued a written permit by the utilities director that provides numerical limits on the quantity of such pollutants. Such limits will be calculated based on national pretreatment standards, local conditions of the POTW; and the presence of any pollutants causing passthrough or interference with the POTW; 
(12)  Any waters containing quantities of radium, naturally occurring or artificially produced radioisotopes in excess of presently existing or subsequently accepted limits for drinking water as established by the National Committee on Radiation Protection and Measuring; 
(13)  Any concentrated dye wastes, or other wastes which are highly colored, and adversely affect the treated effluent of the POTW. 
(e)  Local discharge limits. Using EPA approved methodology the city has established local discharge limits for the pollutants of concern to the POTW. These limits are designed to protect the receiving stream, prevent interference with POTW operations and protect the quality of the sludge produced by the POTW. These limits apply to all users of the system. For industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, the local limit will be compared to the categorical limit and the lower value will be used. The city reserves the right to set higher discharge limits for individual industrial users provided that the following conditions apply: 
(1)  There are no other industrial users discharging the pollutant of concern or if there are other significant industrial users discharging the pollutant of concern they are discharging below the established limit; 
(2)  If any other significant industrial users are discharging the pollutant of concern they agree to accept a lower limit; and 
(3)  The total combined loading on the POTW will not exceed the established maximum head works loading. 
Any user that desires to have a higher local discharge limit should petition the utilities director in writing. 
(f)  Any discharge to the POTW that contains concentrations of conventional pollutants above the local discharge limit will be subject to surcharges as provided in this division. For purposes of this division conventional pollutants are considered biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, chemical oxygen demand, ammonia nitrogen, and oil and grease. 
(g)  All other regulated pollutants are considered nonconventional pollutants and any discharge to the POTW that contains concentrations of these pollutants above the local discharge limit will be subject to enforcement action as provided in this division. 
City Local Limits 
Pollutant Concentration 
(mg/l) Surcharge Limit 
(mg/l) Biochemical oxygen demand 1,000 250 Total suspended solids 1,000 250 Chemical oxygen demand 3,000 750 Ammonia nitrogen 30 Oil and grease 100 Arsenic 0.015 Cadmium 0.005 Chromium 13.46 Copper 0.108 Lead 0.0125 Mercury 0.00025 Molybdenum 0.03 Nickel 1.23 Selenium 0.02 Silver 4.21 Zinc 0.738  
(Code 1986, § 13-85; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-257. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR chapter 1, subchapter N, parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated by reference. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the utilities director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the utilities director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined wastestream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(5)  Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The city may impose mass limitations on industrial users that are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations are appropriate. 
(Code 1986, § 13-86; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-258. - Industrial pretreatment requirements. 
(a)  Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(1)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this division and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 90-256 within the time limitations specified by the EPA, the state, or the utilities director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the utilities director for review, and shall be acceptable to the utilities director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this division. 
(2)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
a.  Whenever deemed necessary, the utilities director may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate certain wastewaters to be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage wastestreams from industrial wastestreams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this division. 
b.  The utilities director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain on their own property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
c.  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the utilities director, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease, oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of a type and capacity approved by the utilities director and shall be located as to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
d.  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(3)  Accidental discharge or slug control plans. At least once every two years, the utilities director shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge or slug control plan. The utilities director may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the utilities director may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge or slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
a.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
b.  Description of stored chemicals; 
c.  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by subsection (d)(6)a of this section; 
d.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(4)  Hauled waste. 
a.  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the utilities director, and at such times as are established by the utilities director. Such wastes shall not violate section 90-256 or any other requirements established by the city. The utilities director may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the director, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. 
b.  A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping the contents of septic tanks, as provided in separate rules. A record shall be kept of such dumps and statements rendered at the first of each month, the amount of such statements shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within such ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. 
c.  The utilities director shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The utilities director may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The utilities director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this division. 
d.  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the POTW superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the POTW superintendent. The POTW superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The POTW superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit application process. 
(1)  Analysis. When requested by the utilities director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 90 days of the request. The utilities director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(2)  Required. 
a.  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the utilities director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to subsection (c) of this section may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
b.  The utilities director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this division. 
c.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this division and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections 90-259-90-261. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(3)  Existing connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this division and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall, within 180 days after said date, apply to the utilities director for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 180 days of the effective date of the ordinance from which this division is derived except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the utilities director. 
(4)  New connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (b)(2) of this section, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(5)  Reissuance. Any user who is issued a wastewater discharge permit under this division must submit an application to have their permit reissued at least 90 days prior to the expiration date on the permit. 
(6)  Application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The utilities director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
a.  All information required by subsection (d)(1)b of this section; 
b.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
c.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
d.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
e.  Type and amount of raw materials processed, the average and the maximum per day; 
f.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
g.  Time and duration of discharges; 
h.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the utilities director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application; and 
i.  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(7)  Signatories and certifications. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(8)  Evaluation and decision on issuance. The utilities director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application the utilities director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The utilities director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(c)  Issuance process. 
(1)  Duration of permit. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the utilities director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(2)  Conditions. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the utilities director to prevent passthrough or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
a.  Permits must contain: 
1.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
2.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection (c)(5) of this section, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
3.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
4.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and recordkeeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
5.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
b.  Permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
1.  Limits on the average or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
2.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
3.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
4.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plan to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
5.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
6.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
7.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
8.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the utilities director to ensure compliance with this division, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(3)  Appeals. The utilities director shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the utilities director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
a.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
b.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
c.  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
d.  If the utilities director fails to act within 90 days, a request for reconsideration, shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(4)  Modifications. The utilities director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
a.  Incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
b.  Address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
c.  Change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
d.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
e.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
f.  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
g.  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
h.  Correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
i.  Reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(5)  Transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90 days' advance notice to the utilities director and the utilities director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the utilities director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
a.  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
b.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; 
c.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit; and 
d.  Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of the facility's transfer. 
(6)  Revocation. The utilities director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
a.  Failure to notify the utilities director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
b.  Failure to provide prior notification to the utilities director of changed conditions pursuant to subsection (d)(5) of this section; 
c.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
d.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
e.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
f.  Refusing to allow city representatives timely access to the facility's premises and records; 
g.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
h.  Failure to pay fines; 
i.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
j.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
k.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
l.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of permitted facility; 
m.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this division; or 
n.  Cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. 
All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(d)  Reporting requirements. 
(1)  Baseline monitoring reports. 
a.  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a national categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the utilities director a report which contains the information listed in subsection (d)(1)b of this section. At least 90 days prior to the commencement of their discharge, new sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit to the utilities director a report that contains the information listed in subsection (d)(1)b.1-5 of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
b.  Users described in subsection (d)(1)a shall submit the following information set forth: 
1.  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
2.  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
3.  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operations carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram, which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process. 
4.  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
5.  Measurement of pollutants. 
i.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
ii.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentrations, or mass, where required by the standard or by the utilities director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and longterm average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (d)(10) of this section. 
iii.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (d)(11) of this section. 
6.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O and M) or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
7.  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment or O and M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment or O and M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this subsection (d)(1)b.7 must meet the requirements set out in subsection (d)(2)a of this section. 
8.  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (b)(7) of this section. 
(2)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (d)(1)b.7 of this section: 
a.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards, such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation; 
b.  No increment referred to in subsection (d)(2)a of this section shall exceed nine months; 
c.  The user shall submit a progress report to the utilities director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
d.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the utilities director. 
(3)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 calendar days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the city a report containing the information described in subsection (d)(1)b of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's longterm production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production, or other measure of operation, this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (b)(7) of this section. 
(4)  Periodic compliance reports. 
a.  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the city but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with subsection (b)(7) of this section. 
b.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
c.  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the city, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (d)(11) of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(5)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the city of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system, which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. 
a.  The city may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under subsection (b) of this section. 
b.  The city may issue a wastewater discharge permit under subsection (c) of this section or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under subsection (c)(4) of this section in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
c.  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(6)  Reports of potential problems. 
a.  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to accidental discharges, discharges of nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the plant superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
b.  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the city, submit a detailed written report describing the causes of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this division. 
c.  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph a. above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advise of the emergency notification procedure. 
(7)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the city as the city may require. 
(8)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by the user indicates a violation, the user must notify the city within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the city within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the city monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the city samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(9)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
a.  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge, continuous, batch, or other. If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: 
1.  Identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes; 
2.  Estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the wastestream discharged during that calendar month; and 
3.  Estimation of the mass of constituents in the wastestream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. 
All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this subsection (d)(9) need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection (d)(5) of this section. The notification requirement in this subsection (d)(9) does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsections (c)(2)a.4 and (e)(1)c of this section. 
b.  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (d)(9)a of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
c.  In the case of any new regulations under section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the city, the EPA regional waste management division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
d.  In the case of any notification made under this subsection (d)(9), the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
e.  This provision does not create the right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this division, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(10)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(11)  Sample collection. 
a.  Except as indicated in subsection (d)(11)b of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the city may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
b.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(12)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed, to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports, which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(13)  Recordkeeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this division shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this division and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, name of the person taking the samples; the dates analysis were performed; who performed the analysis; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analysis. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the city. 
(e)  Compliance monitoring. 
(1)  Right of entry; inspection and sampling. The city shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this division and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
a.  Where a user has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the city personnel will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
b.  The city shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and metering of the user's operations. 
c.  The city may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated on at least an annual basis to ensure their accuracy. 
d.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
e.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this division. 
(2)  Search warrants. If the city has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this division, or that there is need to inspect and sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from the municipal court of the city. 
(f)  Confidential information. Information and data on a user obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public, EPD, EPA or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the city, EPD, and EPA, that release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Users wishing to keep such information confidential must assert a claim of confidentiality at the time the information is submitted to the city, such confidential information may be withheld from the public but it will always be made available to the EPD and EPA. Effluent data will be available to the public without restriction. 
(g)  Publication of significant noncompliance. The city shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the city, a list of the users that, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term "significant noncompliance" means: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria; 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH; 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the city believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or passthrough, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the city's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation, which the city determines, will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(h)  Service charges. The city may adopt charges and fees, which may include: 
(1)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program; 
(2)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures; 
(3)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
(4)  Fees for permit applications; 
(5)  Fees for filing appeals; 
(6)  Fees for consistent removal, by the city, of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards; 
(7)  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this division and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the city. The applicable charges shall be set forth in the city's schedule of charges and fees. 
(Code 1986, § 13-87; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-259. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. Whenever the city finds that any user has violated or is violating this division, or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, the utilities director or his agent may serve upon said user written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt date of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the utilities director or his agent. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The utilities director is hereby empowered to enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the order. Consent orders shall have the same force and effect as compliance orders issued pursuant to subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The utilities director may order any user which causes or contributes to a violation of this division or wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any user. Whether or not a duly notified user appears as noticed, immediate enforcement action may be pursued. 
(d)  Compliance order. When the utilities director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this division or a permit or order issued thereunder, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, sewer service shall be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may also contain such other requirements as might be reasonably necessary and appropriate to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices. 
(e)  Cease and desist orders. When the utilities director finds that a user has violated or continues to violate this division or any permit or order issued hereunder, the utilities director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct those persons in noncompliance to: 
(1)  Comply forthwith; 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and terminating the discharge. 
(f)  Administrative fines. Notwithstanding any other section of this division, any user who is found to have violated any provision of this division, or permits or orders issued hereunder, shall be fined in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge and the city shall have such other collection remedies as it needs to collect other individual user's property. Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a request for the city to reconsider the fine within ten days of being notified of the fine. Where the utilities director believes a request has merit, he shall convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receiving the request from the industrial user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. 
(1)  The utilities director may suspend the wastewater treatment service and wastewater permit of a user whenever such suspension is necessary in order to stop an actual or threatened discharge presenting or causing imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment. 
(2)  Any user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the utilities director shall take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The utilities director shall allow the user to recommence its discharge when the endangerment has passed, unless termination proceedings set forth in subsection (h) of this section are initiated against the user. A user who is the subject of a suspension order under this subsection shall have the right to appeal to the utilities director from such suspension, but such suspension shall remain in full force and effect pending such hearing and the decision of the director thereto. 
(3)  A user which is responsible, in whole or in part, for imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the utilities director prior to the date of the hearing described in subsection (g)(2) of this section. 
(h)  Termination of permit. Significant industrial users proposing to discharge into the POTW, must first obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the public works department. Any user who violates the following conditions of this division or a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any applicable state and federal law, is subject to permit termination: 
(1)  Violation of permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater constituents and characteristics; or 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling. 
Any noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (c) of this section, why the proposed action should not be taken. 
(i)  Termination of services. The city may order any user who causes or continues to allow an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW to show cause before the city council as to why termination of services should not happen. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the city council regarding the termination of services, the reasons why the action is to be taken, and directing the user to show cause before the city council why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. The city council may itself conduct the hearing and take the evidence, or may designate any of its members or any officer or employee of the public works to: 
(1)  Issue in the name of the city council notices of the hearing requesting the attendance and testimony of witnesses and the production of evidence relevant to any matter involved in such hearings; 
(2)  Take the evidence; 
(3)  Transmit a report of the evidence and hearing, including transcripts and other evidence, together with recommendations to the city council for action thereon. At any hearing held pursuant to this division, testimony must be taken under oath and recorded stenographically. The transcript, so recorded, will be made available to any member of the public or any party to the hearing upon payment of the usual charges thereof. 
(j)  Order from city council to discontinue service. After the city council has reviewed the evidence, it may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service is to be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are properly operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
(Code 1986, § 13-88; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-260. - Judicial remedies. 
    If any person discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this division or any order or permit issued hereunder, the utilities director, through the city attorney, may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(1)  Injunctive relief. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate this division or any order or permit issued hereunder, the city, through counsel may petition the court for its issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction or both, as may be appropriate, which restrains or compels the activities on the part of the user. The city may also initiate nuisance abatement proceedings in the municipal court of the city, as an alternate remedy. 
(2)  Civil penalties. 
a.  Any user who has violated or continues to violate this division or any order or permit issued hereunder, shall be liable to the city for a civil penalty of up to at least $1,000.00 plus actual damages incurred by the POTW per violation per day for as long as the violation continues. In addition to the above described penalty and damages, the city may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
b.  The city shall petition the municipal court of the city or any state court having jurisdiction to impose, assess, and recover such sums. In determining the amount of liability, the municipal court of the city or any state court having jurisdiction shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factors as justice requires. 
(3)  Criminal prosecution. 
a.  Any user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this division or any orders or permits issued hereunder shall, upon conviction in the municipal court of the city, be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
b.  Any user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed or required to be maintained pursuant to this division, or wastewater permit, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this division shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1986, § 13-89; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-261. - Supplemental enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Performance bonds. The utilities director may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this division or any order or previous permit issued hereunder unless such user files with it a satisfactory bond, payable to the city, in a sum not to exceed a value determined by the utilities director to be necessary to achieve consistent compliance. 
(b)  Liability insurance. The utilities director may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with the provisions of this division or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge. 
(c)  Water supply severance. Whenever an industrial user has been found after a hearing, to be in violation of the provisions of this division or an order issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Code 1986, § 13-90; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Sec. 90-262. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  Treatment upsets. 
(1)  For the purposes of this division, the term "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (a)(3) of this section are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workmanlike manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the utilities director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset, if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days: 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and the plan to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges, to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Treatment bypasses. 
(1)  For the purposes of this division: 
a.  The term "bypass" means the intentional diversion of wastestreams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
b.  The term "severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(2)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to ensure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsection (b)(3) and (4) of this section. 
(3)  Need for bypass known in advance. 
a.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the utilities director, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
b.  A user shall submit oral notice to the utilities director of an anticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The utilities director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(4)  A bypass is prohibited, and the utilities director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate backup equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection (b)(3) of this section; and 
d.  The utilities director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the utilities director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in this subsection (b)(4). 
(c)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 90-256 or the specific prohibitions in subsections 90-256(d)(1)-(13), if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause passthrough or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the passthrough or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the city was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Code 1986, § 13-91; Ord. No. O-98-05-19, 5-21-1998) 
Secs. 90-263-90-287. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING AND COLLECTIONS 

Sec. 90-288. - No free service; connections to be effectuated; meters required. 
(a)  No free service shall at any time be furnished from the system and the city shall undertake within its health powers, or such applicable powers now or hereafter provided by law, to have each separate improved real property within the corporate limits of the city, as now existent and as the same may hereafter be extended, connected to the sewerage facilities. 
(b)  The city shall endeavor to prohibit the disposal of sewage by any other means. 
(c)  No customer shall be connected to the system or served by the city without a proper meter having been first installed. 
(d)  All services shall be furnished in accordance with rates now or hereafter established, including services furnished to any county, municipal corporation or any other public board or body. 
(Code 1962, § 26-23; Code 1986, § 13-60) 
Sec. 90-289. - Sewer tap and connection charges established. 
(a)  Sewer tap charges are as established by ordinance. The cost of installing a meter other than those listed by ordinance will be charged according to actual installation costs. 
(b)  The cost of connection to sewer shall be as established by ordinance. 
(Code 1962, § 26-21; Code 1986, § 13-61; Ord. No. O-99-12-46, 12-16-1999; Ord. No. O-04-11-29, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-290. - Service charge rates; inside city limits. 
(a)  Residential, small commercial, and large commercial users. Rates in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for users inside the city limits for sewer service furnished to them by the city. 
(b)  Residential sewer rate computation. Residential sewer rates shall be based upon the actual water usage each monthly billing cycle and shall be computed at the current rates for the applicable monthly sewer billing cycle. 
(c)  Industrial users. Rates in the amount established by ordinance shall be charged for users inside the city limits for sewer service furnished to them by the city. 
(d)  Industrial sewer rate computation . Any industry that has received approval from the utilities director and has installed a flow meter for the purposes of metering wastewater shall be billed in the amount established by ordinance. 
(Code 1962, § 26-22; Code 1986, § 13-62; Ord. of 12-22-1986, § (b); Ord. No. O-88-04-16, 4-25-1988; Ord. No. O-89-01-01, 1-23-1989; Ord. No. O-89-12-41, 12-18-1989; Ord. No. O-90-12-35, 12-26-1990; Ord. No. O-92-01-02, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-93-01-03, 1-28-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-05, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-96-01-04, 1-25-1996; Ord. No. O-98-01-02, 1-22-1998; Ord. No. O-99-01-06, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-01-01-04, 1-18-2001; Ord. No. O-02-01-03, 1-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-01-02, 1-23-2003; Ord. No. O-06-01-04, 1-19-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-18, 11-19-2015) 
Sec. 90-291. - Sewer rates and contract for sewer usage; outside the city limits. 
(a)  In accord with the provisions of state law and the city's Charter, the city shall be authorized to provide sewer service to residential, small commercial, large commercial, and industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The sewer rates to be charged by the city for sewer service provided by the city to residential, small commercial, large commercial, and industrial users located outside the corporate limits of the city shall be two times the rates charged for similar services to city sewer customers whose premises are located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  The provision of such sewer services outside the corporate limits of the city shall only be authorized upon the occurrence of the following: 
(1)  The city shall have entered into an intergovernmental contract with the county authorizing the provision of sewer services in the unincorporated areas of the county as required pursuant to article IX, section II, paragraph III, subsection (b) of the Constitution of the State of Georgia of 1983, as such may be now or hereafter amended; and 
(2)  The owner of the premises, to which such sewer services are proposed to be provided, executes and delivers to the city a written contract between the city and such property owner, which contract shall provide, at a minimum, the method by which the property owner shall pay the city for base charges and sewer usage at the premises, the terms and conditions for the provision of such sewer services, and such other terms and conditions as the parties may deem appropriate with such contract. In addition thereto, and as further consideration for the city's provision of sewer services to the property owner's premises, said contract shall provide that in the event that the property owner's premises, or any portion thereof, becomes subject to annexation pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. title 36, ch. 36, art. 2 (O.C.G.A. § 36-36-20 et seq.), annexation pursuant to application by 100 percent of landowners, then the property owner shall, within 90 calendar days after such premises become subject to such annexation, apply to the city for annexation of such premises into the city. Each party shall be responsible to undertake all proceedings necessary in order to effect such annexation in accord with state law. Such contract shall also provide that upon the completion of such annexation, the sewer rates charged for the provision of sewer services to the premises shall be the same sewer rates as those rates charged to residential, small commercial, large commercial, or industrial users, as the case may be, which are located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(d)  Notwithstanding the foregoing, the rates for any sewer services provided by the city to facilities owned or operated by a government which are located outside the corporate limits shall be the same as such rates for sewer service customers located inside the corporate limits of the city. For such purposes, the term "facilities owned or operated by a government" shall include any such facilities owned or operated by a government or any boards, authorities, or divisions appointed or established by such government, for the provision of public services as authorized by the Constitution and the laws of the state or federal government. 
(e)  This section shall be applicable to any residential, small commercial, large commercial, or industrial users whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city who commence the use of city sewer services after August 1, 2005. For residential customers whose premises are located outside the corporate limits of the city who are already city sewer customers prior to August 1, 2005, the rates for such sewer service provided by the city to such residential customers shall continue to be two times the rate charged for similar services for customers residing within the corporate limits of the city, but no contract or other agreement with respect to such residence shall be required. 
(Code 1962, § 26-4; Code 1986, § 13-63; Ord. No. O-85-05-12, 5-27-1985; Ord. No. O-84-03-05b, 3-27-1989; Ord. No. O-92-01-04, 1-28-1992; Ord. No. O-05-08-21, 8-18-2005) 
Sec. 90-292. - Nonusers of public water supply-Advance payment of service charges. 
    An advance sewer service payment in the amount established by ordinance is required before sanitary sewer service is furnished to any user of the city's sanitary sewer system whose premises is in the city and whose premises is not served by the public water supply system of the city. The deposit for users outside the city shall be as established by ordinance. 
(Code 1962, § 26-18.1; Code 1986, § 13-64; Ord. No. O-85-05-12, 5-27-1985) 
Sec. 90-293. - Same-Monthly charges. 
(a)  All occupants of premises located in the city served by the sanitary sewer system of the city, where such premises are not served by the public water system of the city, shall pay a monthly sanitary service charge. Such charge shall be determined with reference to a water meter installed at the expense of the owner at such location, which water meter shall be read at least monthly by the city. The charges shall include the base customer fee plus the operating fee specified in section 90-290, based upon water usage per month. In the event that said premises are located outside the city, the rates shall be specified in section 90-291. 
(b)  The owner of such premises shall be required to install a water meter at such location and in such proximity to the premises' water well as may be determined proper by the city. The water meter shall be installed in such a manner and in such location so as to require that all water usage at said premises is recorded by said meter. 
(Code 1962, § 26-16; Code 1986, § 13-65; Ord. No. O-90-04-10, 4-24-1990) 
Sec. 90-294. - Same-Charge imposed upon each family unit. 
    For the purpose of sections 90-292 and 90-293, the term "premises" is defined to be a single-family unit. Each additional family unit shall be charged a monthly service charge in the same amount. 
(Code 1962, § 26-17; Code 1986, § 13-66) 
Sec. 90-295. - Same-Charge imposed upon commercial unit. 
    A commercial unit which is now tied to the sanitary sewer system and which is not receiving water from the municipal system shall be charged a monthly sanitary sewer service charge in the amount as set out in section 90-293 and any industrial waste charges imposed. 
(Code 1962, § 26-18; Code 1986, § 13-67) 
Sec. 90-296. - Effect of nonpayment; disconnection of service. 
    Upon any occupant failing or refusing to pay the monthly sanitary sewer service charge after having been duly billed for same by the city, and following the lapse of 30 days after such billing, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this division and the sanitary sewer service to such premises shall be terminated by the city severing the sanitary sewer connection at the property line. 
(Code 1962, § 26-19; Code 1986, § 13-68) 
Sec. 90-297. - Reinstatement of service; reconnection fee. 
    The sanitary sewer service will be reinstated by the city at such premises upon the occupant of the premises paying all past due sanitary sewer service charges billed to the occupant of said premises, together with a reconnection fee in the amount established by ordinance. 
(Code 1962, § 26-20; Code 1986, § 13-69) 
Sec. 90-298. - Billing. 
    The charges for such sewer services as aforesaid shall be included in the bill for charges for water services and facilities and shall be billed to the customers at the same time and in the same manner as now provided for the payment of water bills and same shall be collected in the manner and subject to the provisions applicable to the water bills. 
(Code 1962, § 26-24; Code 1986, § 13-70) 
Sec. 90-299. - Amending rates. 
    Nothing herein contained shall be construed as relieving the city of the requirement, as often as it may be necessary, to revise and adjust its schedule of rates, fees and charges for either water or sewer services and facilities, or both, as provided and covenanted in the ordinances of its city council heretofore or hereafter adopted authorizing the issuance of the city's water and sewerage revenue obligations. 
(Code 1962, § 26-25; Code 1986, § 13-71) 
Sec. 90-300. - Disposing of sewage by delivery to city facility. 
    All persons disposing of sewage by delivering same to the city sewage treatment facility shall be charged an amount established by ordinance. Said persons shall be billed on a monthly basis. 
(Code 1962, § 26-26; Code 1986, § 13-72) 
Secs. 90-301-90-318. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - NATURAL GAS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 90-319-90-339. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - RATES AND CHARGES; BILLING AND COLLECTION 

Sec. 90-340. - Meters-Required; installation and maintenance; cut off of service. 
(a)  All buildings, structures or premises supplied with gas by the city gas system shall be controlled by a meter. 
(b)  The meter shall be of the design, type and size to be approved by the natural gas services director of the city and shall be provided and installed by the city gas department at a charge adequate to cover the purchase and installation costs of said meter. After installation, such meter shall be under the control of the gas department of the city; and if such meter becomes damaged by negligence of the property owner or tenant, the expense of any replacement or repair to such meter by the city gas department shall be borne by the property owner; otherwise, the city gas department will replace any such meter at the city's expense when, in the judgment of the city gas department, such meter is defective or in need of replacement. 
(c)  If any person shall refuse to comply with the provisions of this section, the supply of gas to such service shall be cut off. 
(Code 1986, § 13-100) 
Sec. 90-341. - Same-Separate connections. 
    Each house, store, building, place of business, or residential premises which desires to have gas service shall have a separate meter and be separately connected to said meter, except as hereinafter provided. 
(Code 1986, § 13-101) 
Sec. 90-342. - Same-Tampering with meter or lock. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any gas meter in the city so as to cause said meter to misregister or fail to register the volume of gas furnished to the owner or user of gas through said meter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to tamper with any gas meter lock in the city so as to cause the service to be cut back on when the city has terminated the service for a reason. 
(Code 1986, § 13-102) 
State Law reference- Theft of service, O.C.G.A. § 16-8-5. 
Sec. 90-343. - Service deposit-Nonsingle-family, commercial and industrial customers; nonprofit organizations. 
(a)  All categories of consumers of gas in the city other than single-family residences shall be required to pay a minimum amount established by ordinance as a service deposit before gas service is made available, and in the case of all existing commercial, industrial and other residential gas customers an average will be taken of the previous customer's six months of gas usage and the deposit required will be one month's bill to be computed and rounded off to the nearest dollar amount; and provided further, however, in the case of a previous consumption history not being available for a new commercial, industrial or nonsingle-family residential gas customer, a monthly figure will be estimated, based on a similar type commercial, industrial or nonsingle-family gas customer, and a followup computation will be calculated after six months of gas usage to ascertain the accuracy of such estimated deposit amount charged, and an adjustment either up or down will be made at that time, based on the average six months of gas usage. 
(b)  Nonprofit organizations shall be required to pay a service deposit calculated in the same manner as set out in subsection (a) of this section; provided, however, that the finance director shall be authorized to waive such service deposit for nonprofit organizations where the nonprofit organization has established its credit worthiness from such documentation or other information presented to the finance director. 
(Code 1986, § 13-103; Ord. No. O-87-12-27, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. O-95-03-10, 3-23-1995; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-344. - Same-Exceptions, refunds. 
(a)  An advance service deposit in the amount established by ordinance is required before gas service is made available to the consumers of gas in the city, except those who have presented a letter from another utility company establishing their credit worthiness or have had a utility account in good standing with the city. For these customers, the advance service deposit may be waived by the finance director. 
(b)  The service deposit required of residential customers under subsection (a) of this section shall be refunded after the customer has maintained service at the same address for a minimum of 24 months with no delinquencies. The city utility billing department shall accomplish the refunding at least annually by applying the customer's deposit to his bill and notifying the customer when it has been done. 
(Code 1986, § 13-104; Ord. No. O-87-12-27, 12-21-1987; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-345. - Senior citizens' discount on residential gas bill. 
(a)  A qualifying senior citizen is one who meets the following criteria: 
(1)  Shall be 62 years of age or older. 
(2)  Total household income from all sources shall not exceed $15,000.00. 
(3)  Shall complete and sign an application attesting certain required information. 
(4)  Shall have the residential utility account in the name of the qualifying senior citizen. 
(b)  The qualifying senior citizen shall be billed gas rates which are ten percent less than the current residential gas rates in effect. 
(Code 1986, § 13-105; Ord. No. O-93-02-08, 3-26-1993; Ord. No. O-01-01-05, 1-18-2001) 
Sec. 90-346. - Purchase gas adjustment. 
(a)  The customer rates for all classifications of firm natural gas customers are based upon the city's paying a commodity charge to the natural gas supplier. Under applicable federal statutes and regulations; namely the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission's Regulation section 154.38(d)(4), regulations under the Natural Gas Act and section 282.601 of the regulations under the Natural Gas Policy Act of 1978, the commodity charges imposed upon the city by the supplier have been rapidly increasing and otherwise fluctuating. Such rapid product cost fluctuations make it practically impossible for the city to establish firm natural gas customer rates at realistic levels to ensure normal revenues that will cover the purchase cost of gas, distribution and transportation costs, natural gas department operating expenses, and an established margin. 
(b)  To provide for fluctuations in the city's cost of natural gas purchased and other costs to the city that may be incurred in the delivery of natural gas to the city gate, the rates for firm natural gas imposed upon the various classifications of natural gas customers shall be subject to a purchase gas adjustment (hereinafter called "PGA") that will be calculated in accordance with subsection (d) of this section. 
(c)  The PGA shall not be reflected separately on the utility customer's monthly billing. 
(d)  The PGA shall be supplied on a monthly basis by the Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia (MGAG) to the city. The natural gas variable rates for all classifications of firm delivery customers shall be calculated monthly and shall be equal to the cost of gas plus the PGA plus the operating expenses and the appropriate rate of return on the city's investments in the natural gas system as determined by the city council from time to time. The Municipal Gas Authority of Georgia will provide the cost of natural gas each month prior to the city's billing cycle. In establishing the PGA, all fractions of cents shall be rounded up to the nearest whole cent. 
(e)  The city shall have available in the office of the finance director the applicable PGA and corresponding rates for the current calendar month and for the previous 24 calendar months so that interested parties may determine fluctuations in the city's natural gas rates to all classifications of firm load customers. 
(f)  Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the city shall not consider any price fluctuations in its cost for propane in determining the purchase gas adjustment under this section unless the price fluctuations negatively impact the city's overall gross margin. 
(Code 1986, § 13-106; Ord. No. O-97-01-01, 1-23-1997; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 90-347. - Discontinuance of service for failure to pay natural gas bill; reconnection charges. 
    All natural gas charges must be promptly paid or natural gas service will be discontinued and a reconnection fee in an amount established by ordinance shall be charged for turning the natural gas service on again. In addition, the current advance natural gas service payment required shall be paid in full to the city before the city shall turn the natural gas service on again in the event of a disconnection. 
(Ord. No. O-09-03-07, 3-19-2009) 
Sec. 90-348. - Reconnection of natural gas services after business hours. 
    In addition to the provisions of section 90-170 of this article, any person whose natural gas service has been turned off for nonpayment, or for other violation or violations of the City Code, and who requests reconnection services which must be performed after normal business hours, which are Monday-Friday 8:00 a.m. to 5:00 p.m., shall be required to sign an "after hours service agreement" with the city before the reconnection services will be performed by the city. Such agreement shall provide that the customer requesting reconnection services must pay the service agreement fee, reconnection fees, and any past due amounts by 10:00 a.m., on the next business day. In the event that the customer does not pay such amounts within such time frame in violation of the agreement, the city shall be authorized to disconnect the natural gas for such customer again, and the charges incurred for the reconnection shall be added to the customer's natural gas service account. In the event that the customer fails to pay the amounts due under the after hours service agreement prior to the deadline for payment thereof, service shall not be reinstated for the customer all amounts owed by the customer to the city in connection with the customer's natural gas service are paid in full. In the event that the original disconnection is deemed to be an error on the part of the city, the service agreement fee and the reconnection fees will be waived. The amount of the service agreement fee and reconnection fees shall be established by ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-09-03-07, 3-19-2009) 
Secs. 90-349-90-364. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - SOLID WASTE[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; hazardous waste disposal, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-61 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-4. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 90-365. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ashes means and includes the waste product from coal, wood or other fuels used for cooking and heating. 
    Brown goods includes such items as chairs, mattresses, sofas, tables and other furniture items. 
    Building refuse means solid waste generated from construction or demolition activities undertaken on property located within the corporate limits of the city. The term "building refuse" includes, but is not limited to, lumber, brick, block, stone, carpet, plumbing materials, plaster, concrete, roofing, floor tile, gutters, and other substances accumulated as a result of construction of or repairs or additions to structures or accessory structures or the demolition thereof. 
    Bulk waste means appliances, furniture, bedding material, automobile parts, mechanical equipment, mechanical parts and carpet. 
    Commercial solid waste means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants, warehouses, and other nonmanufacturing activities, excluding residential and industrial wastes. 
    Composting means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
    Disposable trash containers means plastic bags and cardboard, wooden and corrugated boxes which shall be nonreturnable and shall be collected and packed into the garbage truck collecting such items. 
    Disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of solid waste occurs and includes, but is not limited to, landfilling and solid waste thermal treatment technology facilities. 
    Dump means to throw, discard, place, deposit, discharge, bury, burn or dispose of a substance. 
    Front-loading container means a heavy-duty steel container designed for use in commercial, industrial, and apartment units for storage of garbage, miscellaneous rubbish, trash and other waste. 
    Garbage means all vegetable and animal matter, food and other refuse from a kitchen, market, store, or elsewhere, including all matter that decays, attracts flies, and creates disagreeable odors. 
    Hazardous waste means solid or liquid waste material resulting from the manufacture or use of chemicals, pesticides and drugs, other than normal household use, pathological waste, highly flammable, explosive waste, toxic waste, sewer sludge, insecticides, poisons, corrosives, caustics, acids, infectious materials, compressed gases, biological materials, radioactive materials, petroleum products and other waste material that is determined to be a hazard to public health, safety or environment. 
    Industrial waste means solid waste from generated by factories, processing plants, wholesale establishments, assembling plants, food processing wastes, cinders and ashes, lumber scraps, sawdust, shavings, including solids, semisolids, sludges, and liquids floor sweepings, metal scrap and shavings, and any other waste products from industrial and manufacturing processes. 
    Leachate collection system means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate, which may percolate through the waste and into the soils surrounding the landfill. 
    Litter means all discarded manmade materials, including, but not limited to, garbage, lottery tickets, household trash, industrial waste, building materials, appliances, or portions thereof, refuse, waste materials, sand, gravel, slag, brick bats, rubbish, tin cans, cigarette and cigar butts, other tobacco products, rags, cloths, newspapers, aluminum cans, trash, debris, dead animals, or any other discarded, used or unconsumed substance which is not handled in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
    Multiple residential unit means any duplex, dwelling place or apartment, or group of apartments under a single roof, or in a single apartment complex, used for a dwelling place for more than a one-family unit and which is served by a single water meter. 
    Municipal solid waste means any solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash and sanitary waste in septic tanks and includes solid waste for single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, and day use recreation areas. The term includes yard trimmings and commercial solid waste, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvacultural operations or industrial processes or operations. 
    Municipal solid waste disposal facility means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of municipal solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed or including commercial or industrial solid waste, including, but not limited to municipal solid waste landfills. 
    Municipal solid waste landfill means a disposal facility where any amount of municipal solid waste, whether or not mixed with or including commercial waste, industrial waste, nonhazardous sludges or small quantity generator hazardous waste, is disposed of by means of placing an approved cover thereon. 
    Owner means any person, firm, corporation owning, leasing, renting, occupying or managing any premises. 
    Plastic bag means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation Standard of 1.1 mills and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist tie. An untied plastic bag shall not be an approved container. 
    Retail tire dealer means a person actively engaged in the business of selling new and used replacement tires. 
    Rubbish means a variety of nonrecyclable household waste derived from places of residence and shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, broken glass bottles and jars, crockery, rubber, discarded clothing, and similar materials. 
    Scrap tire means a tire that is no longer suitable for its original intended purpose because of wear, damage or defect. 
    Scrap tire carrier means any person engaged in picking up or transporting scrap tires not otherwise exempted in the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management for the purpose of removal to a scrap tire processor, end user or disposal facility. 
    Scrap tire generator means any person who generates scrap tires. The term "scrap tire generator" may include, but is not limited to, retail tire dealers, retreaders, scrap tire processors, automobile dealers, private company vehicle maintenance shops, garages, service stations, and city, county and state governments. 
    Scrap tire processor means any person who is approved by the environmental protection division to receive scrap tires from scrap tire generators or scrap tire carriers for the purpose of scrap tire processing. 
    Scrap tire sorter means any person, other than the original scrap tire generator, who handles mixed tires by separating used tires and retreadable casings from scrap tires. 
    Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one-family unit and which is served by a single water meter. 
    Solid waste means any garage or refuse; sludge from wastewater treatment plants; solid, liquid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from operations; mineral matter; metal and wooden furniture; appliances; large metal scraps and wires; wooden crates, boxes or pallets; dead animals; and other waste in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this section. 
    Waste means discarded material including, but not limited to, ashes, building refuse, garbage, hazardous waste, industrial refuse, recyclable waste, rubbish, solid waste, yard debris, tires, sand, gravel, slag, brick bats, trash, debris, dead animals, bottles, cans, boxes, containers, papers, tobacco products, appliances, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles or parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge from wastewater treatment plants or air pollution control facilities, and any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description resulting from domestic, industrial, commercial, governmental, or other operations. 
    Wheeled container means a covered plastic or rubber container on wheels designed primarily for use by residential units for storage of garbage, miscellaneous refuse, trash and other waste. 
    White goods means appliances such as stoves, refrigerators and other bulky household items primarily constructed of metal, parts of appliances, metal parts and miscellaneous metal. 
    Yard debris means tree limbs, branches, stumps and logs, twigs, grass and shrub trimmings and clippings, bushes, weeds, leaves, and general yard and garden waste materials, and includes stone and dirt rakings and similar waste materials resulting from landscaping activities. 
    Yard trimmings means leaves, brush, grass clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals, and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance, other than mining, agricultural and silvacultural operations. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-110, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-366. - Penalties for violation of article. 
    Except as otherwise specifically provided in this article, any violation of this article shall be subject to punishment in the municipal court of the city, upon conviction of such violation, as provided in section 1-8. 
(Code 1986, § 13-130) 
Sec. 90-367. - Litter. 
(a)  Scattering refuse and litter prohibited. No person shall throw or deposit any rubbish on any public or private street or scatter such refuse or litter on any public or private property, or throw or deposit in any stream or drainage area. 
(b)  Use of streets and roads. It shall be unlawful for any vehicle transporting loose materials to transport the same without a suitable cover securely fastened to the vehicle in such a manner as to prevent said loose material from being deposited on the streets and adjoining areas. 
(c)  Unlawful dumping. It shall be unlawful for a person to deposit, throw, drop, dump or otherwise leave any litter on the premises of another without the consent of such other person and without complying with the applicable laws including, but not limited to this section. 
(d)  Prima facie case. Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this section, the trier of fact may in its discretion and in consideration of the totality of the circumstances infer that the operator of the conveyance has violated this section. 
(e)  Presumption. Whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this section is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings which display the name of the person thereon in such manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be an rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this section. 
(f)  Emergencies. Nothing contained in this section shall require the intermediate measures where the violation is of such nature or degree as to constitute an immediate, clear, and present danger to the health and safety of the public. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-125, 11-16-2006) 
State Law reference- Litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40. 
Sec. 90-368. - Administration and enforcement of article. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee shall be responsible for the administration and enforcement of the provisions of this article. He may call upon the police department for assistance in its enforcement. All regulatory actions of the city manager or his designee shall be subject to review and approval of city council or a committee of city council designated for such purpose by the mayor. 
(b)  Upon determining that a violation of this article exists, the city manager or his designee shall cause written notice of such violation to be issued to the owner or occupier of the subject premises, setting forth the violation of the chapter and granting such owner or resident a reasonable time, not to exceed ten days, for the owner to correct said condition. 
(c)  Upon determining that the owner has failed or refused to correct the condition within the time prescribed in the notice, the city manager or his designee shall cause a notice to be issued directing the owner or occupier of said premises to appear in the municipal court to answer the charge of violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-128, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-369. - Offal defined; removal to designated area; time limitation. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Offal means the inedible parts of a butchered animal and waste parts of the animal. 
(b)  All offal and byproducts which result from the slaughter of an animal within the city shall be removed to the area designated by the county commissioners by the person responsible for slaughtering said animal within 12 hours after the slaughter of the animal. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-127, 11-16-2006) 
Secs. 90-370-90-396. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - COLLECTION 

Sec. 90-397. - Waste collection responsibility of city. 
(a)  The city shall be responsible for the collection and disposal of all garbage, solid waste, yard debris and rubbish within the city, and no person, unless otherwise authorized by a contract with the city, shall collect and dispose of or transport over the streets of the city any of such waste without first obtaining a written permit from the city to do so. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the city shall be authorized to enter into a contract with a private corporation or a public authority to provide for the collection and disposal of all garbage, solid waste, yard debris, and rubbish within the city. Such contract shall contain such terms and conditions as authorized by the city council and shall be for such length of time as may be determined by the city council and its citizens, but in no event shall such contract extend a length of time not otherwise authorized by the Constitution and laws of the state. 
(b)  The city shall not be responsible for the collection of hazardous waste and industrial refuse except as otherwise provided herein. The city shall not be responsible for the collection of building refuse generated by a contractor or other person who does not own or occupy the premises where such building refuse is generated. The city shall not be responsible for the collection of more than one cubic yard of residential building refuse generated in any one-week collection period by a person who owns or occupies the premises where such building refuse is generated. The disposal of all such waste, which is not subject to collection by the city, shall be the responsibility of the person generating such waste. Such waste shall be disposed of in accord with local, state and federal statutes, ordinances and regulations. One cubic yard shall be the equivalent of the size of two-wheeled garbage containers used for residential garbage collections. 
(c)  No person who owns or occupies any premises in the city shall permit trash, garbage, or other waste or rubbish to collect or remain on such premises, except during such periods between waste pickup; and no person who owns or occupies any premises in the city shall permit garbage, trash or other waste to be scattered from such premises into the public streets of the city. 
(d)  Any owner of property who permits garbage, solid waste, building refuse, yard debris, recyclable waste and rubbish, hazardous waste or industrial refuse to become in a condition which is hazardous or dangerous to the public health, safety and welfare shall be notified in writing by the city manager or his designee to abate such condition within ten days of the date of such notice. In the event that such condition is not abated within the time provided in such notice, then the city shall be authorized, either directly or through a private contractor, to abate such condition, and the cost of such abatement shall be charged against the property and shall be collected in the same manner as a lien for taxes is collected. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-111, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-09-08-27, 8-20-2009; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-398. - Refuse collection by city. 
(a)  The city, or any entity with which the city has contracted for such purposes, shall make collections of waste from residential premises which have wheeled containers at least once weekly. The particular day or days of each week during which such collection shall occur shall be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent. 
(b)  The city, or any entity with which the city has contracted for such purposes, shall make collections of waste from commercial and industrial premises which have wheeled containers at least weekly. The particular day or days of each week during which such collection shall occur shall be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent. 
(c)  The city, or any entity with which the city has contracted for such purposes, shall make collections of residential building refuse not exceeding one cubic yard in size on a schedule and at such times as may be determined by the city manager or his designee. One cubic yard shall be the equivalent of the size of two, wheeled garbage containers used for residential garbage collection. 
(d)  Yard debris and yard rubbish shall be collected by the city, or by any entity with which the city has contracted for such purposes, at least once a week on a schedule at such times as may be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent of the city. Such waste shall only be collected by the city when placed curbside. Wheeled containers shall not be utilized for disposal of such waste. 
(e)  Industrial refuse shall be collected from business and commercial premises a minimum of twice weekly and a maximum of five times weekly, based upon the need of the customer, according to such schedule as may be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent of the city. Such collection shall be made from a front-loading container. 
(f)  For purposes of this section, any resident of any multiple residential or commercial unit authorized to dispose of its waste by use of a front-loading container shall not be required to comply with the recyclable waste disposal provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-112, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-09-08-27, 8-20-2009; Ord. No. O-10-05-17, 5-20-2010; Ord. No. O-10-08-27, 8-19-2010; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-399. - Garbage containers. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of any owner or occupant of any single or multiple residential or commercial unit to place the wheeled container provided for such purpose on the assigned collection day at a front curbside location in such a manner as not to obstruct pedestrian passage, except that the city manager or his designee or agent may require the wheeled container to be placed on any side of a parcel of property for the reasons of topography or efficiency. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of a single or multiple residential or commercial unit to place the wheeled container at an appropriate curbside location at or before 7:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the sanitation truck. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the owner or occupant of any single or multiple residential or commercial unit to remove the wheeled container from the curbside location to a storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the unit located on the premises than to any street abutting such premises; provided, however, that said removal shall be accomplished not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day the contents thereof are collected. 
(d)  Garbage containers must be placed at least three feet away from vehicles, poles, fire hydrants, fences, overhead wires, low-hanging trees, branches, limbs, or other types of cover. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter or disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any container provided by the municipality or its agent for the dumping of garbage. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-113, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-400. - Precollection practices. 
(a)  Front-loading containers. The city manager or his designee or agent shall determine the type, size, specifications, number and location of the garbage containers and shall determine the condition. 
(b)  Secure containers. All containers shall be maintained at all times with tight-fitting lids or covers, and secured in such a manner as to prevent the overturning by the elements or by dogs or other animals. 
(c)  Garbage. Garbage placed in containers for collection shall be enclosed in disposable watertight plastic bags with the top secured and placed in the container. 
(d)  Liquid. Garbage shall be drained of all liquids prior to its being placed in the container. 
(e)  Injurious garbage or trash items. Garbage placed for pickup with the potential for injury, such as broken glass, lightbulbs, sharp pieces of metal, fluorescent tubes, etc., shall be securely packaged or wrapped in such a manner to prevent injury to collection crews or other persons. 
(f)  Pet litter. Pet litter must be placed in securely tied plastic bags not to exceed ten pounds in weight and placed in the container. 
(g)  Clean container. It shall be the responsibility of the owner or lessee of the property to keep the container clean and free of odor. 
(h)  Scrap tires. No person shall deposit a scrap tire in any garbage container or on any public or private property. 
(i)  Dead animals. No dead animals shall be deposited in any garbage container. 
(j)  Burying or burning litter or waste; written consent. No owner or occupant of any such property within the corporate limits shall bury or burn litter or waste without prior authorization and written consent from the applicable regulatory agency, including, but not limited to, the United States Environmental Protection Division and/or the state forestry commission. Nothing in this provision shall authorize or be construed to permit the burial or burning of any material which is otherwise prohibited by state and/or federal law. 
(k)  Accumulation. No owner or occupant of any property shall cause, suffer, or allow the accumulation on his premises, of garbage, litter or waste where such material creates or causes a health hazard to neighbors or other citizens, or which is unsightly or emits foul or obnoxious odors. 
(l)  Violations. The conduct described in subsections (h), (j) and (k) of this section shall constitute a separate violation of this article for each day the garbage, litter or waste material remains or continues to unlawfully pollute, contaminate or burn on such premises. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-114, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-401. - Garbage collection for disabled persons. 
    Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit and who is disabled to the extent that such person is incapable of moving the wheeled container and who shall obtain a physician's certificate as to such disability, shall not be required to place the wheeled container at curbside as required in section 90-399. This section shall not apply unless all of the persons residing in a residential unit are disabled and obtain such physician's certificate. Provision for the collection of garbage from disabled residents shall be included in any contract approved by the city council under section 90-397. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-115, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-402. - Sorting, storing, composting and collecting yard trimmings. 
(a)  Yard trimmings, and other small debris generated from the maintenance of a yard shall be collected and placed at the curb of the residence for collection. Said items are to be bagged or placed inside a container with a lid before being placed at the curb for pickup. 
(b)  The on-site composting of yard trimmings and other yard debris is encouraged. Further, the development of low-maintenance landscaping is encouraged for all commercial and industrial developments. 
(c)  Storing of yard trimmings and other debris generated on-site for a use other than in a composting or landscaping effort is hereby prohibited. 
(d)  Limbs and yard trimmings which cannot be bagged as required under subsection (a) hereof, shall be placed at the curb for pickup and shall be subject to the following limitations: 
(1)  Limbs and yard trimmings no more than five inches in diameter must be cut to no more than five feet long; 
(2)  Limbs and yard trimmings measuring from five inches to 12 inches in diameter must be cut to no more than one foot long. 
(3)  No limbs or yard trimmings larger than 12 inches in diameter shall be picked up by the city or by any entity with which the city has contracted. 
(e)  Yard trimmings and limbs shall be picked up on vacant lots, but only when such debris is generated from the vacant lot. 
(f)  Yard waste bags or containers must be placed at least six feet away from vehicles, trees, poles, fences, mailboxes, fire hydrants, low-hanging trees, limbs, branches, power lines, guy wires, or other types of obstructions. 
(g)  Lawn services and contractors are responsible for bagging the yard waste and other waste that they generate and disposing of it in a suitable location as identified by this division. 
(h)  Grass clippings, weeds, leaves, and other small yard waste materials must be bagged or placed in a container with a lid prior to being placed at the curb for pickup. 
(i)  Yard waste bags may be placed in the right-of-way, the street pavement or in roadside ditches as long as the flow of water or the flow of traffic is not inhibited or changed. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-116, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-09-08-27, 8-20-2009; Ord. No. O-10-05-17, 5-20-2010; Ord. No. O-10-08-27, 8-19-2010) 
Sec. 90-403. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  Yard trimmings. It shall be unlawful to place or mix yard trimmings with municipal solid waste within the city. 
(b)  Yard trimmings disposal . Yard trimmings shall not be disposed of at any municipal solid waste disposal facility having a liner and leachate collection system or requiring vertical expansion located within the city or the county. 
(c)  Stormwater collection system. It shall be unlawful for any person to dump any solid waste on any property, in any waters or in any stormwater collection system, except as authorized by applicable permits it shall be the burden of the alleged violator to show proof of any applicable permits. 
(d)  Storm drains. No person shall place any litter, refuse, trash, trees, grass, or other rubbish over or within five feet of a storm drain, drop inlet, culvert, or manhole. 
(e)  Appliances. No person shall leave outside in any building or in a place accessible to children any appliance, refrigerator, freezer, or other container which has an airtight snap lock or similar device without first removing therefrom the door. This section shall not apply to any appliance, refrigerator, or container which has been placed on or adjacent to the rear of the building and which has been crated, strapped, or locked so that it will be impossible for a child to obtain access to any compartment thereof. 
(f)  Dumping. It shall be unlawful to dump, open dump, or permit the dumping of litter, waste, scrap tires, municipal, commercial, or industrial solid waste or recyclables at any place within the corporate city limits including and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way, any public or private property in the city or any waters in the city unless such litter or waste originates within the corporate limits of the city and the property is designated by the city council or its duly designated agent for the disposal of the above, and the material is placed into a receptacle or container designed for such property; and the property has a valid solid waste handling permit issued by the state environmental protection division (EPD) when required. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-117, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-404. - Damaging, etc., containers; enforcement of regulations. 
(a)  No person shall overhaul, damage, or interfere with the contents of any wheeled container or adjacent containerized trash set out for collection for emptying or removal by the city, unless by permission of the city manager or his designee or agent. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee or agent is assigned the responsibility for enforcement of waste collection procedures enumerated herein. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-120, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-405. - Scrap tires. 
(a)  The owner or occupant of any premises shall be responsible for the sanitary handling and disposal of all scrap tires on the premises used or occupied by such person. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to cause, suffer or allow the dumping of scrap tires at any place including, and without limitations, in or on any public highway, road, street, alley, or thoroughfare, including any portion of the right-of-way thereof, any public or private property or any waters unless the property is designated by the city council and the state environmental protection division for the collection or disposal of scrap tires and the person is authorized to use such property. The scrap tires must be placed into a receptacle or container installed specifically for such property and the property has a valid solid waste handling permit or other applicable identification numbers, and approvals and/or permits issued by the state environmental protection division (EPD) when required. 
(c)  All persons defined as scrap tire generators, scrap tire carriers, scrap tire processors, including scrap tire sorters, and retail tire dealers shall be subject to rules as defined in chapter 391-3-4 et seq. of the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, as amended, and handle scrap tires in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. and the Georgia Rules for Solid Waste Management, chapter 391-3-4 et seq., as amended, applicable to solid waste, except where provisions of this division are more stringent, in which case the provisions of this division shall be applicable unless preempted by state law. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person in a residential zone to accumulate any amount of scrap tires on or around property, which they own or occupy. 
(e)  A retail tire dealer may hold up to 100 scrap tires per garage bay in storage, up to a maximum of 1,000 scrap tires. 
(f)  Tires must be stored in covered or enclosed areas to prevent the accumulation of water. 
(g)  Any person, firm, or corporation violating any portion of this section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor: 
(1)  The court may order the publication of the names and photographs of persons convicted of violating this division; 
(2)  The court may order the person convicted hereunder to repair or restore property damaged, or pay damages resulting from such violations, or perform public service related to the repair or restoration of property damaged by the violation; 
(3)  In case of a tire dump, the property owner, contractor, developer, builder or other person responsible for the property shall, upon conviction, cause the property to be cleaned and to come into full compliance with this division. The city council shall not be responsible for any costs of cleanup or remediation; 
(4)  The expenses incurred by the city council for cleanup, enforcement of violations and penalties shall be chargeable to the person convicted hereunder, such expenses including, but not limited to: court costs, filing fees, special investigations, mutual aid assistance from other agencies and other costs necessary for the reasonable enforcement of this division; 
(5)  In addition to actions filed by the city council for violations of this division, any state or federal agency may independently file separate or concurrent charges within their respective applicable authority and seek conviction within a court of competent jurisdiction; 
(6)  Enforcement of this division shall be the responsibility of the city manager or his designee; and 
(7)  Any person authorized to enforce this division shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable or necessary times in order to properly inspect for violations of this division, subject to the condition that to allow entry onto private property for inspection, the alleged violation of this division must be visible from a public road or right-of-way, or upon said person having received a valid complaint alleging a violation of this division, or by a judge's order upon said person having received information/allegations that constitute reasonable suspicion that a serious unlawful act or threat to the health and safety of the community and/or the environment has occurred or is about to occur. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-124, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-406. - Waste not subject to pickup by the city. 
(a)  Manufacturers. All processors of raw material or manufactured items, manufactured and/or assembly plants, are hereby exempted from payment of the fees provided for in this division; and no pickup service is to be furnished to such establishments except upon request, oral or written, which pick up shall be made by the city upon an estimated cost basis to be determined by the city manager or his designee or agent and to be billed by the finance director to such business making the request. 
(b)  Automotive parts. Automotive parts will not be collected by the city or it's agent. 
(c)  Dangerous materials. Dangerous materials or substances such as poisons, acids, caustics, infectious materials, explosives, paints, solvents, petroleum products, and other dangerous materials will not be collected by the city or its agent. 
(d)  Dead animals. The collection of heavy dead animals such as cows, horses, deer, and mules will not be included in the services provided by the city or its agent. 
(e)  Land clearing. Waste from land clearing operations such as rocks, dirt, sand, brick, and concrete will not be collected by the city or its agent. 
(f)  Tires. No automobile or other motor vehicle tires will be collected by the city or it's agent. 
(g)  Separation required. No comingled rubbish will be collected by the city or it's agent. All white goods, brown goods, yard trimmings, and garbage shall be separated into separate piles prior to collection. 
(h)  Building materials . The contractor and/or builder shall be required to haul and transfer the debris to an authorized and permitted transfer station or landfill. 
(i)  Batteries. Automotive, boat, and any other type of battery will not be collected by the city or it's agent. 
(j)  Eviction or rental property debris. Trash, rubbish, white goods, brown goods, will not be collected by the city or its agent if occurs as a result of an eviction or as a result of the property owner cleaning up after a tenant has moved out. It will be the responsibility of the property owner to call the city or its agent to arrange for a special pickup at an additional fee. The fee will be determined by the size of the load, manpower requirements, and time of service required as determined by the city's solid waste hauling contractor. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-126, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-407. - Enforcement of this division. 
(a)  In the event that any person violates any provision of this division, the city council or other appropriate authority may, in addition to other remedies, institute an action for injunction, cleanup or stop work orders, mandamus, irreversible damage fines, liens on property or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent such unlawful acts or to correct or abate any such violation. In addition, the city may immediately revoke or suspend any and all business, building, development or any and all other city issued permits related to the property or properties involved with the violation until such time that compliance is met, or until the ruling of a court of competent jurisdiction is obtained, at which time respective permits may be reissued. 
(b)  Upon finding evidence, a written notice of violation may be issued at the discretion of the enforcing officer, in lieu of a citation. In the absence of corrective action or in the event that a second violation occurs, the evidence constituting the notice of violation may be submitted as evidence for consideration as a first offense before a court with competent jurisdiction and the pending case treated as a second offense by the court. 
(c)  If a person is found guilty of a violation of the provisions of this division, the court may cause written notice to be incorporated into the court order to the violator instructing that person to properly address any provision still remaining in violation of this division for which said violator is convicted. Such notice shall be by personal service and in the event the violator cannot be so served, then by registered mail sent to the violator's last known address. 
(d)  Upon failure, neglect or refusal of any person so notified to properly address said provisions within ten days after receipt of notice as provided in this section, the city council is hereby authorized and empowered to cause the cleanup, removal or disposal of scrap tires, dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of this division on behalf of the city. The expenses incurred by the city shall be chargeable to the violator and the city council and/or the court shall send a statement of the amount due for said expenses by registered mail. 
(e)  When the full amount of such charges are not paid by the violator within 30 days after receipt of said statement as provided for in this section, the city council shall cause to be recorded in the execution docket a sworn statement showing the cost and expense incurred by the city, the dates of the action, the location of the property for which action was taken, and the name of the person to be charged for the expenses incurred. The recording of such statement shall constitute a lien on the personal and real property of the person to be charged and shall remain in full force and effect until final payment is received in full, including accrued interest from the date of recording and any and all costs. Such amount as shall constitute final payment shall be subject to collection in the manner fixed by law for the collection of taxes. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-129, 11-16-2006) 
Secs. 90-408-90-427. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - RATES AND CHARGES 

Sec. 90-428. - Charge-Authorized. 
(a)  A monthly refuse disposal charge is hereby fixed and assessed against the owner or occupant of every improved premises within the city for which the occupant shall be liable for payment, but if for any reason an occupant of improved premises shall fail to pay said monthly charge to the city, then the owner thereof shall be liable for the payment thereof. 
(b)  The owner or occupant of every improved premises within the city which is furnished a wheeled container by the city, or by any entity with which the city has contracted for garbage collection, shall be liable for any damage to such container and shall be liable for the expense of repairs to such container which shall be required, except for normal wear and tear, which repairs shall be made by the owner of the container. Such repair for which an owner or occupant shall be liable shall be billed to the occupant. If for any reason an occupant shall fail to pay said charges, then the owner of said improved premises shall be liable for the payment thereof. The charges shall be the actual cost of the necessary repairs. 
(c)  The owner or occupant of any improved premises within the city who intends to vacate such premises must notify the city in order that the wheeled container may be removed from the premises if the owner of the wheeled container deems it appropriate to do so. 
(d)  Where multiple residential or commercial premises are served through a master water meter, the owner of the premises shall be required to pay the appropriate charges as established in section 90-429 at the same time and in the same manner as the billing for water and other related services. 
(Ord. No. O-97-05-16, 5-22-1997; Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-118, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-429. - Same-Schedule. 
    The monthly charge, provided for in section 90-428, within the city shall be established by separate ordinance. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-119, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-430. - Billing. 
(a)  The charges provided for in section 90-429 within the city shall be billed monthly by the city. 
(b)  In all instances where a residential premises is occupied by more than one single-family unit and is served by a single water meter, the refuse collection charges that are applicable to the residential premises at such location shall all be billed to the person in whose name the water meter is registered at the finance director's office, the charge to be included thereon for each family unit on the premises; provided, however, that with respect to any such multi-family premises where dumpster service is provided at such location, the owner of the premises shall be billed and shall pay the applicable monthly dumpster charges as provided in the then-current dumpster fee schedule approved by the local governing body from time to time. In the event of failure to pay the bill in accordance with ordinances applicable thereto, the city, by and through its proper officials, may proceed to enforce collection of same as provided by ordinance, and in addition to such remedies, failure to pay the bill within 30 days from the date of issue will constitute adequate cause to have such water service disconnected and discontinued at those premises. 
(c)  Charges for repairs to wheeled containers shall be billed and collected with the following billing of refuse collection charges. Subsections (a) and (b) of this section and sections 90-431 and 90-432 are applicable to wheeled container repair charges. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-121, 11-16-2006; Ord. No. O-2017-12, 10-19-2017) 
Sec. 90-431. - Execution, levy, and sale authorized. 
    Should any person liable for payment of the fees and charges hereby fixed and imposed fail to pay the same within 30 days after having been billed therefor, the finance director is authorized to issue an execution therefor against such person in the same manner provided in cases of default in payment of utility bills. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-122, 11-16-2006) 
Sec. 90-432. - Discontinuance of services to premises when charges remain unpaid. 
    Any person failing for any reason or refusing to pay monthly the charge provided for in this division shall be subject to the discontinuance of city services as provided in section 90-1. 
(Ord. No. O-06-11-41, exh. A, § 13-123, 11-16-2006) 
Secs. 90-433-90-455. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - CABLE SERVICE PROVIDER AND VIDEO SERVICE PROVIDER STATE FRANCHISE FEES 

Sec. 90-456. - [State franchise fees.] 
    Pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-76-6, there is hereby established within the corporate limits of the City of Americus an annual five percent franchise fee payable to the City of Americus by the holders of state cable service franchises and state video service franchises who operate or provide services within the incorporated area of the city. Such annual five percent franchise fee shall be paid by the holder of each state cable service franchise and the holder of each state video service franchise upon the gross annual revenues received by such state franchise holder from customers residing within the incorporated areas of the city. Such franchise fees shall be paid directly to the city within 30 days after the last day of each calendar quarter. In the event that such franchise fees are not paid in a timely manner, then the city shall have the authority to take such steps that are authorized under O.C.G.A. § 36-76-6(b) in order to collect such franchise fees. 
(Ord. No. O-08-03-06, 3-20-2008) 
Secs. 90-457-90-500. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - STORMWATER UTILITY ENTERPRISE FUND 

Sec. 90-501. - Purpose. 
    This article shall establish the stormwater utility enterprise fund. All monies deposited into this fund shall be held in trust and expended solely for the purposes and uses set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-502. - Findings of fact. 
    The mayor and city council make the following findings of fact: 
(1)  The City of Americus is authorized by the Georgia Constitution of 1983, including, without limitation, Article IX, Section II, Paragraphs I and III thereof and O.C.G.A. § 36-82-62 to provide stormwater management services systems and facilities throughout the corporate boundaries of the City of Americus (hereinafter "the city" or "Americus") and to collect fees for provision of those services. 
(2)  In promulgating the regulations contained in this section, Americus is acting pursuant to authority granted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and its City Charter to provide for stormwater collection and disposal. A system for the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater provides services to all properties within the city limits. 
(3)  Failure to effectively manage stormwater runoff: 
a.  May cause erosion of lands, threaten businesses and residences, and other facilities with water damage and may environmentally impair the rivers, streams and other bodies of water within, and downstream of, the city. 
b.  Failure to effectively manage stormwater can adversely affect the operations of the sanitary sewer system operated by the city thereby increasing the likelihood of infiltration and inflow into the sanitary sewer system. 
c.  Failure to effectively manage stormwater contributes to the potential degradation of the quality of both surface water and groundwater resources. 
(4)  The city presently owns and operates stormwater management systems and facilities, which have been developed over many years. The future usefulness and operational function of the existing stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated by the city, and the additions and improvements thereto, rests on the ability of the city to effectively manage, protect, control, regulate, use, and enhance stormwater systems and facilities within the city in concert with the management of other water resources within the city. In order to do so, the city must have both a comprehensive stormwater management program as well as an adequate and stable funding source for its comprehensive program operation and drainage-related capital improvement needs. 
(5)  The city desires to provide enhanced management of stormwater runoff quality and quantity to mitigate the impacts of pollution and flooding which may impact the public municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4), private property and downstream receiving waters of the State of Georgia and/or United States. Therefore, it is appropriate for the city to establish a stormwater utility and impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public MS4 and stormwater conveyance system, whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(6)  Compliance with applicable regulatory obligations, including but not limited to, the city's NPDES wastewater discharge permit, the comprehensive plan and the city's watershed protection plan as well as other identified stormwater management program needs will affect the cost of providing stormwater management services, systems and facilities above what is currently being spent for stormwater quality management, drainage system maintenance, floodplain management, capital drainage projects and other program activities. 
(7)  The cost of operating and maintaining the city's stormwater management system and the funding of necessary repairs, replacements, improvements and extensions thereof should, to the extent practicable, be allocated in relationship to the services received from the city's stormwater management program and the demand imposed by improved property on the city's drainage system and stormwater management program. 
(8)  The professional engineering and financing analysis and related documents prepared by the city's consulting stormwater engineer properly assesses and defines the city's stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities as well as the stormwater management program funding strategy. 
(9)  Given the stormwater management program problems, needs, goals, priorities and funding strategy identified in the aforementioned professional engineering and financing analysis, it is appropriate to authorize the formation of an organizational and accounting entity dedicated specifically to the management, maintenance, protection, control, regulation, use, and enhancement of stormwater management services, systems and facilities within the city in concert with other water resource management programs. 
(10)  Stormwater management is applicable and needed throughout the incorporated areas of the city. While specific service and facility demands may differ from area to area at any given point in time, a stormwater management system and service area encompassing all lands and waterbodies within the incorporated areas of the city is consistent with the present and future needs of the city. 
(11)  The stormwater management services rendered may differ depending on many factors and considerations, including but not limited to, location, demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management systems and programs, and risk exposure. It is practical and equitable to allocate the cost of stormwater management among the owners and/or tenants of improved properties in proportion to the demands the properties impose on the city's stormwater management systems and facilities which result in services to such properties and the owners and/or tenants thereof. The fair and equitable apportionment of costs via the stormwater user fee charge should correlate to the stormwater management services provided to that property and the runoff demand that the property imposes on the public drainage system and the city stormwater management program. 
(12)  The stormwater management needs in the city include, but are not limited to, protection of the public health, safety and welfare of the community. Provision of stormwater management services renders and/or results in both a service to customers and at least some benefit to all properties, property owners, citizens and residents of the city in a variety of ways although the benefits may be indirect or immeasurable. 
(13)  A stormwater management program provides the most practical and appropriate means of properly delivering stormwater management services throughout the city, and the most equitable means to implement an enhanced level of service for stormwater management within the city through stormwater user fees, development permits and inspection fees, and other mechanisms. 
(14)  The presence and amount of impervious surfaces on each improved property is the most important factor influencing the cost of the stormwater management services provided by the city, or to be provided by the city in the future, to that property such that the amount of impervious surface on each property is therefore the most appropriate parameter for calculating a periodic stormwater user fee charge. Therefore, the city deems it appropriate to impose a stormwater user fee charge upon all improved properties that may discharge, directly or indirectly, into the public drainage system whether the property is private or public in nature. 
(15)  A schedule of stormwater utility user fee charges based primarily on the amount of impervious surface located on each improved property is the most appropriate and equitable means of allocating the cost of stormwater management services throughout the city. Stormwater utility user fee charges may be designed with specific modifiers to further enhance customer equity, as well as customer understanding of the user fee charge rate structure, while at the same time minimizing the city's customer account management and maintenance efforts. 
(16)  Stormwater utility user fee charges may be supplemented by other funding which addresses specific needs, including, but not limited to, special district service fees, special assessments, revenue bonds, use of proceeds from special purpose local option sales taxes (SPLOST) and other forms of revenue, as, from time to time, deemed appropriate by the mayor and city council. 
(17)  The existence of privately owned and maintained on-site stormwater control facilities, activities or assets which reduce, or otherwise mitigate, the impact of a particular property on the city's stormwater management program, and the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management services and/or stormwater management systems and facilities, should be taken into account to reduce the user fee charge on that property either in the form of a credit, and such credit should be conditioned upon continuing provision of such services, systems, facilities, activities or assets in a manner complying with the standards and codes as determined by the stormwater utility. Credits for privately owned and maintained stormwater management systems, facilities, activities or assets shall be generally proportional to the affect that such systems have on the reduction and mitigation of the stormwater runoff impacts from the property. 
(18)  It is imperative that the proceeds from all user fee charges for stormwater management services, systems or facilities, together with any other supplemental revenues raised or otherwise allocated specifically to stormwater management services, systems or facilities, be dedicated solely to those purposes, and such proceeds of user fee charges and supplemental revenues shall therefore be deposited into the City of Americus Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund and shall remain in that fund. In trust, to be dispersed only for stormwater management capital improvements, facilities, and equipment, operating and nonoperating costs, lease payments and debt service of bonds or other indebtedness for stormwater management purposes. 
(19)  In order to protect the health, safety and welfare of the public, the governing authority of Americus hereby exercises its authority to establish a stormwater utility enterprise fund, as the best available means of addressing the foregoing needs and legal requirements. By means of a separate stormwater utility rate ordinance, the city will enact a stormwater user fee rate structure in the future to establish stormwater utility user fee charge rates for the provision of stormwater management services. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-503. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Act means and refers to the Clean Water Act as amended by the Water Quality Act of 1987 (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), as amended, and the rules and regulations promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant thereto. 
    Customers of the stormwater utility shall include all persons, properties, and entities serviced by and/or benefiting from the services provided by the city's stormwater management program and the stormwater utility. These services include, but are not necessarily limited to, the stormwater utility's administration, management, maintenance, expansion, and improvement of the stormwater management systems for the handling and disposal of stormwater runoff from private and public properties, and the regulation of the public and private stormwater management systems, controls, facilities and activities. 
    Hydrologic response defines the manner and means whereby stormwater collects, remains, infiltrates, and is conveyed from a property. Hydrologic response is dependent on several factors including, but not limited to, the presence of impervious surface, the parcel's size, the parcel's shape, the parcel's topography, the parcel's vegetative canopy, the parcel's groundwater characteristics, the parcel's on-site operations, the parcel's stormwater controls, the parcel's antecedent moisture as well as the parcel's geologic and hydro-geologic characteristics. 
    Impervious area shall mean and have the same definition as impervious surface. 
    Impervious surface means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil in the manner in which it entered the soil, in natural conditions, prior to development and causes stormwater runoff to collect, concentrate or flow in a manner materially different from what would occur if the land were in an unaltered natural condition. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings or structures, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces such as compacted soil and gravel, which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. 
    Improved property (or developed property) means property altered from its natural state by construction or installation of more than 500 square feet of impervious surfaces. 
    Service area means the entire land area within the corporate limits of the city. 
    Single-family residential property (or SFR) means developed property containing one residential structure with no more than two dwelling units in or attached thereto, situated upon a single lot of record. Improved property may be classified as SFR even if supplemental accessory structures are present such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guesthouses, servants or caretakers quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in significant additional amounts of impervious surfaces. SFR properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes; manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes; residential condominium developments with more than two units; or vacant/undeveloped property. 
    Stormwater management services mean all services provided by the city which relate to the: 
(1)  Transfer, control, conveyance or movement of stormwater runoff through the incorporated portions of the city; 
(2)  Maintenance, repair and replacement of existing stormwater management systems and facilities; 
(3)  Planning, development, design and construction of additional stormwater management systems and facilities to meet current and anticipated needs; 
(4)  Regulation of the use of stormwater management services, systems and facilities; and 
(5)  Compliance with applicable state and federal stormwater management regulations and permit requirements. 
Stormwater management services may address the quality of stormwater runoff as well as the quantity thereof. 
    Stormwater management systems and facilities mean those natural and manmade channels, swales, ditches, rivers, streams, creeks, branches, reservoirs, ponds, drainage ways, inlets, catch basins, pipes, headwalls, storm sewers, lakes and other physical works, properties and improvements which transfer, control, convey, detain, retain, treat or otherwise influence the movement of stormwater runoff. 
    Stormwater user fee charge means the periodic user fee charge for the provision of stormwater management services imposed pursuant to this article of the Americus Stormwater Utility Enterprise Fund Ordinance and applicable sections of the Americus Stormwater Utility Rate Ordinance. This term shall exclude special charges to the owners and/or tenants of particular properties for services, systems or facilities related to stormwater management, including, but not limited to, charges for development plan review, inspection of development projects, post-construction maintenance and inspection of existing facilities, on-site stormwater control systems and other stormwater management related services provided by Americus for which a corresponding fee is collected for the service rendered. 
    Stormwater utility manager means the person appointed by the mayor and city council to administer the provisions of this article. 
    Undeveloped land means land in its unaltered natural condition or which is modified to such a minimal degree as to have a hydrologic response comparable to land in an unaltered natural condition shall be deemed undeveloped. For purposes of this article, undeveloped land includes property altered from its natural condition by the creation or installation of 500 square feet or less of impervious surface. 
    User is defined as any person who uses property, which maintains connection to, discharges to, or otherwise receives services from the city for stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-504. - Stormwater utility and enterprise fund established. 
(a)  There is hereby established within the City of Americus a stormwater utility department, to be known as the "Americus Stormwater Utility", which shall be responsible for stormwater management services throughout the incorporated area of the city, and which shall provide for the management, protection, control, regulation, use and enhancement of the city's stormwater management systems and facilities and stormwater management services. 
(b)  There is hereby established a stormwater utility enterprise fund in the city budgeting and accounting systems for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the purposes and responsibilities of the Americus Stormwater Management Program and Stormwater Utility, including, but not limited to, rates, charges, and fees as may be established by the city council from time to time, and other funds that may be transferred or allocated to the Americus Stormwater Utility. 
(c)  All revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be placed in the stormwater utility enterprise fund in trust, to be expended solely for stormwater management purposes. All expenses and capital investments of the stormwater utility shall be paid from the stormwater utility enterprise fund; provided, however, that other revenues, receipts and resources not accounted for in the stormwater utility enterprise fund may be applied to stormwater management services as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(d)  The city shall place responsibility with the stormwater utility manager for operation, maintenance and regulation of the stormwater utility and stormwater management systems and facilities owned and operated, or maintained by the city, and other related assets, including, but not limited to, properties, other than road rights-of-way, upon which such stormwater management systems and facilities are located, easements, rights-of-entry and access and certain equipment used solely for stormwater management. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-505. - Stormwater utility service area. 
    There shall be one stormwater utility service area in the city which shall encompass the municipal boundaries of Americus. The city has established that all developed parcels within the municipal boundaries receive stormwater management program services from the city. Improved/developed properties within the defined service area will receive a stormwater user fee charge bill because they contribute stormwater runoff to the public drainage system, are directly or indirectly connected to the city's drainage system, and/or receive stormwater management services from the city to varying degrees. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-506. - Scope of responsibility for stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(a)  The city owns in fee simple or has rights established by written agreements which allow it to operate, maintain, improve and access those stormwater management systems and facilities which are located: 
(1)  Within public road rights-of-way; 
(2)  On private property but within legally dedicated easements granted to, and accepted by, the city; 
(3)  On private property where the city has been granted, by written agreements, for rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other permanent provisions for operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management system facilities located thereon; 
(4)  On land dedicated to, and accepted by, the city solely for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon; or 
(5)  On public land which is owned by the city and/or land of another governmental entity upon which the city has agreements providing for the operation, maintenance, improvement and access to the stormwater management systems and facilities located thereon. 
(b)  Operation, maintenance and/or improvement of stormwater management systems and facilities which are located on private or public property not owned by the city, and for which there has been no written agreement granting easements, rights-of-entry, rights-of-access, rights-of-use or other form of dedication thereof to the city for operation, maintenance, improvement and access of such stormwater management systems and facilities shall be and remain the legal responsibility of the property owner and/or tenant, except as otherwise provided for by state and federal laws and regulations. 
(c)  It is the express intent of this article to protect the public health, safety and welfare of people and property in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person, or to any specific property within or outside the municipal boundaries of the city. The city expressly reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages or equitable remedies upon the city, its elected officials, officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship. 
(d)  If any permit, plan approval, inspection or similar act is required by the city as a condition precedent to any activity or change upon property not owned by the city pursuant to this or any other regulatory ordinance, regulation or rule of the city, or under federal or state law, the issuance of such permit, plan approval or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a warranty, express or implied, nor shall it afford the basis for any action, including any action based on failure to permit, negligent issuance of a permit, negligent plan approval, negligent construction of permitted system or facility, or negligent maintenance of any permitted stormwater management system or facility not expressly dedicated to and accepted by the city for further maintenance in an action seeking the imposition of money damages or equitable remedies against the city, its mayor and council members, officers, employees or agents. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-507. - Stormwater user fee charges. 
(a)  It shall be the policy of the city that user fee charges for stormwater management services to be provided by the stormwater utility in the designated service area shall be equitably derived through methods which have a demonstrable relationship to the varied demands and impacts imposed on the stormwater management services by individual properties and/or the level of service rendered by, or resulting from, the provision of stormwater management services by the city. Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be adopted via a separate stormwater utility rate ordinance and be structured so as to be uniform within the customer class, and the resultant user fee charges shall bear a substantial relationship to the cost of providing stormwater management services. User fee charge rates shall be in addition to other rates, charges, or fees employed for stormwater management within the incorporated areas of the city as defined herein. 
(b)  To the extent practicable, credits against stormwater user fee charges shall be provided for on-site stormwater control systems and activities constructed, operated, maintained and performed to the city's standards by public and private property owners and/or tenants which eliminate, mitigate or compensate for the impact that the property or person may have upon stormwater runoff discharged to public stormwater management systems and facilities, or to private stormwater management systems and facilities which impact the proper function of public stormwater management systems and facilities. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-508. - Enforcement methods and inspections. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of all property owners and/or tenants of improved real property within the incorporated area of the city to provide, manage, maintain, and operate on-site stormwater management systems sufficient to collect, convey, detain, and/or discharge stormwater runoff in a safe manner consistent with all applicable federal and state laws, regulations, city development regulations, and other pertinent ordinances. Any failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a violation of this article and be subject to citation and prosecution in the Americus Municipal Court. Each day such violation exists shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  Alternately, in the event a public nuisance is deemed to exist by the mayor and city council, the city may elect to sue in municipal court to abate such nuisance. In the event a public nuisance is found by the court to exist, which the property owner and/or tenant fails to abate within such reasonable time as allowed by the Americus Municipal Court, the court, by judgment, may allow the city to enter upon the real property and cause work as is reasonably necessary to be performed, with the actual cost thereof assessed against the property by filing a lien. From date of filing of such abatement action, the city shall have lien rights which may be perfected, after judgment, by filing a notice of lis pendens on the general execution docket of the Sumter County Superior Court. 
(c)  The city shall have the right for its employees or designated agents to enter upon public and private property during reasonable hours, and after reasonable notice to the owner and/or tenant thereof, in order to assure compliance with the provisions of this article, and state and federal law. Such inspections shall generally be limited to the following purposes: 
(1)  Inspecting or conducting engineering analyses on existing stormwater management systems and facilities located on-site; 
(2)  Verification and review of information contained within a stormwater utility credit manual application; and 
(3)  Determining that stormwater management systems and facilities need to be constructed. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-509. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Sec. 90-510. - Repealer. 
    All ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with any provision or any section, subsection, paragraph, provision or clause of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. O-10-04-13, 4-22-2010) 
Secs. 90-511-90-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - STORMWATER UTILITY RATE 

Sec. 90-601. - Purpose. 
    This article shall serve the purpose of establishment and set up of the stormwater utility rate structure and billing rate. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-602. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Credit means a reduction in the amount of a customer's stormwater user fee charge in recognition of a customer's efforts to mitigate the stormwater runoff impact that developed property has on the city stormwater management services and systems, and/or the efforts of a customer to offset the city's cost for implementation of stormwater management program (SWMP) activities such as public education, watershed stewardship, etc. 
    Dwelling unit shall mean a structure, regardless of the type or method of construction, which contains one or more bedrooms, a bathroom, and cooking facilities, designed for occupancy by one or more person(s) regardless of relationship, living as a single-family unit. 
    Equivalent residential unit (ERU) means the stormwater user fee charge billing unit increment related to the median horizontal impervious surface area footprint of 3,000 square feet for a typical single-family dwelling unit within the city. 
    Manufactured home park means a common development (with a single property owner or entity) of more than one factory-built or prefabricated housing structures that have been partially or entirely assembled at another location and moved into the development. 
    Nonsingle family residential (NSFR) customer shall mean a utility customer whose property meets the definition of NSFR whether such customer is the owner of the parcel or a tenant of the owner. 
    Nonsingle family residential (NSFR) property shall mean a developed parcel of land that consists of various nonresidential land uses including, but not limited to: (1) multifamily, commercial (including mixed commercial and residential), office/institutional, public, transportation, industrial, manufacturing and storage buildings and facilities; (2) parking lots, parks, public and private schools, universities and hospitals; (3) streets, roads, water and wastewater treatment plants; and (4) any other form of use not specifically defined as a single-family residential property (SFR). 
    Single-family residential (SFR) customer means a utility customer of the city residing in a dwelling unit whether such customer is the owner of the dwelling unit, a tenant of the owner of the dwelling unit, or a resident of the dwelling unit. 
    Single-family residential (SFR) property means developed property containing one residential structure with no more than two dwelling units in or attached thereto, situated upon a single lot of record. Improved property may be classified as SFR even if supplemental accessory structures are present such as garages, carports, storage buildings, guesthouses, servants or caretakers quarters, cottages or barns, or the presence of a commercial use within the residence, as long as such use does not result in significant additional amounts of impervious surfaces, as determined by the governing body or its designee. SFR properties shall not include improved property containing structures used primarily for nonresidential purposes and as defined herein; manufactured homes located within manufactured home parks where the land is owned by someone other than the owners of the manufactured homes; residential condominium developments with more than two units; or vacant/undeveloped property. 
    Unless otherwise defined within this article, the definitions included in the stormwater utility enterprise fund ordinance (Code section 90-501 et seq.) are adopted herein by reference. 
    The professional engineering and financing analysis documents entitled: The Americus SWMP Assessment Funding Feasibility Study (Technical Memorandum, dated June 8, 2009); The Americus SWMP Assessment Funding Feasibility Study Addendum (Technical Memorandum, dated May 20, 2010, or the most recent version); and applicable supporting, project-related documents are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-603. - Stormwater utility customer classes. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall establish specified customer classes within the service area to reflect differences in impervious surface and stormwater runoff characteristics; stormwater management program services provided by the city to the stormwater utility customers; and the respective demand that those customers' properties place on the city SWMP and drainage system components. All state, federal, and county developed properties are subject to the user fee charges on the same basis as private properties. The stormwater utility classes will encompass all developed and undeveloped properties within the city and are defined as follows: 
(1)  The single-family residential (SFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as SFR customers per the applicable definition. 
(2)  The nonsingle-family residential (NSFR) class shall consist of all developed properties classified as NSFR customers per the applicable definition. 
(3)  The undeveloped class shall consist of properties classified as undeveloped per the applicable definition. 
(b)  Documentation pertaining to the stormwater utility customer classes shall be kept on file in the office of the stormwater utility manager for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-604. - Stormwater user fee charge rates. 
(a)  The stormwater utility shall impose a stormwater user fee on all developed properties within the service area in a fair and equitable manner. The stormwater utility shall apportion the cost of delivering stormwater services to all developed properties based on the demand the property places on the city's stormwater management program and the stormwater services provided by the city. 
(b)  Stormwater user fee charge rates shall be set and may be modified from time to time by the governing body of the city. A schedule of said rates shall be on file in the Office of the City Clerk of Americus. In setting or modifying such rates, it shall be the goal of the city to establish rates that are fair, equitable and reasonable, and together with other funding sources available to the Americus Stormwater Utility for services, systems, and/or facilities related to stormwater management (e.g., credit application fees, plan review fees, development inspection fees, regulatory compliance inspection fees and other fees related to provision of stormwater management services), are sufficient to support the cost of the stormwater management program, including but not limited to, the payment of principal and interest on debt obligations, lease payments, operating expenses, capital outlays, non-operating expenses, provisions for prudent reserves and other costs as deemed appropriate by the city. 
(c)  The basis for calculation of the stormwater user fee charge to all developed property within the city is established in this article. The city shall assign or determine the customer class, amount of impervious area and other pertinent factors as may be needed for the fair, reasonable and equitable allocation of the costs to deliver stormwater management services and to calculate the stormwater user fee charges for all developed properties in the city. 
(d)  Stormwater user fee charges shall be based upon the total number of equivalent residential units (ERUs) associated with developed properties within the city. Each ERU shall correspond to 3,000 square feet of impervious surface. Gravel and compacted soil driveways, parking areas, and roads on private property will be considered impervious surface and included in the customer's ERU calculation because of the hydrologic response characteristics of these materials. However, the total surface area associated with these materials will be calculated at 85 percent of the total ERUs to reflect the hydrologic response characteristics of these materials. Application of the 85 percent factor to these materials is based on applicable literature sources and reference documents outlined herein. 
(e)  Calculation of charges. The periodic stormwater user fee charges imposed on all developed properties shall be $4.00 multiplied by the number of ERUs for each customer account. 
(1)  The number of ERUs that will be utilized to calculate the user fee charge shall be in general accordance with the following: 
a.  SFR customer class: Each SFR customer account shall be charged 1.0 ERU per month unless one of the conditions outlined below applies. 
1.  If two customer accounts are assigned to a SFR property (i.e., a duplex) then each customer account on that parcel will be charged 0.5 ERU per month for billing purposes. 
2.  The minimum stormwater user fee charge amount to any eligible customer will be $2.00/ERU/month. 
3.  If the SFR property has an impervious surface amount that exceeds 9,000 square feet (or three ERUs) then a customer stormwater user fee bill will be calculated for the customer account using the NSFR user fee charge calculation approach outlined herein. 
b.  NSFR customer class: Each NSFR customer shall be charged one ERU for each 3,000 square feet, or increment thereof, of impervious surface located on the property to establish the total number of ERUs for billing. Fractional ERUs will be rounded to one decimal place to establish the number of ERUs for billing each month. 
c.  Undeveloped land customer class: Undeveloped land shall be assigned zero ERUs and will not receive a stormwater user fee bill. 
(f)  Stormwater user fee charges shall be billed on the customer's monthly public utility bill (except as stipulated below) starting with the first billing cycle in June 2010 as provided in this article and the stormwater utility enterprise fund ordinance. 
(1)  Customers that do not receive a monthly public utility bill from the city shall be billed for stormwater services via another method and frequency established by the city. 
(2)  The property owner will be charged for the total impervious surface for residential customer accounts that are part of a larger common development such as multifamily complexes. 
(3)  The city shall bill the property owner's tenant for the stormwater user fee charge in situations where the tenant has opened an account with the city for public utility services (i.e., water, sewer, and/or sanitation); provided, however, the property owner shall remain ultimately liable for payment of the stormwater user fee charge imposed on the property. The city shall be authorized to bill the landlord or property owner for stormwater services where accurate and equitable apportionment of the user fee charges to multiple accounts on a site is not practical as determined by the city, and/or to facilitate efficient billing and collection of customer user fee charges. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-605. - Stormwater user fee charge exemptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section or otherwise provided by law, no developed public or private property located in the incorporated area of the city shall be exempt from the stormwater user fee charges. The stormwater utility user fee charge is not a tax and no exception, credit, offset, or other reduction in stormwater user fee charges shall be granted based on age, tax status, economic status, race, religion, disability, or other condition unrelated to the stormwater utility's cost of providing stormwater management program services and facilities. 
(b)  Exemptions to the stormwater user fee charges are as follows: 
(1)  Parcels which contain 500 square feet, or less, of impervious surfaces shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(2)  Linear railroad rights-of-way (i.e., tracks, rails, roadbed) outside of the defined yard limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by the railroad company associated with rights-of-way and drainage conveyance systems. However, railroad stations, rail yards, maintenance buildings, and/or other improved property used for railroad operations shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(3)  Sumter County roads and rights-of-way located within the city limits shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges in situations where Sumter County has legal responsibility to perform all drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities with respect to such roads and rights-of-way. This exemption is in recognition of the drainage system maintenance and capital construction responsibilities undertaken by Sumter County as required in the service delivery strategy dated September 23, 1999. The list of county roads that are exempt from the user fee charges are listed in the service delivery strategy dated September 23, 1999. All other developed property owned by Sumter County shall be subject to the imposition of stormwater user fee charges in accordance with this article. 
(4)  Georgia Department of Transportation (GDOT) roads and rights-of-way shall be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. This exemption is in recognition of routine drainage system maintenance and capital construction activities undertaken by GDOT in association with GDOT rights-of-way road and drainage conveyance systems. However, maintenance buildings and/or other developed property used for GDOT purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater user fee charges. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-606. - Stormwater user fee charge credits. 
(a)  The stormwater utility manager shall grant credits or adjustments based on the technical and procedural criteria set forth in the stormwater utility credit manual (credit manual), which is incorporated into this article by reference and made a part hereof. Copies of the credit manual will be maintained by and made available from the stormwater utility manager. 
(1)  Customers may apply for credits and/or adjustments in accordance with the credit manual. 
(2)  A stormwater user fee charge credit shall be determined based on the technical requirements, standards and criteria contained in the credit manual. The amount of credit, or reduction of the stormwater user fee charge, shall be in accordance with the criteria contained in the credit manual. 
(3)  Any credit allowed against the stormwater user fee charge is conditioned on continuing compliance with the city's design and performance standards as stated in the credit manual and upon continuing provision of the controls, systems, facilities, services, and activities provided, operated, and maintained by the customer. The stormwater utility manager may revoke a credit at any time for noncompliance with applicable standards and criteria as established in the credit manual or this article. 
(4)  In order to obtain a credit, the customer must make application to the city on forms provided by the stormwater utility manager for such purpose, and in accordance with the procedures outlined in the credit manual. 
(5)  The application for any credit or adjustment must be in writing and must include the information necessary to establish eligibility for the credit or adjustment, and be in the format described in the credit manual. The customer's public utility account must be paid and current prior to review and approval of a stormwater utility credit application by the city. Incomplete applications will not be accepted for consideration and processing. 
(b)  When an application for a credit is deemed complete by the stormwater utility manager, he shall have 30 days from the date the complete application is received to approve the credit in whole, approve the credit in part, or deny the credit. The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. Credits applied for by the customer and approved in whole or in part, shall apply to all stormwater user fee charges in accordance with the terms defined in the credit manual. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-607. - Stormwater user fee charge billing, delinquencies, collections, adjustments. 
    The property owner or utility customer account holder, as identified from city public utility billing database information, tax digest and other public records of Sumter County, shall be obligated to pay the applicable stormwater user fee charge. 
(1)  Billing. 
a.  Stormwater user fee charges shall begin to accrue June 1, 2010, and shall be billed prospectively. A bill for stormwater user fee charges may be sent through the United States Postal Service or by alternative means, notifying the stormwater utility customer of the following items (as a minimum): The stormwater user fee charge amount (less any approved credits); the date the payment is due; and the date when payment is past due. 
b.  Unless otherwise billed directly to the property owner, the stormwater user fee charge will be billed and collected on a common statement and collected along with other city utility services from the person in whose name such services have been placed on account with the city. If and when the account is closed or becomes delinquent, the bills for unpaid previous service as well as for current and future service shall be sent to the property owner. 
c.  Frequency of the billing of stormwater user fee charges shall be specified by the city. 
d.  Failure to receive a bill shall not be justification for nonpayment. Regardless of the party to whom the bill is initially directed, the owner of each developed property subject to stormwater user fee charges shall be ultimately obligated to pay stormwater user fee charges and any interest at the rate of 18 percent per annum on delinquent stormwater user fee charge payments. 
e.  If a property is unbilled, or if no bill is sent for a particular tract of developed property, the stormwater utility may back bill for a period of up to three years, but shall not be entitled to any interest or any delinquency charges during the back billed period. 
(2)  Delinquencies and collections. 
a.  Unpaid stormwater service fees shall be collected by filing suit to collect on an unpaid account and by using all methods allowed by Georgia law to collect on any judgment obtained thereby, including enforcement of any lien resulting from any such judgment. Unless reduced to a judgment and a writ of fieri facias issued, the unpaid user fee charge shall not constitute a direct lien against the owner or the property. 
b.  A late charge shall be assessed against the customer for the unpaid balance of any stormwater utility user fee charge that becomes delinquent in accordance with applicable state law and city ordinance provisions. In addition, the city shall assess all costs of collection, including attorney's fees and court costs, against the property owner. 
(3)  Adjustments. The stormwater utility manager shall administer the procedures and standards for the adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge. 
a.  If a customer believes his stormwater user fee is incorrect, the customer may seek an adjustment of the stormwater user fee charge allocated to a property at any time by submitting the request in writing to the stormwater utility manager and setting forth in detail the grounds upon which relief is sought. The customer's public utility account must be paid and current prior to consideration of an adjustment request by the city. 
b.  Customers requesting the adjustment shall be required, at their own expense, to provide accurate impervious area and other supplemental information to the stormwater utility manager, including, but not limited to, a survey certified by a registered land surveyor or a professional engineer. Submittal of this information will be required if the city staff cannot make a determination based on field inspection and/or review of existing city aerial photography. Failure to provide the required information within the time limits established by the stormwater utility manager, as may be reasonably extended, may result in denial of the customer's adjustment request. 
c.  Once a completed adjustment request and all required information are received by the stormwater utility manager, the stormwater utility manager shall within 30 calendar days render a written decision. 
d.  In considering an adjustment request, the stormwater utility manager shall consider whether the calculation of the stormwater user fee charge for the property is correct. 
e.  The stormwater utility manager's decision shall be in writing and will be mailed to the address provided on the adjustment request, and service shall be complete upon mailing. 
f.  If the result of an adjustment is that a refund is due the applicant, the refund will be applied as a credit on the applicant's next stormwater user fee charge bill. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-608. - Appeals and hearings. 
(a)  Appeals. An appeal to the city manager may be taken by any property owner or customer aggrieved by any decision of the stormwater utility manager. The appeal shall be taken within 30 calendar days of the decision of the stormwater utility manager by filing with the city manager a notice of appeal in writing specifying the grounds thereof. Upon the filing of the notice of appeal, the stormwater utility manager shall forthwith transmit to the city manager all documentation constituting the record upon which the decision appealed from was taken. 
(b)  Hearings. The city manager shall fix a reasonable time for hearing the appeal and give written notice to the appellant at least ten calendar days prior to the hearing date. The notice shall indicate the place, date and time of the hearing. The city manager shall affirm, reverse, affirm in part, or reverse in part the decision of the stormwater utility manager after hearing the evidence. If the decision of the stormwater utility manager is reversed in whole or in part, resulting in a refund or credit due to the property owner or customer, then such refund or credit shall be calcualted retroactive to the date of the initial appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final, and there shall be no further administrative appeal. Any person aggrieved or dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager may petition the Superior Court of Sumter County for writ of certiorari. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 90-609. - Severability. 
    If the provisions of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article shall be judged invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such order of judgment shall not affect or invalidate the remainder of any article, section, subsection, paragraph, subdivision or clause of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Sec. 90-610. - Repealer. 
    All ordinances or parts thereof which are in conflict with any provision or any section, subsection, paragraph, provision or clause of this article are hereby repealed to the extent of the conflict. 
(Ord. No. O-10-05-15, § 1, 5-20-2010) 
Secs. 90-611-90-640. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - COMMERCIAL PRETREATMENT 

Sec. 90-641. - Purpose. 
    The City of Americus enacts this article to set forth uniform requirements for certain users of the sanitary sewer system; to enable the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403); to prevent the introduction of certain pollutants into the sanitary sewer system that will interfere with its operation. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-642. - General provisions; nonapplicability to residential users. 
(a)  This article pertains to fat, oil and grease (FOG), grit, and any other wastes of commercial origin which may be discharged to the City of Americus sanitary sewer system. The requirements of this article apply to commercial waste from city generators only and not residential users. 
(b)  For the purposes of this article, wastes of commercial origin are those generated by restaurants, institution kitchens, and other food service establishments, as well as car maintenance, automobile dealerships and car/truck wash facilities. All commercial waste generators involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide an approved fat, oil, grease (FOG) pretreatment system such as a grease trap; provided that the excess FOG is floatable and can be effectively removed. All commercial facilities with vehicle servicing or car washing will be required to provide a pretreatment system such as an oil separator and/or sand trap to remove oil waste prior to discharging to the sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-643. - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following words, terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated: 
    Alternative system. Any approved pretreatment system used in lieu of, including modifications to a standard subsurface system outside the building or an interior type system that is installed other than the Americus Standard System (copy available from the public works department). 
    Automatic grease recovery unit. Electronic grease removal system used on the interior to collect liquid wastewater from kitchen equipment. 
    Commercial waste. Nontoxic, nonhazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities. Fats, oil, grease, food scraps and other grease trap contents generated by a food operation or institutional food preparation facility. Any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharges to an oil water separator and/or sand trap. 
    Commercial waste FOG permit. A permit issued to a transporter for the collection of commercial waste by pumping out, cleaning, or otherwise servicing a grease trap, oil water separator and sand trap. 
    Disposer. A licensed person or company that receives commercial waste from a transporter for disposal. 
    Generator. A person or company that produces commercial waste. 
    Grease trap. A structure or device found in commercial food facilities that separates and retains fats, oil, grease waste prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer system. 
    Installer. A person or company responsible for a contracted project who, for compensation, undertakes to submit a bid to, or does himself or by others construct, install, alter, repair, or modify a pretreatment system. An installer must be a licensed contractor or master plumber in the State of Georgia possessing the experience, knowledge, skill and ability to provide services pertaining to the installation, construction, alteration, repair and design of a pretreatment system. 
    Oil water separator. A structure or device installed in commercial facilities to retain and separate oil waste prior to discharge to sanitary sewer. 
    PDI certification. Plumbing certification given to plumbing equipment, by the plumbing and drainage institute that has passed the institute's testing standards. 
    Permit. Written authorization granted to a person or company to perform services or discharge commercial waste to the sanitary sewer in the county. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. 
    Pollutant. Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity or odor). 
    Pretreatment. The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the sanitary sewer. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements. Any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment system. A grease trap, oil water separator, and sand trap installed to the exterior of the building subsurface or interior at a sink, dishwasher, floor drain, and utility sink to collect and treat commercial wastewater prior to discharge to the sanitary sewer. 
    Sewage. A combination of water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such groundwater, surface water, and stormwater as may be present but unintentionally admitted. 
    Sewer surcharge fee. A fee charged to commercial waste generators for the cost of additional sewer preventative maintenance and program efforts deemed necessary to prevent blockage due to grease in the sewer collection system. 
    Subsurface. Placement of a pretreatment system below ground or recessed in building floor. 
    Test manhole. The last discharge point of the pretreatment system and the sampling point for the pretreatment system waste stream. 
    User or industrial user. A source of indirect discharge. 
    Wastewater. Liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-644. - Pretreatment equipment installation, maintenance and grease disposal requirements. 
(a)  All users of the City of Americus sanitary sewer system involved in the preparation of food for commercial purposes shall provide approved fat, oil, grease (FOG) removal equipment such as separators or traps, if: 
(1)  The user generates a wastewater which contains greater than the quantity of FOG permitted in this article division; and/or 
(2)  The excess FOG is floatable and can be effectively removed in an oil/grease separator or trap, then said user shall be required to install an oil/grease separator. 
(b)  Oil/grease traps shall be required for commercial and industrial establishments where it has been determined by the public works department that they are necessary to prevent discharge to the sewer system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the sanitary sewer system. 
(c)  Alternative pretreatment systems include automatic waste removal equipment and shall be used only after evaluation and authorization by the public works department. 
(d)  Commercial car and truck washing facilities which discharge to the city sewer shall provide for grit and oil removal as required in these regulations. 
(e)  All oil/grease separators shall be designed and installed in accordance with city standards. The user shall submit plans to the city for review and comment. The installation shall be subject to the city's inspection prior to placing in service. 
(f)  Grit and oil/grease separators shall be installed in accordance with the city's plumbing code. 
(g)  When required by the city, the user shall install a suitable manhole on the discharge to the sewer to allow for observation, sampling and measurement of wastewaters. This manhole shall be installed at the user's expense and shall be maintained to be safe and accessible to the city at all times. 
(h)  It shall be a violation of these regulations when a person: 
(1)  Allows commercial waste that emits noxious or offensive odors or is unsanitary or injurious to public health or property to spill, overflow or be discharged onto public or private property. 
(2)  Allows commercial waste to be removed from a facility under his/her control except by a transporter holding a valid and current license/permit for pumping in the State of Georgia. 
(3)  Allows commercial waste generated at a facility under his/her control to be disposed of at a site not properly permitted to accept such waste. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-645. - Operation and maintenance of pretreatment system. 
(a)  All oil/grease and grit separators shall be maintained by the user, at the user's expense, in continually efficient operation at all times. The user shall service each separator frequently and repair as necessary, to prohibit the introduction into the system of FOG of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l. The user shall maintain records of said service and make these records available to the public works department upon request. 
(b)  It shall constitute a violation of this article to introduce chemicals, acidic or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils and grease to the extent that it later solidifies in the city sewer system. Use of any other substances, including enzymes and special bacteria is solely at the discretion of the user. Prior to the use of any biological products, the user shall inform the city in writing their intent to add such products to their pretreatment system and provide a material safety data sheet certified by the manufacturer. 
(c)  The city shall have the authority to prohibit the addition of any substance, including enzymes and bacteria used for maintenance of a grease trap if it is discovered that said substance causes damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of the sewer system, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential hazard to personnel. The utilities director shall maintain a list of substances determined to cause damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of the sewer system, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential hazard to personnel. 
(d)  If upon inspection, it is determined that a grease trap is in need of cleaning, the only acceptable means shall be to pump out the grease for disposal, as provided elsewhere in this article. Applying heavy doses of chemicals, enzymes or bacteria to the grease trap will not be allowed as a substitute for pumping and removing the material from the trap. 
(e)  Installation of a mechanical system to continuously or intermittently apply solutions of enzymes, special bacteria or other agents to the sewer shall not be allowed in lieu of an acceptable grease trap. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-646. - Permits. 
(a)  Construction permit. No portion of a pretreatment system shall be installed, repaired, altered, modified or replaced until a pretreatment construction permit has been issued by the city. A fee will be required for review of plans. Permits issued for new construction shall become void 12 months after the date of issuance if the system has not been installed. However, if building construction has commenced, the system construction permit shall be valid for an additional 90 days beyond the 18-month expiration date. Permits for system repairs shall become void after 90 days from the date of issuance. A construction or repair permit for a pretreatment system shall be transferred to another person if the transferee files an amended application providing all corrected information and proof of ownership of the property or tenant occupancy within 60 days after the transfer of ownership, and all information pertaining to the sitting, location, and installation conditions or repair of a pretreatment system remains the same. There is no fee associated with the processing of the transfer. The date of the construction or repair permit shall not be amended, but shall run from the date of original issuance prior to the transfer. 
(b)  Construction revision permit. The applicant shall be the permit holder and shall be held responsible for all information supplied to the city. The signed application, site evaluation, and system design plans when required, serve as the basis by which the city determines the issuance of a construction permit. In the event of a change in any information given in the application which served as basis for issuing a construction permit, the permit holder will immediately file an amended application detailing such changed conditions. If the new conditions are determined to be in compliance with city engineering standards, the construction permit shall be amended. If the new conditions are determined to be in noncompliance with the city engineering standards, the permit shall no longer be valid. 
(c)  Commercial waste permit. A commercial waste permit shall be required by any commercial waste generator discharging to the city sanitary sewer. The permit will be valid for one year from the date of issuance and is not transferable. 
(d)  The permit must be placed in a location visible to inspections. If the owner of a pretreatment system remains the same but the ownership of the building changes, a site tenant is still operating within the permit guidelines. No new building tenant shall open for business until the city has approved the change of tenancy, and inspected the pretreatment system to see if it is still within the guidelines of the original operating permit (see subsection (c) of this section, commercial waste permits issuance). 
(e)  Voiding a permit. If the system is improperly modified or damaged, the city shall undertake administrative action to revoke the permit. The city shall prohibit the further or continued use of a system when the permit has become void. The contractor, engineer or licensed plumber will be responsible to do a permit revision and present corrected plans for review. If a larger system is required based on project modifications, another final inspection will be required once the system installation has been completed. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-647. - Pretreatment inspections. 
(a)  New construction. Before covering with earth and before placing a pretreatment system into service, a person/company installing or constructing any portion of a pretreatment system shall notify the city 48 hours prior to completion of the construction activities and shall have the system inspected by the city for compliance with the requirements of this article. A final inspection fee will be required. The city shall make every reasonable effort to make a complete inspection of system construction, modification, replacement or alteration within two working days after notification to the city that the system is ready for inspection. A repair shall be inspected by the city to determine compliance with construction permit standards prior to final covering of the system. If the system constructed is approved by the city, an "inspection approval" notice will be given to the installer. If the system installation does not pass the construction inspection, then the installer shall make all required corrections and notify the city within seven days for a re-inspection of the system. A re-inspection fee shall be charged to the installer for additional inspection(s) if the contractor has failed to correct the items an inspector has required at the preliminary inspection. Final installation approval shall not be granted until the city has confirmed that the installation is in compliance with plans and specifications submitted with the permit application. If no final construction inspection can be documented of the commercial waste generators pretreatment system, then the certificate of occupancy on the project will not be released by the building inspector. 
(b)  Existing pretreatment systems. The city will perform an annual inspection of all pretreatment systems permitted to operate in the city. The inspections will be conducted to make sure the commercial waste generator is following the maintenance criteria set forth in this article and the waste generator is operating under the conditions of the permit. Those facilities found in noncompliance will be required to correct all violations within seven days of notification. However, if the violation requires a repair, replacement or installation of a pretreatment system, then the commercial waste generator will have 15 days to comply. All repairs, replacement and installations will require approval by the city. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-648. - Right of entry; inspection and sampling. 
    The public works department shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the utilities director or designee ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the public works department will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The public works department shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The public works department may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated at least monthly to ensure their accuracy and records of calibrations shall be kept and made available to the public works department upon request. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the public works department and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the public works department for access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-649. - Location and installation. 
(a)  Pretreatment systems will be located and installed as close as reasonably possible to the discharge source of the commercial waste. 
(b)  A subsurface pretreatment system must be located or installed no more than 50 feet from the discharge source. A subsurface pretreatment system installed beyond 50 feet must have approval by the city. 
(c)  Pretreatment systems will be located and installed so that proper maintenance of the system does not create sanitary nuisances or health hazards and does not impact the environment. 
(d)  Pretreatment systems must be located and installed so that they are accessible for maintenance. No heavy kitchen equipment, canisters, dumpster or trash compactor can block access to the pretreatment system. 
(e)  Interior grease traps will be installed at the point source such as a three- to four-compartment sink, dishwasher, or any kitchen equipment where grease must be collected prior to discharge to building waste line. Interior grease traps will be located above the floor. Recessed grease traps must have prior approval for installation. All interior grease traps must have a flow control valve and a vent. The flow control valve shall be placed on the inlet side of the grease trap. The vent line will take all odors out of the building. 
(f)  Pretreatment systems installed and located that experience a rusting of parts (e.g., pretreatment system located under a kitchen sink) which may impair the opening of the system for inspection, will require the commercial waste generator to provide access to the system. If the commercial waste generator cannot provide access, then they will be in violation. Inspector can require the unit replaced if it has deteriorated from corrosion. 
(g)  Pretreatment systems installed and located to the outside of a building will discharge to the sanitary sewer line. The test manhole is the last discharge point of the pretreatment system before the sanitary sewer. The sanitary sewer connection from the pretreatment system will not be allowed to connect to the site sanitary sewer line by going under or through the building. The connection to the sanitary sewer line must be kept to the exterior of the building structure. The connection from the building to the pretreatment system will be a direct straight line. One, 90- or 45-degree angle will be allowed with a clean out if a straight line is not obtainable. The test manhole will be located a maximum of four feet from the last tank in the pretreatment system and must have an invert in the test manhole. Prefab concrete or brick construction is allowed. 
(h)  All pretreatment systems installed subsurface in multi-level parking decks must be located on the ground level of the structure and must be located so they are accessible for maintenance and inspection. 
(i)  Installation of interior pretreatment system will be allowed for commercial waste generators where the following criterion is met: 
Food Service Establishment Interior Grease Trap Size: Minimum 40 lb. Maximum 200 lb. Coffee/Sandwich Shop (no foods prepared) Waste from by products, cream and milk 
Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Daycare/Preschool Centers (no hot food prepared; all food reheated in microwave, no commercial kitchen) Waste from clean-up Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Delicatessen (no hot food served, no meat cooked Waste from clean-up cold foods, salads 
Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Doughnut Shop (retail only) Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity 
Waste from clean-up and handling area, none, if written declaration required that no hot food will be prepared or served Fish Shop (retail) no cooking on-site scales, fish guts Grease Trap 70 lb. minimum capacity Gas Stations with food service (sandwich shop, no hot food preparation) Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity 
Waste from clean-up and handling area Hotel (reheating food in microwave; continental breakfast; kitchen equipment limited) Waste from clean-up Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Hotel (no cooking on-site; no hot foods served) Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity 
Waste from clean-up and handling area, none, if written declaration required that no hot food will be prepared or served Movie Theater (with food service, reheat in microwave) Waste from clean-up Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity Pizza Cooking (reheating) no preparation or washing up on-site; pizza heated in retail container and sold for consumption Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity 
Waste from clean-up and handling area, none, if written declaration required that no hot food will be prepared or served. Shopping Centers (retail strip mall) Grease, solids grease trap determined by tenant, type of food service. Take-Out Food Service (cold food preparation) Waste from clean-up Grease Trap 40 lb. minimum capacity  
(j)  Installation of alternative interior pretreatment system will be allowed for commercial waste generators where an upgrade, repair or installation of a pretreatment system is required and a subsurface system is not possible. However, the commercial waste generator must meet the following criteria for an alternative pretreatment system to be installed: 
(1)  The facility must be located in an existing building structure 15 years or older, where written documentation is submitted by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber to verify a subsurface pretreatment system is impossible to install due to existing underground utilities; 
(2)  The facility is not located in new commercial development; 
(3)  The facility provides written documentation by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber that the sanitary sewer tie in of a subsurface pretreatment cannot be reached by the installer. 
(k)  Installation of alternative interior pretreatment system will be allowed for commercial waste generators where an upgrade, repair or installation of a pretreatment system is required and a subsurface system is not possible. However, the commercial waste generator must meet the following criteria for an alternative pretreatment system to be installed: 
(1)  The facility must be located in an existing building structure 15 years or older, where written documentation is submitted by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber to verify a subsurface pretreatment system is impossible to install due to existing underground utilities; 
(2)  The facility is not located in new commercial development; 
(3)  The facility provides written documentation by a licensed engineer, contractor or master plumber that the sanitary sewer tie in of a subsurface pretreatment cannot be reached by the installer; 
(4)  The facility's pretreatment system is found to be inadequate and an alternative system will upgrade the current pretreatment system to bring the facility into compliance. 
(l)  Any subsurface pretreatment system requiring installation of more than one single tank will lace the tanks in tandem; one single line. The multiple tanks must be installed so the commercial waste from the building will flow from tank to tank. The distance from tank to tank will not be greater than 12 inches. 
(m)  The city reserves the right to assess a sewer surcharge fee on a commercial waste generators for the cost of additional sewer collection system frequency and magnitude of cleaning that may be required as determined by the utilities director to prevent stoppages or backups due to commercial waste generators where a required upgrade, repair or installation of a pretreatment system is not completed and/or a subsurface system is not possible pursuant to the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-650. - Design of pretreatment system. 
    Oil water separators, grease traps, and sand traps will be required for commercial and industrial establishments as a pretreatment system where it is determined by the city that they are necessary to prevent oil and grease waste discharge to the sanitary sewer system in quantities that may adversely affect the operation of the sewer system. The user shall submit plans to the city for review and comment. The installation shall be subject to the city's inspection prior to placing in service. 
(1)  All subsurface pretreatment systems must comply with the engineering standards indicated on the standard detail, as well as the current plumbing code used by the city. 
(2)  For the sizing of pretreatment systems by specific generators source the following calculations are required to be submitted by a licensed engineer or master plumber: 
a.  Restaurant facilities: 
(S) × (GS) × HR / 12 × (LF) = Grease Interceptor capacity in gallons 
S = Number of seats in dining area 
GS = Gallons of wastewater per seat (use 15 gallons per seat)* 
HR = Number of hours open 
LR = Loading factor - 
1.25 Interstate freeways 
1.0 Other freeways 
1.0 Recreational areas 
Example: Restaurant with 100 seats open 12 hours a day next to a recreational facility. 
 (100) × (15) × 12 / 12 × (1.0) = 1,500 gal. capacity 
b.  Hospitals, nursing homes, schools and other commercial kitchens with varied seating capacity: 
(M) × (GM) × (LF) × (SC) } = Grease interceptor capacity in gallons / 1500 
M = Meals per day 
GM = Gallons of wastewater per seat (use 5 gallons per meal) 
LF = Loading factor: 
 1.0 with dishwashing 
 0.5 without dishwashing 
SC = storage capacity factor: 
 1.0 for Public sewer 
 2.5 for on-site septic disposal 
Example: School facility w/252 cafeteria seat capacity 
(3) meals served per/day 3(252) = 756 
(756) × (5) × (1.0) = 3780 / 1,500 = 2.52 
(Number of Interceptors) 
(3) 1,500 grease interceptors needed 
Nursing home w/120 beds, meals served per/day varies 
(120) × (5) × (1.0) = 1,500 / 1,500 = 1 
(1) 1500 grease interceptor needed 
c.  Commercial car/truck wash facility, gas stations w/carwashes: (without reclaim system) 
(HR) × (C/HR) × (GAL USED/C) = GAL/DAY Minus (-) 
(HR) × (C/HR) × (GAL LOST/C) = GAL/DAY } = Oil Interceptor capacity / 1,500
= Oil interceptor capacity (gallons) 
HR = Hours of Operation 
C/HR = Cars per Hour 
GAL/USED = Gallons of Wastewater Used per Car 
(Based on system design specifications) 
GAL/LOST = Gallons of Wastewater Lost per Car 
(Based on system design specifications) 
Example: Carwash is open 12 hours. System can wash 10 cars per hour. System uses 35 gallons of wastewater per car, but loses 8 gallons of wastewater per car. 
(12) × (10) × (35) = 4200 Used gal. wastewater/day 
(12) × (10) × (8) = -960 Lost gal. wastewater/day 
3240 Gallons Capacity 
  3,240 / 1,500 = (2) oil interceptors needed for carwash area 
Example: Carwash Calculation reclaimed water: 
Average hours of operation = 12.5 13 hours 
Mon-Sat = 15 Hrs Sun = 10 Hrs  25 Hrs>  
Number of cars washed daily 250 Cars Number of Cars washed hourly (250) / 13  = 19 Cars Gallons of wastewater used per car 35 gallons Gallons of wastewater reclaimed per car 30 gallons (13) × (19) × (35) = 8,645 used gal wastewater/day (13) × (19) × (30) - (minus) = 7,410 reclaimed wastewater/day  1,235 gallons of wastewater backwashed to sewer> 1/1500 gallon oil separator required for collection of backwash to sewer (2) 3,000 gallon tanks used for reclaim system ( 7410/3000 = 2.47).  
d.  Determine seating capacity to calculate grease interceptor size: 
AREA / 15 = Approximate seating capacity 
(S) = AREA / 15 - Square footage of designated food space - Factor to be used to calculate seating capacity 
(S) × (GM) × (2.5) × (LF) = Grease Interceptor capacity in gallons. 
Example: A grocery store is 69,000 sq.ft. An area of 4,000 sq. ft., is designated for their food court area. 
4,000 / 15 = 266.6 (267) Seating Capacity 
(267) × (5) × (2.5) × (1.0) = 3,338 / 1,500 = 2.2 
(2) 1,500 grease interceptors needed 
Grocery stores will have a minimum (1) 1,500 grease trap. If additional eating facilities will be located in store similar to a food court area, store will be sized based on square footage of food area and seating capacity. Individual restaurants may be required to install pretreatment for their space. 
(3)  Systems currently installed will not change unless the pretreatment system is found to be: 
a.  Inadequate for the facility's current operation. 
b.  In violation due to a commercial waste generator failing to provide documentation for maintenance of the current system and an inspection reveals an upgrade or repair is required. 
c.  Located in a spill area and the commercial waste generator has failed to maintain the pretreatment system, which results in a fine from the city or clean-up is required and an inspection reveals the current system is inadequate or in need of repair. 
d.  Installed incorrectly and not per plumbing code used by the city or engineering standards. The existing system shall be corrected where possible. If unable to correct, then the system must be replaced. 
(4)  Subsurface pretreatment systems will have manhole covers over the inlet and outlet of the system. The concrete lid of tank will have circular openings for the placement of manhole covers. The manhole covers must be at least two feet in diameter. All openings on the pretreatment system will be core drilled. 
(5)  Any 3,000-gallon pretreatment system can be installed in two sections provided the center section has been sealed properly where no leakage can occur. The maximum size for any single tank installation will be 3,000 gallons on commercial sites where a greater system is not required for spill containment. All 3,000-gallon tanks shall have a minimum of two manhole openings for access to the tanks for cleaning and inspection. The subsurface pretreatment system will be made of prefab concrete tanks or its equivalent and will be a solid continuous structure where no sealing or binding of the middle section of the tank is allowed. The tank cannot be fabricated in two sections on tanks less than 1,500 gallons. A baffle wall is required in the tanks and the baffle wall must be fabricated as a permanent fixture. A slide structure will not be allowed as a baffle wall. A three-inch to five-inch diameter hole in the baffle wall must have a PVC elbow pipe turned down a maximum two feet from the bottom of the tank. 
(6)  A subsurface pretreatment system will have a standard manhole suitable for observation, sampling and measurement of wastewater. This manhole shall be installed at the user's expense and shall be maintained to be safe and accessible to the city at all times. This manhole is called the test manhole and is considered part of the overall pretreatment system. 
(7)  Subsurface pretreatment systems installed must be certified as a grease trap or an oil water separator. A septic system will not be allowed in lieu of the required pretreatment system. Interior pretreatment systems must have PDI certification (or certification approved by the public works department) and the gallon (GMP) capacity must be labeled on the unit. To verify type and size of tank purchased, an inspector can request a copy of the invoice for the pretreatment system installed. 
(8)  All pretreatment systems that are subsurface will be brought to finished grade using pre-cast concrete cones. Brick work will also be allowed if the depth is no more than four feet to reach grade. The depth of the pretreatment system will determine how the brick work should be built. The standard core hole in the top of a pre-cast pretreatment system lid is two feet. The brick work will be three feet in diameter around the core opening. The three-foot base will allow entry to the pretreatment system for maintenance. When using bricks, once 80 percent of the height has been achieved to the two-foot manhole opening, you must corbel in the brickwork in small increments. 
(9)  An alternative interior pretreatment system shall be used only after evaluation and authorization by the city. Any alternative pretreatment system unit authorized by the city for use must have product support for maintenance and operation of the system. The equipment must be available for sale and the supply must be readily available for installation. The use of an alternative system will require established procedures for routine maintenance, operational surveillance, and environmental monitoring to assure the system continues to function properly. Any fees incurred for quality assurance of this unit will be the total responsibility of the commercial waste generator. The sizing of the grease trap will be based on the manufacturer's recommendations, but it must be equivalent to a subsurface pretreatment system gallon capacity where required. 
(10)  A grease trap is used for the collection of kitchen waste discharge only. No can wash areas, no dumpster, no mop sinks, no food grinders and no floor drains in mechanical rooms, bathrooms, or discharge from food coolers. Commercial waste generators that have micro-brewery facilities may be subject to additional discharge requirements. 
(11)  Installation of a mechanical system to continuously or intermittently apply solutions of enzymes, special bacteria or other agents to the sewer shall not be allowed in lieu of an acceptable pretreatment system. 
(12)  It shall constitute a violation of this article to introduce chemicals, acidic or caustic substances which emulsify or otherwise temporarily dissolve fats, oils and grease to the extent that it later solidifies in the city sewer lines. If a commercial waste generator uses enzymes and bacteria for pretreatment maintenance and it is discovered that said substances causes damage to or interferes with the operation or maintenance of the sewer system, creates a public nuisance or odor, or presents a potential health hazard, then these additives will be prohibited. Use of any other substances, including special enzymes and bacteria is solely at the discretion of the commercial waste generator. 
(13)  Grit, sand traps and oil water separators shall be installed in accordance with the current official plumbing code used by the city engineering standards. 
(14)  Any strip retail shopping center or office building showing subsurface pretreatment systems at designated buildings or structures will only be allowed discharge by a single tenant or food service to that system. No multiple users will be allowed. The only exception to this condition is a shopping mall with a food court where pretreatment systems are installed and maintained by the mall corporation or management leasing. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-651. - Maintenance of pretreatment systems. 
(a)  Pretreatment systems shall be maintained by the commercial waste generator at their expense, to assure continually efficient operation at all times. The commercial waste generator shall maintain records of said service and make available all records to the city upon request. The commercial waste generator must service their pretreatment system frequently or repair their system to maintain the following: 
(1)  A 25-percent tank retention capacity rule (the 25 percent rule requires that the depth of oil and grease (floating and settled) in a trap shall not be equal to or greater than 25 percent of the total operating depth of the trap. The operating depth of the trap is determined by measuring the internal depth of the tank. If the tank is measured with more than two feet of floating top solids or more than two feet of settled solids, the tank is in violation). 
(2)  A top sludge cap less than two feet in tank. 
(3)  A suspended solids content of less than two feet on the bottom of tank. 
(4)  A pretreatment system able to maintain a daily discharge limit of 250 mg/l to sanitary sewer. 
(5)  A pretreatment system where no sludge deposits of grease or oil waste accumulate in a test manhole or create a grease/oil waste stream to the sanitary sewer. 
(6)  A pretreatment system that does not create any obnoxious odors and poses no threat to public health and welfare. 
(7)  A pretreatment system that does not cause back-ups to kitchen sinks or any interior kitchen or building plumbing. 
(8)  A pretreatment system that causes no manhole overflows no accumulation of oil/grease in the city sanitary sewer system. 
(b)  The following maintenance schedule shall be required for pretreatment systems operating in the city; however, commercial pretreatment inspectors shall have the authority to adjust any facility's maintenance schedule if upon inspection it is determined the maintenance schedule of the pretreatment system is not controlling the discharge of grease/oil waste to the sanitary sewer: 
(1)  Subsurface systems (grease trap, oil water separator, sand trap): 
Gallon Capacity Maintenance Required Time Period 
Type/Size Number Frequency Exterior 
1,000-1,500 Gal. 1 Every 3 months Exterior 
1,500 Gal. 2-4 Every 6 months Exterior 
3,000 Gal. 1 Every 6 months  
(2)  Interior systems (grease trap, oil separator, sand trap): 
40 lb.-50 lb. Total Pump out-Monthly. 
70 lb.-200 lb. Total Pump out-Every 3 months. 
(3)  Automatic grease recovery systems (grease trap): 
-35 GPM daily maintenance of solids container-Total pump out of unit to remove solids. 
Check system weekly-Every three months to make sure system is operating correctly. 
(c)  New commercial waste generators that are permitted for new pretreatment installation shall be required to provide the city with a notarized statement for the maintenance of their pretreatment system based on the maintenance schedule stated in this article. 
(d)  Commercial waste generators located in an area that have experienced a spill where a city sanitary sewer system has been impacted or a manhole has overflowed due to grease/oil accumulation must provide the city with a maintenance schedule to prevent this from occurring again. If the maintenance schedule is found to be inadequate or does not adhere to the maintenance schedule required by the city for that specific pretreatment system, the city shall have the right to amend that commercial waste generators' maintenance schedule to control any further commercial waste discharge that could impact the sanitary sewer system, manhole or pretreatment system. 
(e)  Any commercial waste generator(s) found to be in violation for failure to maintain their pretreatment system in a spill area shall be assessed one-half the cost for clean-up and/or fined by the city due to commercial waste impacting the environment or sanitary sewer system. Additional fines may be imposed by the state. 
(f)  Any commercial waste generator found not adhering to any maintenance standards as established by this article will be in violation. 
(g)  Any commercial waste generator requesting a deviation from a pretreatment system maintenance schedule as stated in this article shall submit their request in writing. The written request must include documentation that verifies that the pretreatment system has been operating in accordance with this article for a year and the modification of the maintenance schedule will not change the compliance status of the pretreatment system. 
(h)  A commercial waste generator who operates a food service in their establishment, but the food service is not considered their main business income may be required to cease their food operation if they violate any parts of this article and may be assessed a sewer surcharge fee for the cost of additional sewer collection system frequency and magnitude of cleaning that may be required as determined by the utilities director to prevent stoppages or backups due to commercial waste generators where a required upgrade, repair, or installation of a pretreatment system is not completed and/or a subsurface system is not possible pursuant to the requirements of this article. Once the generator has come into compliance the food service operation can resume. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-652. - Manifests for commercial waste disposal. 
(a)  A commercial waste generator shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from their facility without a current commercial waste hauler permit issued by the state or local governing authority. In addition they: 
(1)  Shall not permit a transporter to remove commercial waste from their premises until the transporter has presented a nonhazardous manifest to the generator to document pumping activity. This manifest will require signatures from the generator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The manifest should be a multi-copy form. 
(2)  Shall ensure the manifest form used to document the transportation and disposal of commercial waste generated in the city contains the following information as a minimum: 
a.  Generator information: 
1.  Name and physical address of facility. 
2.  Volume of waste pumped. 
3.  Date and time of pumping activity. 
4.  Signature of authorized representative. 
5.  Print name. 
b.  Transporter information: 
1.  Name and physical address of company. 
2.  City or issued commercial waste FOG permit. 
3.  Driver certification number. 
4.  Volume of waste pumped. 
5.  Name and signature of driver. 
6.  Print name. 
c.  Disposer information: 
1.  Name and physical address of facility. 
2.  State, city or federal permit number of site. 
3.  Volume of waste received. 
4.  Signature of authorized representative. 
5.  Print name. 
Upon receipt of the completed copy of the manifest from the transporter, the generator must mail a copy of the manifest within five days to the following: 
The City of Americus Georgia 
Department of Public Works 
229 Railroad Street 
Americus, Georgia 31709 
Attn: FOG Inspectors 
(3)  Shall accurately complete and sign the generator information section of the manifest to ensure that the transporter has noted on the manifest, the number of gallons of waste removed; and verify the generator information is correct. 
(4)  Shall keep a copy of all manifests for a period of three years on-site and shall make available for inspection by the city. 
(5)  Shall report any spills to the city upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact, any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams or ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's pretreatment system. Failure to notify the city of a spill will constitute a violation and fines will be assessed to the commercial waste generator as well as the transporter. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-653. - Commercial waste permit issuance. 
    An annual permit will be required for all pretreatment systems existing and new. A fee will be charged for this permit. The permit fee will be based on the type of pretreatment system at the site. Failure to apply for a commercial waste permit shall be a violation of this article. The generator's environmental health department food service permit may be suspended by the Sumter County Health Department until the permit is obtained. 
(1)  All commercial waste permits shall be issued annually in conjunction with the business license renewal process. The following types of pretreatment system sizes shall be the basis for the fee schedule to be determined by the mayor and council and posted or maintained by the city clerk or the utilities director: 
 Annual permit fee shall be based on the type of facility. 
Pretreatment Size Type 1-5 tanks Subsurface system (exterior) 6-10 tanks Subsurface system (exterior) 11-15 tanks Subsurface system (exterior) 10-100 pounds (1-2 units) Manual (interior) 20-35 GPM (1-2 units) Automatic Grease Recovery Combination of systems Subsurface manual and automatic grease recovery  
(2)  Permit conditions shall include, but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Permit duration. 
b.  Permit fee. 
c.  Permit transfer. 
d.  Frequency of inspections. 
e.  Pretreatment requirements. 
f.  Maintenance requirements. 
g.  Compliance schedules. 
h.  Requirements for maintenance records and submission of reports. 
i.  Right of entry. 
j.  Review of upgrades or repairs of a pretreatment system. 
k.  Other conditions deemed necessary to ensure compliance with this article or other applicable ordinance, laws and regulations. 
(3)  Commercial hauler vehicle inspection and permit. A commercial waste hauler permit is required for all transporters operating in the city. If the transporter does not already have a permit issued by a local government authority, the city will issue a permit. The commercial waste transporter must meet the following criteria: 
a.  Operate a vehicle that is registered with the State of Georgia as a commercial vehicle. The vehicle must have a combined gross weight of 10,001 pounds or more and have a USDOT registration number and must conform to all 49 CFR transportation rules and the trucks container must meet the DOT rule for the type of material being transported; 
b.  The transporter must register with the environmental protection division and obtain a FOG number and permit; 
c.  The transporter must contact the public works department to schedule their truck or trucks to be inspected; and 
d.  The transporter on the day of inspection shall provide proof of the aforementioned information and pay a permit fee based on EPD rules. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-654. - Abandonment of systems. 
(a)  Wherever the use of a subsurface pretreatment system is discontinued due to a business closing or relocating, and the system is connected to the sanitary sewer, the commercial waste generator shall follow the following procedure: 
(1)  Contact the public works department (229-924-7111) before vacating the property. 
(2)  Resolve all outstanding violations. 
(3)  Clean the pretreatment system before vacating the business and submit a manifest to the city to substantiate the cleaning of the system. 
(b)  If the commercial waste generator fails to clean the pretreatment system and/or resolve outstanding violations it shall be considered a violation of this article. Management or property leasing will be notified. No commercial waste generator shall be allowed to occupy the facility until it is brought into compliance. If the existing pretreatment system is not adequate based on the new business operation, then the new commercial waste generator shall upgrade the pretreatment system. If the building or tenant space vacated will not be used for another commercial waste generator, then management leasing or the building owner shall follow the following tank abandonment procedures: 
(1)  Collapse tank or fill pretreatment system with sand. 
(2)  Seal over manholes so they are no longer accessible. 
(3)  Disconnect or reroute the kitchen waste line from the building to the pretreatment system. 
(4)  Contact the city to inspect the abandoned system prior to a new business opening. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-655. - Construction prohibitions. 
    It shall be the responsibility of persons under this rule to see that work contracted for and performed by them or under their supervision is carried out in conformance with the requirements of the city engineering standards and this article. Persons contracted for installation of pretreatment systems must be a licensed contractor or master plumber in the State of Georgia and their license must be current. Inspectors shall have the authority to request a copy of the license when approving all pretreatment system installations. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-656. - Construction violations. 
    The following will constitute a construction violation: 
(1)  No contractor shall construct, alter, modify, repair or install a pretreatment system without receiving a permit from the city; 
(2)  No contractor shall install, modify or repair a pretreatment system which will violate standards set forth in this article, without evidence that a variance has been granted; 
(3)  No contractor shall perform services which will cause or increase the likelihood of pollution to sanitary sewer and pose a threat to the health and safety of the public; 
(4)  Each contractor shall be responsible for maintaining records of services as required by this article and provide a copy of those records to the city upon request. Example of this would be an invoice verifying the purchase of the pretreatment system; 
(5)  Contractor initiating work to install, upgrade, or repair a system where no permit has been issued by the city. A permit is issued after construction is started but prior to completion of the contracted work. No site inspections performed; 
(6)  Contracted work is completed without a permit having been issued, or no permit application was received until contracted work was completed, resulting in missed inspection(s); 
(7)  Failure to call for required inspection(s); 
(8)  Abandoning, without good cause, a project in which the contractor is engaged or is under contractual obligation to perform. The failure of a contractor to perform work without just cause for 90 consecutive days shall create a presumption that the contractor has abandoned the project; 
(9)  Gross negligence, incompetence, or misconduct which causes monetary or other harm to a customer or physical harm to any person. Example of such a violation would be the illegal disposal of a generator's waste when repairing a pretreatment system. 
(10)  Pretreatment system is not installed by a license contractor or master plumber. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-657. - Notification of violation. 
    When the public works department finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a commercial waste permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works department may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within 15 days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the public works, department. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the public works department to take emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-658. - Penalties. 
    When the public works department finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a commercial waste permit or any order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the public works department may issue a citation to such user a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00, or the maximum civil penalty permissible whichever is greater for each violation and each day a violation continues, shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. Citations shall be issued when the commercial waste generator fails to correct the same violation after a notice of violation has been issued. Any civil penalties issued will be required to be paid in 30 days from the day of issuance of the citation. A citation must be in writing and must describe the particular nature of the violation, including specific references to the provisions of this article violated and the time frame for correction. Refusal of the citation will not negate its issuance. 
(1)  Failure by user/generator to pay the designated citation 30 business days after citation has been issued shall result in the revocation of the generator's commercial waste permit. 
(2)  Issuance of a citation shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action. 
(3)  The following shall be considered violations of this article and the user, responsible person or company will be assessed civil penalties accordingly: 
a.  A licensed contractor, engineer or plumber who installs, modifies, or repairs a pretreatment system without a pretreatment permit, or is working on the installation of a pretreatment system, and obtains a permit after work has commenced. No inspections performed. 
b.  Commercial waste generator who has a pretreatment system installed without submitting plans for review; no permit application is received or on file and installation of system is completed. No final inspections of project performed. 
c.  Failure to call for required inspection(s) when a renovation or upgrade of a pretreatment system is required. 
d.  Commercial waste generator is in violation for failure to maintain their pretreatment system. 
e.  Commercial waste generator fails to provide the city with a manifest or maintenance documentation for their pretreatment system. 
f.  Commercial waste generator fails to inform the city a spill has occurred during pumping of a pretreatment system and it impacts the sanitary sewer, storm drain or environment. 
g.  Commercial waste generator fails to apply for the required commercial waste permit for a pretreatment system in the city. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-659. - Criminal penalties. 
    For intentional and flagrant violations of this article, the City of Americus, Public Works Department may issue a citation to the user, generator or other responsible person, requiring such person to appear in municipal court to answer charges for such violation. Upon conviction, such person shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00, or imprisonment for 60 days, or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-660. - Administrative appeal. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision or determination of the city public works department shall appeal in writing within 30 days after the issuance of such decision or determination to the mayor and city council or their designee and shall be entitled to a hearing within 45 days of receipt of the written appeal. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-661. - Judicial review. 
    Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the city public works department after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to by petition for writ of certiorari to the Superior Court of Sumter County. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Sec. 90-662. - Fee schedule for commercial pretreatment. 
    A fee schedule shall be determined and modified as needed by the mayor and council and shall be posted or maintained by the city clerk or the utilities director. The following services shall be assessed a fee: 
(1)  Plan review for pretreatment system (new construction, existing facility renovation). 
(2)  Plan review (permit revision), (project changes for previously approved plan). 
(3)  Site evaluation of a pretreatment system (under change of operation or ownership). 
(4)  Re-inspection fee for modifications, repair and replacement of existing pretreatment systems in violation. 
(5)  New pretreatment system installation inspection (new construction). 
(6)  Re-inspection fee for new construction installation per visit. 
(7)  Revision to commercial waste permit during a permit year. 
(8)  A copy of permit inspection report (reissued), (new construction). 
(9)  Commercial hauler vehicle inspection and permit. 
(10)  Sewer surcharge fee for additional system cleaning resulting from the failure to maintain or install an adequate pretreatment system pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. O-11-11-24, exh. A, 11-17-2011) 
Secs. 90-663-90-685. - Reserved. 
Chapter 94 - ZONING 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Accessory use means a use customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
    Adult day care means a community-based program which provides nonmedical care, consisting primarily of social and recreational activities for persons aged 60 and over where such persons are in need of limited personal care assistance, supervision, or assistance essential for sustaining the activities of normal daily living, or for the protection of such persons on less than a 24-hour basis. If necessary, such program and facility shall be appropriately licensed by the state. 
    Adult family day care center means adult day care business located in a private residence operated by the owner or a lessee of such private residence who receives consideration in return for the supervision and care of adults for a period of time of less than 24 hours per day for not more than six adults. If necessary, such day care shall be appropriately licensed by the state. 
    Adult group day care center means adult day care business located in a facility other than a private residence that provides supervision and care for consideration paid to the facility for a time period of less than 24 hours per day, for seven or more adults. If necessary, such day care center shall be appropriately licensed by the state. 
    Advertising signs means any freestanding or partly or wholly attached structure displayed for the purpose of conveying some information, knowledge, or idea to the public. 
    Alteration of building means any change in the supporting members of a building, such as bearing walls, beams, columns, girders, except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or of a building from one location to another. 
    Aquaculture is the farming of aquatic organisms such as fish, crustaceans, mollusks, and aquatic plants. 
    Boardinghouse means a dwelling with lodging for three or more persons where meals are regularly prepared and served to the residents thereof for compensation, and where food is placed upon a table family style, without service or ordering of individual portions from a menu. The owner of the residential structure is required to live in the structure as his personal residence in order for the residential structure to be classified as a boardinghouse. 
    Building or structure means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing, or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. 
    Building, accessory, means a building subordinate or supplemental to the main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to that of a main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 
    Building, nonresidential accessory, means a subordinate structure detached from but located on the same lot as the principal use or structure, the use of such subordinate structure being for storage, supplies, or other approved uses. Accessory buildings shall be constructed in accord with requirements of the city building code, provided that no mobile home or mobile office, whether or not placed upon a permanent foundation, nor any truck or trailer bodies may be used as an accessory building. Accessory buildings shall meet and comply with all existing building setback requirements of this Code. Buildings should be constructed of material similar to the principal structure or compatible with surrounding architecture, and which would not be obtrusive to the area, adjoining property owners, or from any street. 
    Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the main or principal use of the lot on which said building is located. 
    Carwash means an area of land and/or a structure with machine or hand-operated facilities used principally for the cleaning, washing, polishing, or waxing of motor vehicles. 
    Centerline of street means that the line surveyed and monumented by the city council shall be the centerline of the street, or if such a centerline has not been surveyed, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of such street. 
    Child or children means any person under 18 years of age for whom day care service is provided in a home. For the purpose of these rules, the term shall not include children that are related to the registrant or children whose parents or guardians reside in the same residence, or children for whom no pay, either in cash or in kind, is received. 
    Child day care center means a licensed child care business that provides supervision and care for more than four hours per day, but fewer than 24 hours per day for 19 or more children. 
    Child family day care center means a private residence operated by any person who receives therein for pay for supervision and care for more than four hours per day, but fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, three but not more than six, children under 18 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
    Child group day care center means a licensed private residence or a separate facility operated by any person who receives therein pay for supervision and care for more than four hours per day, but fewer than 24 hours per day, without transfer of legal custody, seven, but not more than 18 children under 18 years of age who are not related to such persons and whose parents or guardians are not residents in the same private residence. 
    Condominium means an estate in real property consisting of an undivided interest in common elements with other owners of a portion of a parcel of real property, together with a separate interest in space in a residential building. A condominium may include, in addition, a separate interest in other portions of such real property. For the purpose of this Code, a condominium shall be further defined as provided in O.C.G.A. § 44-3-71, as amended. 
    Condominium dwelling means an individually owned dwelling unit in an attached, detached, or multifamily structure, combined with joint ownership of common area of the buildings and grounds. 
    Congregate housing means a single detached residential facility for four or more elderly persons within which are provided living and sleeping facilities, meal preparation, laundry services and room cleaning. Such facilities may also provide other services, including, but not limited to, transportation to routine social and medical appointments, and counseling. Such housing shall not include housing for persons needing medical treatment or institutional longterm or shortterm care. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "elderly person" means a person over 62 years of age. 
    Customary home occupation means a gainful occupation or profession for gain or support conducted only by members of a family residing on the premises (except that such family may employ not more than two nonfamily members to work in the business), conducted entirely within the principal building or in a rear building accessory thereto, and requiring only customary home equipment, provided that not more than 30 percent of the floor area of the principal building is used for such purpose and the total combined floor area of any building used for such purpose on the property does not exceed 500 square feet. A customary home occupation shall not be permitted where, as a result of the activity or activities arising out of the customary home occupation, a change is made or required to be made in the outside appearance of the dwelling or any other building located upon said property; where any outside activity visible from the street in connection with such occupation is permitted or required; where traffic, parking, sewage, or water use in excess of what is normal in the neighborhood is or may be generated; where any noise, vibration, glare, fumes, odor, electrical interference, or nuisances as defined under this Code is or may be created; or where engaging in the occupation results in or is likely to result in the storage of anything related to the business outside the principal dwelling or any other building located on the property. 
Any customary home occupation in existence as of June 20, 1988, shall continue to be authorized until such time as such customary home occupation ceases, but any new customary home occupation, whether upon property presently having a customary home occupation or not having a customary home occupation, shall be subject to the provisions of the article from which this section derives. 
    Dwelling unit means a dwelling or portion thereof providing complete living facilities for one complete housekeeping unit. 
    Dwelling, multifamily, means a building or portion thereof used for occupancy by four or more families living independently of each other and containing four or more dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, single-family, attached, multifamily, duplex, triplex, condominium or townhouse means one of two or more residential buildings having a common or party wall separating dwelling units. 
    Dwelling, single-family, detached, means a structure containing not more than one dwelling unit designed for residential use that meets or exceeds the following standards: 
(1)  The house must be attached to a permanent foundation that is approved by the city's building official. A complete perimeter enclosure is required that will match or coordinate with other conventional foundations in the neighborhood and conform to the city's building code. 
(2)  The roof shall have a pitch equal to or greater than the average pitch on the roofs of all single-family dwellings within a 500-foot radius, and in no case shall the roof have a pitch of less than a ratio of 4:12, that is four feet of rise for every 12 feet of horizontal run. All roofs shall have a surface of wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, concrete, fiberglass or metal tiles, slate, or other material approved by the city's building official. 
(3)  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, metal or vinyl, vinyl-covered, or other materials of like appearance with surrounding dwellings. 
(4)  The dwelling unit must have an overhang or soffit equal to or greater than the average overhang or soffit on single-family dwellings within a 500-foot radius, and in no case shall the overhang or soffit be less than 12 inches to ensure adequate ventilation. 
(5)  At each exit door, there must be a permanent porch or landing that extends outward from the structure a minimum of 48 inches by 48 inches. 
(6)  The dwelling must contain the minimum square footage as required by the regulation of the zone in which it is located. (See section 94-193(1).) 
(7)  The board may approve variances from one or more of the developmental or architectural standards provided herein on the basis of a finding that materials to be utilized or the architectural style proposed for the dwelling will be compatible and harmonious with the structures in the vicinity. 
    Dwelling, two-family, means a building designed or remodeled for use as two-dwelling units. 
    Efficiency or efficiency unit means a dwelling unit consisting of only one room, exclusive of bathroom, kitchen, hallway, closets or dining alcove directly off the principal room, provided the total floorspace of any efficiency unit shall not be less than 450 square feet of heated floor area. 
    Emergency shelter means a facility which provides shortterm residential care, not exceeding a total of 90 days in duration for persons in need of immediate assistance or relief due to physical, mental, or emotional difficulties, but such term shall not include alcohol or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for prisoners or former prisoners, detention centers, halfway houses, or other similar housing facilities which serve as an alternative to incarceration. Where required by state law, an emergency shelter shall be properly licensed by the state before such home can be located in any zoning district in which it is otherwise authorized to locate. This does not include a temporary weather-related emergency shelter operated by a federal, state, or local government agency, the Red Cross, or the Salvation Army. 
    Family means one or more persons living together, whether related to each other by birth or not, and occupying a dwelling unit as a single, nonprofit, housekeeping unit as distinguished from a group occupying a hotel, motel, group home for the handicapped, congregate housing, club, boardinghouse, roominghouse, fraternity or sorority house. 
    Family personal care home means a home for adults or children under the age of 18 years, whether or not related by blood or marriage, in a family-type residence, noninstitutional in character, which offers care to two through six persons who are either permanently or temporarily unable to provide one or more of his life functions for himself due to physical, mental, or emotional difficulties. Where required by state law, such home shall be properly licensed by the state before such home can be located in any zoning district in which it is otherwise authorized to locate. 
    Flea market means a building or open area in which stalls or sales areas are set aside as a consequence of rental agreements or otherwise, which are intended for use by various unrelated individuals for the purpose of selling articles that are either homemade, homegrown, handcrafted, old, obsolete, or antique, and may include the selling of such goods at retail prices by businesses or individuals who are usually and customarily engaged in retail trade. The term "flea market" shall not be deemed to include informal garage sales or yard sales. 
    Garden apartment dwelling means a multifamily dwelling, one or two stories in height, with one dwelling unit per story, a private entrance for each dwelling unit, and where the area immediately surrounding the dwelling is landscaped and may contain recreation facilities for the private use of dwelling occupants. 
    Group development project means two or more principal buildings devoted to a common or similar use constructed on a lot in one ownership and which are made a part of an integrated industrial, commercial, or dwelling unit project; provided, however, that such projects shall not include any use which is prohibited in the district in which such project is to be located. 
    Group homes for the handicapped means a single detached dwelling shared by four or more handicapped persons, in addition to resident staff, who live together as a single housekeeping unit in a longterm, family-like environment in which staff persons provide care, education and participation in community activities for the residents with the primary goal of enabling the residents to live as independently as possible in order to reach their maximum potential. For the purposes of this chapter, the term "handicapped person" shall mean a person with a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the major life activities of such individual. 
    Group personal care home means a home for adults or children under the age of 18 years, whether or not related by blood or marriage, in a residence or other type of building which offers care to seven or more persons who are either permanently or temporarily unable to provide one or more of his life functions for himself due to physical, mental, or emotional difficulties. Where required by state law, such home shall be properly licensed by the state before such home can be located in any zoning district in which it is otherwise authorized to locate. 
    Incidental or accessory sign means a professional or announcement sign not more than one square foot in area. 
    Indoor recreational facilities means any establishment providing completely enclosed recreation activities. Accessory uses shall be permitted to include the preparation and serving of food and/or the sale of equipment related to the enclosed uses. Included in this definition shall be bowling, roller skating or ice skating, billiards, pool, theaters, and related amusement uses. 
    Industrialized or modular home means a home that is a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used for residential purposes, and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of either the Southern Building Code Congress International or the Georgia Industrialized Building Act. 
    Junkyard means a yard, lot, structure, place or land or any part thereof used primarily for the purchasing, collecting, storing, dismantling, salvaging, processing, or selling or offering for sale, either in whole or in part, machinery or vehicles not in running condition. 
    Kennel means the housing of four or more dogs, cats, or other domestic animals for the purpose of providing an income or revenue. 
    Lot of record means a lot or parcel of land, the existence, location and dimensions of which have been legally recorded or registered in a deed or plat. 
    Lot, plot and parcel mean a portion of land devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. 
    Lot width means the horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured at right angles to the depth at the setback line. 
    Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which when erected on site, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. This type of dwelling is fabricated in an off-site facility for installation or assembly at the building site, bearing a label certifying that it is constructed in compliance with the Federal Manufactured Home and Standards Act 42 USC 5401-5445, and which was manufactured on or after June 15, 1976. 
    Mobile home means a dwelling manufactured prior to June 15, 1976, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation. 
    Motor vehicle repair means a vehicle paint and bodywork, frame straightening and similar vehicle repair. 
    Multifamily dwelling means a building designed, constructed, altered, or used for three or more adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall or walls and/or a party floor/ceiling connecting it with at least one other dwelling unit located on one lot of land. 
    Nonconforming use means a building, structure or use of land existing on December 17, 1959, and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
    Nonfamily adult means a resident 18 years of age or older who is not related by blood within the third degree of consanguinity or by marriage to the owner or manager of the personal care home. 
    Nursery school, playschool, or kindergarten means a school for children two years of age through six years of age which operates for no more than four consecutive hours per day, and which may or may not have an established curriculum. 
    Outdoor recreational facilities means businesses which offer as their primary commercial business outdoor recreational activities including, but not limited to, miniature golf, batting cages, golf driving ranges, and similar outdoor amusements. Accessory uses shall be permitted within a building or buildings to be located upon the outdoor recreational facility property, including restrooms, equipment storage, and the preparation and serving of food and/or the sale of equipment related to the outdoor uses. Outdoor recreation uses which may cause excessive noise, as determined by the city council, must be located not less than 500 feet from any residential zone. In the event that an outdoor recreational facility is to be located adjacent to any residential zoning district, then a buffer as described in section 94-194 shall be required. Nothing herein shall be deemed to prevent or restrict outdoor recreational activities sponsored by a school, a church, a recreation authority, or other governmental or quasi-governmental entity that offers such recreational activities as part of its program. 
    Pawnshop means a business being owned and operated by a pawnbroker, with said business normally taking in personal property deposited as security for loans. 
    Personal care home means any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not for profit, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food service, and one or more personal services for two or more adults or children under the age of 18 years, whether or not such persons are related by blood or marriage. For the purpose of this Code, personal care homes shall be classified as a family personal care home or a group personal care home. No personal care home shall provide services to or allow any person to reside therein where such person would constitute a threat to the health and safety of other individuals. The term "personal care home" shall not include alcohol or drug treatment centers, work release facilities for prisoners or former prisoners, detention centers, halfway houses, or other similar housing facilities which serve as an alternative to incarceration. Where required by state law, a personal care home shall be properly licensed by the state before such home can be located in any zoning district in which it is otherwise authorized to locate. 
    Personal services means and includes, but is not limited to, individual assistance with or supervision of self-administered medication, assistance with ambulation and transfers, and essential activities of daily living such as eating, bathing, grooming, dressing and toileting. 
    Pest control means a commercial venture engaging in the business of applying any attractant, fumigant, fungicide, insecticide, rodenticide and repellant to the property of another, the purpose of which is to control insects and vermin. 
    Resident means any nonfamily adult receiving personal assistance and/or residing in a personal care home. 
    Roominghouse means a residential structure which is only available for personal occupancy where the residents are provided lodging without meals, and where no provisions are made for cooking or meal preparation for the residents either as a group or individually in any of the rooms of the house, including any of the rooms occupied by paying guests. The owner of the residential structure is required to live in the structure as his personal residence in order for the residential structure to be classified as a roominghouse. 
    Self-service storage facility means a building or group of buildings that contains varying sizes of individual, compartmentalized and controlled access stalls or lockers for the storage of business and household goods or contractors' supplies. 
    Setback means the distance from the right-of-way line of the street to the nearest point of a building. 
    Setback line means a line illustrating the setback distance. 
    Shopping center means a commercial area apart from the central business district consisting of one or more businesses in one or more buildings in any linear or other arrangement and providing not less than 75 off-street parking areas. 
    Street means a public way for vehicular traffic that affords a primary means of access to abutting property. 
    Strip shopping center means a commercial area apart from the central business district consisting of two or more businesses in one or more buildings in any linear or other arrangement and providing at least 25 off-street parking spaces. 
    Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires more or less permanent location on the ground, or which is attached to something having more or less permanent location on the ground. 
    Townhouse means one of a group of two or more attached single-family residences where the owner owns a fee simple interest in the residence and in the underlying realty that constitutes the approved lot. Each townhouse unit shall be separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved firewall or walls. Firewalls shall be located on the lot line. Each townhouse shall have a front and rear ground level entrance. The townhouse shall be located on its own approved, recorded lot, but setback lines as to interior lot lines shall not be applicable to townhouses. 
    Townhouse dwelling means one of a series of three or more attached dwelling units on separate lots that are separated from each other by firewalls extending at least from the lowest floor level to the roof. 
    Trailer camp means any lot on which are parked two or more trailers, or one or more trailers for a longer period of time than 48 hours. 
    Truck terminal means land and buildings used as a relay station for the transfer of a load from one vehicle to another or one party to another. The terminal cannot be used for permanent or longterm accessory storage for principal land uses at other locations. The terminal facility may include storage areas for trucks and buildings or areas for the repair of trucks associated with the terminal. 
    Used or occupied, as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
    Yard means an unoccupied space except possibly by an accessory building, open to the sky, on the same lot with a principal building. 
    Yard, front, means a yard measured at right angles from the front lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, rear, means a yard measured at right angles from a rear lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side, means a yard measured at right angles from a side lot line to the nearest point of the principal building, exclusive of steps, and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
    Zero-lot-line dwelling means one attached, one-family dwelling constructed against one or two lot lines rather than in the middle of the lot. Setbacks other than common wall areas shall be complied with in connection with such dwelling, including minimum lot area and width per dwelling unit where the same is required in section 94-161, unless otherwise provided. 
(Code 1962, § 27-2; Code 1986, § 23-1; Ord. No. O-88-02-04, § 1, 2-22-1988; Ord. No. O-88-06-22, 6-20-1988; Ord. No. O-91-04-12, 4-24-1991; Ord. No. O-91-10-38, 10-28-1991; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-94-09-32, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. O-95-09-32, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-47, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-03-12, 3-19-1998; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-04-12, 4-22-1999; Ord. No. O-99-05-19, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. O-00-04-17, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-00-12-49, 12-21-2000; Ord. No. O-01-06-21, 6-21-2001; Ord. No. O-02-07-19, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. O-05-12-46, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. O-07-11-41, 11-15-2007; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-2. - Remedies. 
    In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted, or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building official, or any other appropriate city authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of each such building or use of land. 
(Code 1962, § 27-16; Code 1986, § 23-15) 
Sec. 94-3. - Prevailing law. 
    When the regulations of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any statute or other legal document, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. When the provisions of any statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Code 1962, § 27-18; Code 1986, § 23-16) 
Sec. 94-4. - Application of chapter. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, the application of this capter is as follows: 
(1)  Use. No building or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, moved, or altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(2)  Buildings. No building shall hereafter be erected, constructed or altered so as to exceed the height limit, or to accommodate or house a greater number of families than are required or specified in the regulations herein for the district in which it is located. 
(3)  Lots. No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, front, side, or rear yard, inner or outer curbs, lot area per family or other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. This subsection shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public use. 
(4)  Yards. No part of a yard or other open space required about any building for the purpose of complying with the provisions of this chapter shall be included as a part of a yard or other open space similarly required for another building. 
(Code 1962, § 27-10; Code 1986, § 23-9) 
Secs. 94-5-94-26. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-27. - Enforcing officer. 
    The office of building official is hereby established in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The duties of the building official shall include inspecting premises, issuing building permits, and certificates of occupancy for uses and buildings, and ensuring that all such buildings and uses are in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 27-11; Code 1986, § 23-10) 
Sec. 94-28. - Building permits. 
    Building permits shall be issued in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Required. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for any construction of any building; or to commence construction or moving or alteration of any building, or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building until the building official has issued a building permit for such work. 
(2)  Issuance. In applying to the building official for a building permit, the applicant shall submit two copies of a dimensional sketch or a to-scale plan signed by the owner or the owner's authorized agent, indicating the shape, size, and location of the lot to be built upon and the shape, size, height, use and location of the buildings to be erected, demolished, altered or moved and of any buildings already on the lot, the number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate, if any, the setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots and such other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. If the proposed excavation, filling, construction or movement set forth in said sketch or plan are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. If the proposed excavation, filling, construction or movement set forth in said sketch or plan are in conformity with the provisions of this chapter and other ordinances of the city then in force, the building official and fire department representative shall sign and return one copy of the sketch plan to the applicant and shall issue a building permit upon payment of any required fee. The building official shall retain one copy of the building permit and one copy of the sketch or plan. 
(3)  Refusal. If the sketch or plan submitted describes work which does not conform to the requirements of this chapter, the building official shall not issue a building permit, but shall return one copy of the sketch or plan to the applicant along with a signed refusal in writing. Such refusal shall state the reasons therefor and shall cite the portions of this chapter with which the submitted sketch or plan does not comply. The building official shall retain one copy of the sketch or plan and two copies of the refusal. 
(4)  Time limitations. Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have commenced within six months of its date of issue, or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
(Code 1962, § 27-12; Code 1986, § 23-11) 
Sec. 94-28.1 - Waiver of permit fees for governmental entities. 
(a)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, no building permit fees, building inspection fees, or fire inspection fees shall be charged to a governmental entity in connection with the construction or renovation of a public-use governmental building located in the incorporated area of the city. 
(b)  For purposes of this section, the following terms shall have the following meanings: 
    Governmental entity means the State of Georgia and its respective departments and agencies, the Board of Regents of the University System of Georgia, the Sumter County Board of Commissioners, the Sumter County School District, any municipality located in Sumter County, any constitutional development authority established for Sumter County, any economic development authority established pursuant to Georgia law and operating wholly or partially in Americus, Sumter County, or in any other municipality within Sumter County, and any hospital authority established pursuant to Georgia law and operating wholly or partially in Americus. 
    Public-use governmental building means any building, and any and all appurtenances thereto, used or to be used solely by a governmental entity to carry out the lawful purposes of the governmental entity, but the term shall not include a building constructed and used, or to be used, by a private for-profit business or entity. 
(c)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to eliminate the requirement that construction or renovation of a public-use governmental building located in the incorporated area of the city by a governmental entity be inspected by the city building inspector and the city fire marshal during such construction or renovation, and at such other times as may be authorized or required by city ordinance; provided, however, that such inspections by the city shall not be required where the city's authority to undertake such inspections has been pre-empted by state law or regulations. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be construed to allow any such construction without the governmental entity obtaining a building permit from the city. 
(Ord. No. O-07-08-25, § 5-1.1, 8-23-2007) 
Sec. 94-29. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    Certificates of occupancy shall be issued by the building official in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  Required. A certificate of occupancy issued by the building official is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
a.  A building erected after December 17, 1959. 
b.  A building altered so as to affect the height or the side, front or rear yard. 
c.  A change in type of occupancy or use of any building or premises. 
d.  Each nonconforming use created by the passage of subsequent amendments to this chapter. 
(2)  Issuance. Upon payment of any required fees, the building official shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building as stated on the certificate of occupancy is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan submitted for the building permit. One copy of the certificates of occupancy issued shall contain a statement of the intended use of the applicable property signed by the owner or the owner's agent shall be kept on file in the office of the building official. Copies shall be furnished on request to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the building or land involved, at said person's expense. 
(3)  Denial. A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan upon which the building permit was issued. 
(Code 1962, § 27-13; Code 1986, § 23-12) 
Sec. 94-30. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of the building official to keep a record of all building permits and certificates of occupancy issued, with a notation of all special conditions involved. Such official shall file and safely keep copies of all sketches and plans submitted, and the same shall form a part of the records of such official's office and shall be available for the use of the city council, the zoning board of appeals, planning commission, and officials of the city. 
(Code 1962, § 27-14; Code 1986, § 23-13) 
Sec. 94-31. - Nonconforming uses. 
    In order to avoid individual hardship whenever reasonable and not in conflict with the general welfare of the city and, for the purposes herein outlined, the following provisions shall apply to all districts: 
(1)  When permitted. Except as herein specified, the lawful use of any building or land existing on December 17, 1959, may be continued although such use does not conform to the provisions of this chapter. 
(2)  Unsafe structure. Any structure or portion thereof declared unsafe by a proper authority may be restored to a safe condition. 
(3)  Restoration. No nonconforming building or structure, damaged to the extent of more than 75 percent of its assessed value for city tax purposes, shall be repaired or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. 
(4)  Abandonment. Any nonconforming use after discontinuance for a period of one year shall not be reestablished except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. 
(5)  Change to another nonconforming use. No nonconforming use shall be changed to another nonconforming use. 
(6)  Changes. A nonconforming use of a building or land, once changed to a conforming use, shall not be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. 
(7)  Enlargement. No nonconforming use shall be enlarged or extended in any way except in conformity with the regulations of this chapter. 
(8)  Tenancy, etc., change. There may be a change of tenancy, ownership or management of a nonconforming use or structure, provided there is no change in the nature or the character of the nonconforming use. 
(Code 1962, § 27-37; Code 1986, § 23-37) 
Sec. 94-32. - Planning commission to consider special exceptions. 
    Prior to any of the uses being permitted in subsection 94-150(4), R-2 residential district), subsection 94-155(25) (C-1 roadside business district), subsection 94-156(67) (C-2 general business district), subsection 94-158(26) (I-N institutional district), or subsection 94-159(22) (I, industrial district), a request for hearing before the planning commission must be made, and the following procedures shall be observed: 
(1)  The owner of the real property involved shall submit an application in writing to the community and economic development director of the owner's request for a special exception with a fee established by ordinance. Such application shall include the street address of the real property involved, the lot dimensions, a description of the structures on the real property, fences, the names of the adjacent owners, the present zoning designation of the property involved and of the property adjacent to the property involved, and such other information as the planning commission may require. 
(2)  The community and economic development director, upon receipt of an application for a special exception, shall, within three days from receipt of such application, notify the chairman of the planning commission and deliver a copy of such application to said chairman. 
(3)  The community and economic development director shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property in question a two-sided sign of not be less than four square feet in area, which shall contain information as to the proposed request for a special exception and the date, time, and place of the public hearing to be held by the planning commission. The planning commission shall fix a reasonable time for a public hearing on the request for a special exception and shall give at least 15 days public notice of the time and place of said hearing, to be published in the newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(4)  The planning commission at said public hearing shall consider any testimony in favor of or opposed to said request for a special exception and shall either grant or deny said request for a special exception at the conclusion of said public hearing using the following standards: 
a.  The proposed use or structure shall be compatible with development and uses existing on adjacent and nearby property. 
b.  The proposed use or structure shall not have a substantial adverse impact upon the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
c.  The proposed use or structure shall not cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools or other public facilities. 
d.  Any other relevant factors, including the conformity of the proposed development with duly adopted land use and other physical development plans or policies for the area may also be considered. 
(5)  Said special exception, if granted by the planning commission, shall be granted only for the specific use authorized by the special exception and for no other use. Such special exception for such particular use shall continue to be valid and applicable to the property affected by such special exception, so long as such particular use remains in effect, regardless of whether the owner of the property at the time the special exception was issued sells, transfers, or otherwise conveys such property to a third party. Such sale, transfer, or conveyance shall not be deemed to have terminated the special exception, so long as the use authorized in the special exception remains the same before and after such transfer. A special exception issued under this section shall not be considered a nonconforming use under section 94-31. 
(Code 1986, § 23-73; Ord. of 12-22-1986, § 2; Ord. No. O-96-11-50, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-00-10-42, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-02-07-20, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-02-07-21, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-04-06-10, 6-24-2004; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Secs. 94-33-94-52. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CHAPTER AND ZONING MAP AMENDMENTS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Zoning procedures, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

Sec. 94-53. - Authority; procedure; filing fee, etc. 
(a)  This chapter, including the zoning map, may be amended from time to time, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall first have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. A property owner shall not initiate action for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel more often than once every 12 months. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
(b)  Such person as may desire an amendment of this chapter by changing the zoning classification of property from one type of district to another shall: 
(1)  File a request in writing with the city's community development department with fee attached in the amount established by ordinance, setting forth in detail the desired amendment and describing by address or location of property to be reclassified, and the name or names of the legal owner or owners thereof. 
(2)  Such request shall have attached thereto three plats of survey prepared by a registered or certified engineer or land surveyor setting forth in detail the property described in the request, and showing further the present zoning designation, the requested zoning designation, and the zoning designation of all property abutting the subject property. 
(3)  The community development director or designee shall date stamp the request immediately upon receipt and shall direct the property owner to pay the filing fee to the finance director's office. The community development director or designee shall schedule the request for a hearing before the planning commission at the commission's next regular meeting, so long as the next regular meeting of the commission is more than one week from the date of filing. In the event that the rezoning request is filed less than one week prior to the next meeting of the planning commission, the community development director or designee shall be authorized, if said director or designee is unable to complete the necessary preliminary work on the rezoning request prior to the next commission meeting, to schedule the hearing for the next commission meeting after such director or designee anticipates having the preliminary work completed on the rezoning request. 
(4)  The recommendation of the planning commission shall be noted in the minutes of the commission meeting, and a copy of the minutes, along with a copy of the plat of survey filed with the rezoning request, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(5)  The community development director or designee shall notify in writing the city council of the action of the planning commission. Such director or designee shall also have the proper notices posted in connection with any public hearing to be held by the city council regarding the rezoning request. 
(Code 1962, § 27-5; Code 1986, § 23-4; Ord. No. O-96-11-50, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-04-12-33, 12-16-2004) 
Sec. 94-54. - Public hearing and procedures therefor. 
(a)  Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the city council shall hold a public hearing thereon. At least 15, but not more than 45 days prior to the date of the hearing, the city council shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the local government a notice of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing. If the hearing concerns a proposed amendment to the official zoning map, then the notice shall also state, the location of the property, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning classification. 
(b)  Whenever a proposed amendment to this chapter involves changing the zoning classification of property from one type of district to another, the building official shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on said property one or more signs, each of which shall be a two-sided sign which shall not be less than four square feet in area, and each of which shall contain information regarding the time, place, and purpose of the hearing, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property. Such signs shall be posted on the property for a period of not less than 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(c)  At least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing, the city clerk shall prepare an agenda of the proposed amendments to be considered at public hearings. Copies of the agenda and the planning commission report on each proposed amendment shall be available for public view in the city clerk's office during regular office hours for a period of at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(d)  The mayor shall conduct the public hearing and shall open the hearing at the time and place specified in the hearing notice. The mayor shall announce the rules of the hearing before proceeding with a hearing upon each proposed amendment. For each proposed amendment, the mayor shall call upon the city manager, or his designee, to present the report of the planning commission. The mayor shall then call for a show of hands of those present wishing to speak in support of the proposed amendment. The mayor shall recognize each such person in turn and ask him or her to rise, state his name and address, and present his statement. The mayor shall then call for a show of hands of those present wishing to speak in opposition to the proposed amendment. The mayor shall recognize each such person in turn and ask him to rise, state his name and address, and present his statement. Those persons wishing to speak in favor of the proposed zoning amendment and those persons wishing to speak in opposition to the proposed zoning amendment shall be allowed at least ten minutes to present such data, evidence and opinion as such respective side deems appropriate; provided, however, that if either or both sides do not desire to use the full minimum time period, then such minimum time period may be waived. The mayor shall be further authorized to grant each side such additional amount of time beyond the minimum time period set out herein, but in all events, both sides shall be given the same amount of time within which to present their side at the hearing. After all persons have been given an opportunity to speak for or against the proposed amendment, the city council shall have the right to discuss the proposed amendment and, upon completion thereof, the hearing shall be closed. Unless the city council shall give unanimous consent, of those present and voting, to render its decision at the conclusion of the public hearing, the proposed amendment shall be tabled for final consideration at the next succeeding meeting of the city council. 
(e)  The clerk shall print copies of this section of this chapter and maintain such copies at his office for distribution to the public during regular business hours. 
(Code 1986, § 23-5; Ord. No. O-87-11-24, 11-23-1987; Ord. No. O-98-03-11, 3-19-1998; Ord. No. O-02-07-21, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-2015-15, 7-23-2015) 
Sec. 94-55. - Standards used in making zoning decisions. 
(a)  Whenever the planning commission and the city council consider an amendment to this chapter which involves changing the zoning classification of property from one type of district to another, they shall balance the interest of the community in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right of property owners in the use of their property. In making such zoning recommendations and decisions, the planning commission and the city council shall use the following standards, where relevant: 
(1)  Whether the proposed amendment would permit a use that is suitable, in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
(2)  Whether the proposed amendment would likely have an adverse effect upon the existing use, usability or economic value of adjacent or nearby property; 
(3)  Whether the property to be affected by the proposed amendment has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
(4)  Whether the proposed amendment would likely result in a use which would or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities or schools, or would otherwise have an adverse impact upon public health, safety, morality or general welfare; 
(5)  In the event that the city has adopted a land use plan, whether the proposed amendment is in conformity with the policy and intent of the land use plan; 
(6)  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property that gives supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the proposed amendment; 
(7)  Whether the subject property itself is suitable for the proposed use to which it is intended to be put after being rezoned; 
(8)  The length of time that the subject property has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
(9)  Whether the property owner presently intends to develop the property in accord with the proposed amended zoning classification within a reasonable time after approval of the proposed amendment. 
(b)  The clerk shall print copies of this section of this chapter and maintain such copies at his office for distribution to the public during regular business hours. 
(Code 1986, § 23-6; Ord. No. O-87-11-24, 11-23-1987) 
Sec. 94-56. - Withdrawal of amendment petition. 
    Any petition for an amendment to this chapter may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request upon written notice to the community and economic development director. 
(Code 1962, § 27-8; Code 1986, § 23-7) 
Secs. 94-57-94-85. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - ZONING BOARD OF APPEALS; APPEALS AND VARIANCES 

Sec. 94-86. - Authority; membership; terms; removal; rules. 
    The zoning board of appeals is hereby established. Said board shall consist of five members appointed by the city council for overlapping terms of three years. The initial appointment shall be as follows: two members for one year, two members for two years, and one member for three years; each successive appointment shall be for three years. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. Members shall be removable for cause by the appointing authority upon written charges and after a public hearing. No member shall hold any other public office or position. The board shall adopt rules in accordance with the provisions of this chapter for the conduct of its affairs. 
(Code 1962, § 27-54; Code 1986, § 23-60) 
Sec. 94-87. - Procedure; officers; meetings; records. 
(a)  The board shall elect one of its members, other than the member of the planning commission, as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until such person is reelected or a successor is elected. The board shall appoint a secretary who may be a member of the planning commission. 
(b)  Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in the chairman's absence, the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. All meetings of the board shall be open to the public. 
(c)  The board shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examination and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
(Code 1962, § 27-55; Code 1986, § 23-61) 
Sec. 94-88. - Powers and duties. 
    The board shall have the following powers: 
(1)  Administrative review. To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error on any order, requirement, decision or determination of the building official in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(2)  Special exception . To hear and decide applications for special exceptions as specified in this chapter and for decision on any special questions upon which the board is authorized by this chapter to pass. When acting upon such application for special exception, the board shall give consideration to the following factors, where applicable: 
a.  The proposed design and location of the particular development. 
b.  The possible traffic-generating characteristics of the proposed development. 
c.  The effects the proposed development will have on the present or intended character of the area in which it proposes to locate. 
d.  The availability of public utilities, facilities and services. 
After such considerations, the board shall take such actions or establish such reasonable conditions, of approval, such as planted screens, as will accomplish the intents and purposes of this chapter. 
(3)  Variances. To authorize upon appeal in specific individual cases such variances from terms of this chapter as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this chapter will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of this chapter shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of practical difficulty or unnecessary hardship only upon a finding by the board that all of the following conditions exist: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of the chapter to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
d.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this chapter; 
e.  Denying the variance will deprive the owner of rights commonly enjoyed by other landowners; 
f.  Granting the variance will not bestow on the owner rights not generally enjoyed by other similar property owners in that district; 
g.  Granting this variance will be in harmony with the overall intent of this chapter, and will not be detrimental to the public interests; 
h.  The special circumstances surrounding the request for a variance are not the result of acts by the applicant; 
i.  The existence of nonconforming uses in this district or of similar nonconforming uses in other districts will not be considered as a basis on which to grant other variances; 
j.  The variance requested is the minimum variance which will permit reasonable use of the land; and 
k.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land, buildings or structures that is not permitted by right or special exception in the district involved. 
(4)  Use variance prohibited. No variance may be taken for granted for a use of land or premises. 
(Code 1962, § 27-56; Code 1986, § 23-62) 
Sec. 94-89. - Request for variance procedures. 
    Requests for a variance shall be filed in writing with the community and economic development director. Within ten days after receiving a request for a variance, the community and economic development director shall: 
(1)  Send the request, with any comments such as the community and economic development director may deem necessary added thereto, to the secretary of the board; 
(2)  Cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property one or more signs, each of which shall be a two-sided sign which shall not be less than four square feet in area, and each of which shall contain information to the proposed change and the date and time of the public hearing before the board. 
(Code 1962, § 27-57; Code 1986, § 23-63; Ord. No. O-02-07-21, 7-18-2002) 
Sec. 94-90. - Action on appeals. 
    In exercising the powers specified in section 94-88, the board may, in conformity with the provisions of this chapter, reverse or affirm, wholly or in part, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions, or determination of the community and economic development director, and to that end shall have all the powers of the community and economic development director and may issue or direct the issuance of a permit. 
(Code 1962, § 27-58; Code 1986, § 23-64) 
Sec. 94-91. - Appeals process. 
(a)  Appeals to the board may be taken by any person aggrieved, or by any officer, department, board or bureau of the city, affected by any decision of the community and economic development director or other city official based on this chapter. 
(b)  Such appeals shall be taken within a reasonable time, as provided by the rules of the board, by filing with the community and economic development director and any other city official involved, and with the board, a written notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereto. All papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken shall forthwith be transmitted to the board. 
(c)  When an appeal is for a variance or for a grant of special exception, a payment to the city of an amount sufficient to cover any required fees to defray costs of processing and erection of signs for variance must accompany the notice of appeal filed with the community and economic development director. 
(Code 1962, § 27-59; Code 1986, § 23-65) 
Sec. 94-92. - Public hearings on appeals. 
    The board shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of appeals or other matters referred to it, and give at least 15 days' public notice thereof, as well as due notice to the parties in interest, and decide the same within a reasonable time. Upon a hearing, any party may appear in person, or by agent, or by attorney. 
(Code 1962, § 27-60; Code 1986, § 23-66) 
Sec. 94-93. - Stay of proceedings. 
    An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the community and economic development director certifies to the board of appeals after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with such community and economic development director that, by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in such community and economic development director's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by the board or by a court of record on notice to the official from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
(Code 1962, § 27-61; Code 1986, § 23-67) 
Secs. 94-94-94-114. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ZONING MAP 

Sec. 94-115. - Zoning map-Adopted. 
    The boundaries of each district are hereby established as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map, City of Americus, Georgia". The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the city clerk under the following words: "This is to certify that this is the official zoning map referred to in section 42 of the zoning ordinance, City of Americus, Georgia", together with the date of December 17, 1959. Said map and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this chapter, and will hereinafter be referred to as the "zoning map". 
(Code 1962, § 27-3; Code 1986, § 23-2) 
Sec. 94-116. - Same-Amendments. 
    If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the zoning map, such change shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the city council, together with an entry on the zoning map as follows: "on (date), by official action of the city council, the following changes were made in the Official Zoning Map: followed by a brief description of nature of change", which entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk. No amendment to this chapter that involves subject matter portrayed on the zoning map shall become effective until after such change and entry have been made on said map. 
(Code 1962, § 27-4; Code 1986, § 23-3) 
Sec. 94-117. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
    Where uncertainty exists with request to the boundaries of any of the districts as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Unless otherwise indicated, the district boundaries are indicated as approximately following land lot lines, centerlines of streets, highways, alleys or railroads, centerlines or 500 feet from shorelines, whichever is less, of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or civil boundaries shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, or the centerlines of streams, reservoirs, or other bodies of water, or said lines extended, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on said zoning map. 
(3)  Where a district boundary line, as appearing on the zoning map divides a lot in single ownership on December 17, 1959, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extensions shall not include any part of such a lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line. 
(Code 1962, § 27-9; Code 1986, § 23-8) 
Secs. 94-118-94-147. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ZONING DISTRICT REGULATIONS 

Sec. 94-148. - Districts enumerated. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the city is hereby divided into 13 districts designated as follows: 
R-1 Residential 
R-2 Residential 
R-3 Residential 
R-3A Residential 
R-4 MH residential 
N-S Neighborhood shopping 
C-1 Roadside business 
C-2 General business 
C-3 Downtown general business 
I-N Institutional 
I Industrial 
AG Agricultural 
PMUD Planned mixed-use 
(Code 1962, § 27-22; Code 1986, § 23-20; Ord. No. O-89-10-28, 10-23-1989; Ord. No. O-04-08-14, 8-19-2004; Ord. No. O-06-12-46, 12-21-2006) 
Sec. 94-149. - R-1 residential district. 
    Within an R-1 residential district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Dwelling, single-family, detached, but not including manufactured homes, or mobile homes. 
(2)  Public, private and parochial schools, not including nursery schools. 
(3)  Private clubs and golf courses of not less than 50 acres. 
(4)  Public parks and public recreational facilities. 
(5)  Noncommercial greenhouses, nurseries and truck gardens. 
(6)  Churches and other places of worship provided they are located on a major or collector street as designated on the official major street map of the city and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(7)  Customary home occupations. 
(8)  Reserved. 
(9)  Accessory buildings, provided such shall be permitted only in a rear yard and shall not be less than five feet from any property line, and provided further that no mobile home, whether or not placed upon a permanent foundation, may be used as an accessory building. Notwithstanding the foregoing, a freestanding metal or wooden structure, whether constructed at the site or prefabricated, which is intended for use primarily as a carport, shall be considered an accessory building and may be located in either a side yard or a rear yard. Such carport structure shall not extend beyond the front of the residential structure located upon the premises. Any such structure to be constructed or located at a location upon residential property other than the location authorized in this subsection (9) shall be prohibited unless a proper variance therefor has been obtained from the zoning board of appeals. A building permit shall be obtained and a building permit and inspection fee shall be paid prior to the commencement of construction or location of an accessory building in accord with the provisions of section 14-30. 
(10)  Noncommercial clubs, lodges, and social and recreational centers provided they are located not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(11)  Public utilities such as electrical substations, sewage treatment plants or pumping stations, etc., provided same are required for service of the immediate area. Said utilities shall be fenced with a chainlink-type woven wire fence and suitably landscaped. No offices shall be permitted and no equipment shall be stored on the site. 
(12)  Beautyshops and barbershops, where such beauty shop or barbershop meet the customary home occupation requirements established in section 94-1; provided, however, that any such beauty shop or barbershop that has employed only one nonfamily member not residing on the premises as of April 16, 1974, shall be allowed to continue such nonfamily member not residing on the premises. 
(13)  Bed and breakfast inns, provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32, and further provided that the bed and breakfast inn is established, maintained and operated in accord with the provisions of chapter 14 including, but not limited to, the provisions which relate specifically to the establishment, maintenance and operation of bed and breakfast inns contained in article V, therein. 
(14)  Child family day care center. 
(15)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens and child group day care centers, provided such use is in a private residence, and that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32. 
(16)  Family personal care home. 
(17)  Group personal care home, provided such use is located in a private residence, and that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32. 
(18)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(19)  Industrialized home. 
(20)  Adult family day care center. 
(Code 1962, § 27-23; Code 1986, § 23-21; Ord. No. O-87-10-20, 10-19-1987; Ord. No. O-92-08-23, 8-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-07-19, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-01-07, 2-20-2003; Ord. No. O-03-05-09, 5-22-2003; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005) 
Sec. 94-150. - R-2 residential district. 
    Within an R-2 residential district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in an R-1 residential district. 
(2)  Boardinghouses and roominghouses. 
(3)  Residential duplexes. 
(4)  The following uses may be permitted as special exceptions by the city planning commission in accordance with the provisions of section 94-32, entitling the planning commission to consider special exceptions: 
a.  Cemeteries. 
b.  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers, provided that such uses are located in a private residence. 
c.  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. 
d.  Professional offices, so long as the architectural design of the building occupied is, in keeping with the general architectural design and general appearance of the neighborhood. As a condition precedent to any building permit being issued under this section, or before any building under this section is used as a professional office, the city planning commission shall approve any plans, specifications, or the building itself to see that the architectural design or general appearance of the building is in keeping with the architectural design and general appearance of the neighborhood. The term "professional offices" shall be interpreted as meaning all persons engaging in the professions of attorneys, physicians, surgeons, chiropractors, osteopaths, naturopaths, psychotherapists, masseurs, electrotherapists, dentists, occulists, optometrists, chiropodists, pathologists, urologists, radiologists, certified public accountants, public accountants, architects, surveyors, engineers, public relations and consulting services, without the presence of retail sales, noisy commercial machinery or equipment and high volume traffic, and other categories which would normally be considered businesses of a professional nature. 
e.  Fraternity and sorority houses, so long as adequate space for off-street parking is provided for a minimum of 20 motor vehicles on the property to be used as a fraternity or sorority house. As a condition precedent to any building permit being issued under this subsection (e) or before any building under this subsection is used as a fraternity or sorority house, the city planning commission shall approve any plans or inspect the property site itself to be certain there is adequate space provided for the off-street parking of a minimum of 20 motor vehicles. 
f.  Zero-lot-line dwellings. 
g.  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(Code 1962, § 27-24; Code 1986, § 23-22; Ord. of 12-22-1986, § 1; Ord. No. O-91-04-12, 4-24-1991; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-05-19, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-03-09-22, 9-18-2003; Ord. No. O-04-06-10, 6-24-2004) 
Sec. 94-151. - R-3 residential district. 
(a)  The R-3 residential district is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to meet the needs and demands for the development of higher density residential areas, and to protect the future development of land in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(b)  Within an R-3 residential district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in an R-2 residential district. 
(2)  Duplexes and triplexes. 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings, which include townhouses, condominiums, garden apartments, or any multifamily arrangements where more than three units are together on one piece of property. 
(4)  Accessory uses customary to dwellings. 
(5)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements. The minimum area per dwelling unit, less applicable setback shall not be less than indicated by dwelling type in the following table: 
Multiple-Family Dwelling Units Lot Area Requirements 
Unit type One-story
(square feet Two-story
(square feet) Efficiency units 2,200 1,491 1 bedroom 2,200 1,797 2 bedroom 2,880 2,475 3 bedroom 3,725 3,195 4 or more bedrooms 4,575 3,993  
(6)  Zero-lot-line dwellings, provided the following physical requirements are met: 
a.  Minimum lot area: one-eigth acre, 5,445 square feet; 
b.  Minimum floor area per dwelling unit: 700 square feet; 
c.  Minimum road frontage: 30 feet; 
d.  Minimum lot width: 40 feet as measured at the building line; 
e.  Minimum front yard: 20 feet; 
f.  Minimum rear yard: zero feet; 
g.  Minimum side yard: zero feet on one side and ten feet on the other side; 
h.  Maximum lot coverage by principal dwelling unit: 50 percent. 
(7)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(8)  Manufactured homes, provided manufactured housing in this district meet the R-2 residential requirements in section 94-161. 
(Code 1962, § 27-24.1; Code 1986, § 23-23; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-05-19, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-11-34, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 94-152. - R-3A residential district. 
(a)  The R-3A district is established to protect and promote a suitable environment for family life, to meet the needs and demands for the development of medium density residential areas, and to protect the future development of land in accordance with the comprehensive plan of the city. 
(b)  Within an R-3A residential district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in an R-2 residential district. 
(2)  Duplexes and triplexes. 
(3)  Multifamily dwellings, which include townhouses, condominiums, garden apartments, or any multifamily arrangements where more than three units are together on one piece of property. 
(4)  Accessory uses customary to dwellings. 
(5)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit requirements. The minimum area per dwelling unit less, applicable setback shall not be less than indicated by dwelling type in the following table: 
Multiple-Family Dwelling Units Lot Area Requirements 
Unit type One-story
(square feet) Two-story
(square feet) Efficiency units 4,350 3,112 1 bedroom 4,840 3,625 2 bedroom 5,440 4,840 3 bedroom 7,250 6,225 4 or more bedrooms 8,700 7,265  
(6)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(7)  Manufactured homes, provided manufactured housing in this district meet the R-2 residential requirements in section 94-161. 
(Code 1986, § 23-23.5; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002; Ord. No. O-03-11-34, 11-20-2003) 
Sec. 94-153. - R-4 MH manufactured home residential district. 
(a)  No mobile homes as defined in section 94-1 shall be allowed within the city. Those that exist at the time of the adoption of the amendment from which this section is derived may remain in their present locations until such time as they are destroyed or moved from the city. 
(b)  The purpose of this zone is to provide a zone where lots may be rented as in a manufactured home park or purchased by individuals in a subdivision for the purpose of permanently locating a manufactured home or constructing a single-family residence. All manufactured home parks or subdivisions developed in this district shall be developed according to the requirements of chapter 86, subdivisions. 
(c)  Within an R-4 MH residential district, the following regulations and uses are permitted: 
(1)  Minimum development or subdivision size shall be five acres. 
(2)  Uses permitted: 
a.  Dwelling, single-family, detached. 
b.  Manufactured home. 
c.  Industrialized home. 
d.  Accessory buildings. 
e.  Trailer camps, as defined in section 50-21, providing that the following criteria shall apply: 
1.  The trailer camp shall be established and operated in connection with a nonprofit business or entity and located in an R-4 MH residential district, which is not otherwise engaged in the operation of a trailer camp. 
2.  The trailer camp shall be established and operated as incidental and accessory to such business or entity in its primary activities and be in furtherance of such activity. 
3.  The units or lots of such trailer camps shall be a minimum of 1,000 square feet. 
4.  Application for the establishment of such trailer camp shall be made in accord with the provisions of chapter 50, and all provisions of such chapter, except as related to lot size, shall be applicable to such trailer camp. 
f.  Child family day care center. 
g.  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, further, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(3)  Standards for manufactured home parks. 
a.  At least ten percent of the site shall be open space. The open space shall not consist entirely of undevelopable lands and should be integrated into site design, not relegated to one corner of the park. 
b.  A density bonus or smaller lots may be granted by the planning commission where more recreational improvements will be provided. 
c.  In manufactured home parks there shall be not less than 20 feet of open, unoccupied space between each manufactured home. Front setbacks for private access streets within a park, which are not considered major, collector, or other shall be 25 feet. 
(Code 1962, § 27-24.2; Code 1986, § 23-24; Ord. No. O-90-07-18A, 7-23-1990; Ord. No. O-99-05-19, 5-20-1999; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002) 
Sec. 94-154. - N-S neighborhood shopping district. 
(a)  Intent and purpose. The N-S neighborhood shopping district, is intended to be composed of only those establishments that supply convenience goods or personal services, satisfying the daily needs of the residents of the abutting neighborhoods. These districts are small and are within convenient walking distance of most of the areas they will serve. All businesses, servicing, and/or storage within this district must not be objectionable by reason of odor, dust, bright lights, smoke, noise, vibration or congestion. All businesses, servicing, and/or processing shall be conducted within a completely enclosed building except where the nature of the activity makes it impossible, e.g., off-street loading, childcare playground, vehicle fuel pumps. Any commercial structure within this district shall not exceed 3,000 square feet of gross floor area. 
(b)  Permitted uses. Within an N-S neighborhood shopping district, the following uses are permitted: 
(1)  Gasoline service stations, where the primary function is the retail sale of vehicle fuel, oil, grease, tires, batteries and accessories, and where services are limited to installation of items sold, washing, polishing, and greasing, with no fulltime mechanic service. Provided, however, that all storage tanks, dispensing devices, and canopies which shield dispensing device areas from the weather shall be located not less than 20 feet from any right-of-way or property line. All buildings shall be located not less than 15 feet from all storage tanks and dispensing devices. 
(2)  Churches and other places of worship provided they are located on a major or collector street as designated in section 94-214, classification of streets, and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(3)  Banks, including drive-through banks. 
(4)  Laundry and dry cleaning pickup stations, and self-service laundries. 
(5)  Florists and gift shops. 
(6)  Barber and beauty shops. 
(7)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers and child day care centers. 
(8)  Nonresidential accessory building. 
(9)  Restaurants where food and beverages are served and consumed only within the enclosed structure. Not permitted are outdoor dining areas, drive-ins, drive-thrus, pickup windows or other exterior service facilities. 
(10)  Convenience stores with or without gasoline or diesel fuel. 
(11)  Public utilities, such as phone or electrical substations, water or sewage pumping stations, etc., provided the same are required for service of the immediate area. Said utilities shall be fenced with a chainlink-type woven wire fence and landscaped according to section 94-194(a)(2) of the buffer requirements. No offices shall be permitted and no equipment shall be stored on the site. 
(12)  Video sales and rentals. 
(13)  The following use may be permitted as special exception, by the city planning commission in accordance with the provisions of section 94-32, entitled planning commission to consider special exceptions: telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI. Provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(Code 1962, § 27-25; Code 1986, § 23-25; Ord. No. O-89-04-09, 4-24-1989; Ord. No. O-92-02-07, 2-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-95-03-09, 3-24-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-97-04-11, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-03-10, 3-23-2000) 
Sec. 94-155. - C-1 roadside business district. 
    Within a C-1 roadside business district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Hotels, motels, tourist courts. 
(2)  Restaurants and eating establishments. 
(3)  Bus stations. 
(4)  Private clubs and accessory facilities and activities. 
(5)  Nonresidential accessory building. 
(6)  Commercial recreational facilities. 
(7)  Drive-in theaters, provided that there shall be not less than 200 feet of sight distance at any exit onto a major or connector street and provided that there shall be off-street storage space to accommodate waiting automobiles at the ratio of one space for each five theater accommodations. 
(8)  Any other retail sales or retail service establishments or use which, by virtue of the type, character or location of the business conducted, rely upon automobiles, trucks or other such motor vehicles for the transportation of its customers to and from its own particular business location. 
(9)  Gasoline service stations, which shall be defined as an establishment where gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is sold at retail, and dispensed at full service or self-service dispensing devices which may include facilities for minor repairs and services. Provided, however, that all storage tanks, dispensing devices, and canopies which shield dispensing device areas from the weather shall be located not less than 20 feet from any right-of-way or property line. All buildings shall be located not less than 15 feet from all storage tanks and dispensing devices. All buildings or other structures located on said lot shall be located in accord with the minimum setback provisions of section 94-161. In the event that the gasoline service station is located on a corner lot at the intersection of two or more streets, the means of ingress and egress thereto shall not be less than 20 feet from the intersection of street lines and such ingress and egress shall be designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of traffic. 
(10)  Shopping centers/strip shopping centers. 
(11)  Offices and banks. 
(12)  Wholesaling and warehousing; provided, however, that neither toxic materials nor flammable liquids nor explosives shall be permitted; and further provided that the building utilized for such warehousing shall be no larger than 8,000 square feet; and further provided that the operation of such building for such warehousing purpose shall not cause any injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions. 
(13)  Adult entertainment establishments. 
(14)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers and child day care centers. 
(15)  Self-service storage facilities, provided, that the owner complies with the buffer requirements in section 94-194 prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such a facility. 
(16)  Museums and historic buildings which are open to the public or where the owner thereof conducts guided tours for the public upon request; provided, however, that upon approval by the city council, a portion of such museum or historic building may be used for residential purposes, so long as the residential area of such museum or historic building meets all applicable building and other such codes for residential buildings in the city. 
(17)  Motor vehicle repair, provided, however, that no outside storage of motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts associated with such business shall be permitted unless the area where such storage is located is properly screened in accord with the requirements of subsection 14-136(c)(1). 
(18)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(19)  Automotive facilities which include new and used sale and repair and servicing, provided that: 
a.  The primary purpose of all such facilities and activities shall be to provide retail sales and services to the general public; 
b.  All general automotive repair, paint and body shop operations, and any open lot display of used automotive vehicles for sale shall be permitted only as accessory repair, servicing or sales functions of a new car dealer; 
c.  Servicing, except customary services in conjunction with the dispensing of gas and oil, is undertaken entirely within the enclosed structures; 
d.  All outside automobile storage and parking areas are properly screened in accordance with the requirements of subsections 14-136(c)(1) or (2). 
(20)  Indoor recreational facilities. 
(21)  Outdoor recreational facilities. 
(22)  Churches, faith-based organizations, and other places of worship. 
(23)  Adult group day care center. 
(24)  An alternative educational services facility for students in grades 6-12 of the Sumter County School District subject to the following provisions: 
a.  The alternative educational services shall be provided either by the Sumter County School District or by a commercial third party education services business or entity in accord with a written contract with the Sumter County School District; 
b.  The actual building or building space to be used for the provision of such services shall contain at least 4,500 square feet; 
c.  Such educational services shall be provided in a building or building space which is a single separate and distinct unit of a shopping center or strip shopping center that has at least 50 parking spaces on the site of the building where the educational services are to be provided which are available to students and faculty of the educational services building; and 
d.  The educational services facility shall only be operated during daylight hours. 
(25)  Aquaculture, subject to special exception authorization pursuant to section 94-32 of the City Code. 
(26)  Ambulatory health care professionals, including allied health care professionals that are licensed by the State of Georgia; provided that the building where such use is located shall not exceed 7,500 square feet of floor space. 
(Code 1962, § 27-26; Code 1986, § 23-26; Ord. No. O-88-05-19, 5-23-1988; Ord. No. O-88-05-21, 5-23-1988; Ord. No. O-88-08-28, 8-22-1988; Ord. No. O-92-02-07, 2-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-23, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-95-02-08, 2-23-1995; Ord. No. O-95-03-09, 3-24-1995; Ord. No. O-95-09-32, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-47, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-97-04-11, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-01-01, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-03-12, 3-23-2000; Ord. No. O-00-04-17, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-12-49, 12-21-2000; Ord. No. O-01-06-21, 6-21-2001; Ord. No. O-02-02-06, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. O-05-05-13, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-05-12-46, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. O-11-05-04, 5-19-2011; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012; Ord. No. O-2013-19, 7-18-2013) 
Sec. 94-156. - C-2 general business district. 
    Within a C-2 general business district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Baking establishment. 
(2)  Bus station. 
(3)  Dance studios/schools. 
(4)  Physical fitness facilities. 
(5)  Dry cleaners/tailors. 
(6)  Newspaper offices, printing establishments. 
(7)  Gasoline service stations, which shall be defined as an establishment where gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is sold at retail, and dispensed at full service or self-service dispensing devices which may include facilities for minor repairs and services. Provided, however, that all storage tanks, dispensing devices, and canopies which shield dispensing device areas from the weather shall be located not less than 20 feet from any right-of-way or property line. All buildings shall be located not less than 15 feet from all storage tanks and dispensing devices. All buildings or other structures located on said lot shall be located in accord with the minimum setback provisions of section 94-161. In the event that the gasoline service station is located on a corner lot at the intersection of two or more streets, the means of ingress and egress thereto shall be not less than 20 feet from the intersection of street lines and such ingress and egress shall be designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of traffic. 
(8)  Parking lots and parking garages. 
(9)  Public building or use. 
(10)  Nonresidential accessory building. 
(11)  Soft drink bottling and distribution plants. 
(12)  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. 
(13)  Wholesale use not requiring warehousing. 
(14)  Veterinary hospitals; provided, however, that no outside boarding of dogs, cats, or any other domestic animal shall be permitted. 
(15)  Shopping centers/strip shopping centers. 
(16)  Upper floor residential use is permitted in multistory buildings. 
(17)  Offices and banks. 
(18)  Restaurants and eating establishments to include: New York style deli, candy shop, sandwich shop, coffeeshop, regional and ethnic dining and fine dining. 
(19)  Adult entertainment establishment. 
(20)  Hardware (small convenience). 
(21)  Specialty meat/fish market. 
(22)  Grocery store. 
(23)  Men's/boys', women, children, family apparel. 
(24)  Women's accessories/specialties. 
(25)  Shoes, dress and casual. 
(26)  Furniture store. 
(27)  Floor covering. 
(28)  Drapery/upholstery. 
(29)  Radio/TV/electronics. 
(30)  Computers/software. 
(31)  Records/tapes/CDs. 
(32)  Musical instruments. 
(33)  Drugstore. 
(34)  Liquor/wine store. 
(35)  Antiques. 
(36)  Sporting goods/bicycles. 
(37)  Books. 
(38)  Stationery. 
(39)  Jewelry. 
(40)  Hobby/toy/games. 
(41)  Camera/supply. 
(42)  Gift/novelty. 
(43)  Sewing/piece goods. 
(44)  Florists. 
(45)  Newsstand. 
(46)  Optical. 
(47)  Art galleries/framing. 
(48)  Office supplies. 
(49)  Beauty shops/barbershops. 
(50)  Shoe repair/shoeshine. 
(51)  Video rental. 
(52)  Motor vehicle repair; provided, however, that no outside storage of motor vehicles or motor vehicle parts associated with such business shall be permitted unless the area where such storage is located is properly screened in accord with the requirements of subsection 14-136(c)(1). 
(53)  Hotels, motels, tourist courts. 
(54)  Personal service establishments, to include tanning salons and massage therapy offices. 
(55)  Photography studios. 
(56)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers and child day care centers. 
(57)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32, provided, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(58)  Automotive facilities which include new and used sale and repair and servicing, provided that: 
a.  The primary purpose of all such facilities and activities shall be to provide retail sales and services to the general public; 
b.  All general automotive repair, paint and body shop operations, and any open lot display of used automotive vehicles for sale shall be submitted only as accessory repair, servicing or sales functions of a new car dealer; 
c.  Servicing, except customary services in conjunction with the dispensing of gas and oil, is undertaken entirely within the enclosed structures; 
d.  All outside automobile storage and parking areas are properly screened in accordance with the requirements of subsections 14-136(c)(1) or (2). 
(59)  Carwash. 
(60)  Pawnshop. 
(61)  Pest control, provided, that all parking of service vehicles be done in off-street parking in the rear of the building or in a properly screened area in accord with the requirements of subsection 14-136(c)(1). 
(62)  Indoor recreational facilities. 
(63)  Outdoor recreational facilities. 
(64)  Churches, faith-based organizations, and other places of worship. 
(65)  Convenience store with or without gasoline or diesel fuel sales. 
(66)  Adult group day care center. 
(67)  Aquaculture, subject to special exception authorization pursuant to section 94-32 of the City Code. 
(Code 1962, § 27-27(p); Code 1986, § 23-27; Ord. of 6-30-1986; Ord. No. O-88-05-20, 5-23-1988; Ord. No. O-89-04-09, 4-24-1989; Ord. No. O-92-02-07, 2-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-23, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-95-02-08, 2-23-1995; Ord. No. O-95-09-32, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-47, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-97-04-11, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-01-01, 1-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-04-17, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-00-12-49, 12-21-2000; Ord. No. O-01-06-21, 6-21-2001; Ord. No. O-02-02-06, 2-21-2002; Ord. No. O-04-08-14, 8-19-2004; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. O-05-05-13, 5-19-2005; Ord. No. O-05-12-46, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-157. - C-3 downtown general business district. 
    Within a C-3 downtown general business district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Baking establishments. 
(2)  Tailor shop and dress making. 
(3)  Printing/publishing. 
(4)  Hotels. 
(5)  Parking lots and parking garages. 
(6)  Public building or use. 
(7)  Wholesale use not requiring warehousing. 
(8)  Veterinary hospitals; provided, however, that no outside boarding of dogs, cats, or any other domestic animal shall be permitted. 
(9)  Upper floor residential use is permitted in multistory buildings. 
(10)  Offices and banks. 
(11)  Restaurants and eating establishments to include: New York style deli, candy shop, sandwich shop, coffeeshop, regional and ethnic dining and fine dining. 
(12)  Nonresidential accessory building. 
(13)  Hardware (small convenience). 
(14)  Specialty meat/fish market. 
(15)  Grocery store. 
(16)  Mens'/boys', women, children, family apparel. 
(17)  Women's accessories/specialties. 
(18)  Shoes (dress and casual). 
(19)  Furniture and furnishing store. 
(20)  Floor covering. 
(21)  Drapery/upholstery. 
(22)  Radio/TV/electronics. 
(23)  Computers/software. 
(24)  Records/tapes/CDs. 
(25)  Musical instruments. 
(26)  Drugstore. 
(27)  Beer/wine store. 
(28)  Antiques. 
(29)  Sporting goods/bicycle. 
(30)  Books. 
(31)  Stationery. 
(32)  Jewelry. 
(33)  Hobby/toy/games. 
(34)  Camera/supply. 
(35)  Gift/novelty. 
(36)  Sewing/piece goods. 
(37)  Florists. 
(38)  Newsstand. 
(39)  Optical. 
(40)  Art galleries/framing. 
(41)  Office supplies. 
(42)  Beauty shops and services, barber, hairdresser, and/or stylist shops, beauty supply retail, beauty/health spas, manicure establishments. 
(43)  Shoe repair/shoeshine. 
(44)  Video rental. 
(45)  Dance studios/schools. 
(46)  Physical fitness facilities. 
(47)  Tanning center. 
(48)  Photography studios. 
(49)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32; provided, however, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(50)  Indoor recreational facilities. 
(51)  Convenience store with or without gasoline or diesel fuel sales. 
(52)  Administrative or research facilities. 
(53)  Business or trade school. 
(54)  College or university. 
(55)  Parks and open areas. 
(56)  Theaters. 
(57)  Sidewalk cafes. 
(58)  Optometry offices. 
(Code 1986, § 23-27.5; Ord. No. O-89-10-28, 10-23-1989; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-95-02-08, 2-23-1995; Ord. No. O-95-12-47, 12-21-1995; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-00-12-49, 12-21-2000; Ord. No. O-04-08-14, 8-19-2004; Ord. No. O-2013-6, 1-17-2013) 
Sec. 94-158. - I-N institutional district. 
    Within an I-N institutional district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Hospitals. 
(2)  Nursing or convalescent homes. 
(3)  Schools, including colleges and universities. 
(4)  Nursery schools, playschools, kindergartens, child group day care centers and child day care centers. 
(5)  Sorority or fraternity houses, provided they are located not less than 50 feet from any property line which abuts a residential district. 
(6)  Professional offices. 
(7)  Undertaking establishments and funeral homes. 
(8)  Churches and other places of worship provided they are located on a major or collector street as designated on the official major street map of the city and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(9)  Florist shops. 
(10)  Drugstores. 
(11)  Offices or clinics for medical, dental or chiropractic practice. 
(12)  Clinical laboratories. 
(13)  Restaurants and eating establishments. 
(14)  Motels. 
(15)  Antique shops. 
(16)  Public buildings and use. 
(17)  Fraternal organizations. 
(18)  Any other activity that is customarily considered as being accessory to a hospital, school, college or university. 
(19)  Residences; provided, however, that no residence shall be closer to any other institutional use than 150 feet on the same side of the street within the same block. 
(20)  Financial institutions exclusive of small loan companies. 
(21)  Nonresidential accessory buildings. 
(22)  Group personal care home. 
(23)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI, and provided that such use is approved pursuant to the special exception provisions contained in section 94-32, provided, that if there is any conflict between the provisions or requirements of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers and section 94-32, then the provisions of the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers shall control. 
(24)  Emergency shelters. 
(25)  Adult group day care center. 
(26)  Aquaculture, subject to special exception authorization pursuant to section 94-32 of the City Code. 
(Code 1962, § 27-28; Code 1986, § 23-28; Ord. No. O-93-12-45, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-96-09-38, 9-22-1996; Ord. No. O-96-11-48, 11-21-1996; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-02-07-19, 7-18-2002; Ord. No. O-05-02-07, 2-24-2005; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-159. - I industrial district. 
    Within an I industrial district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  All retail uses dependent upon or closely related to industry. 
(2)  Any industry not causing injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions. 
(3)  Wholesaling and warehousing. 
(4)  Airports. 
(5)  Truck and bus terminals. 
(6)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed, and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI. 
(7)  Restaurants. 
(8)  Gasoline service stations, which shall be defined as an establishment where gasoline or other motor vehicle fuel is sold at retail, and dispensed at full service or self-service dispensing devices which may include facilities for minor repairs and services. Provided, however, that all storage tanks, dispensing devices, and canopies which shield dispensing device areas from the weather shall be located not less than 20 feet from any right-of-way or property line. All buildings shall be located not less than 15 feet from all storage tanks and dispensing devices. All buildings or other structures located on said lot shall be located in accord with the minimum setback provisions of section 94-161. In the event that the gasoline service station is located on a corner lot at the intersection of two or more streets, the means of ingress and egress thereto shall be not less than 20 feet from the intersection of street lines and such ingress and egress shall be designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of traffic. 
(9)  Farm supply and equipment sales. 
(10)  Storage yards, including building materials and lumberyards. 
(11)  Junkyards, provided that any area on the premises, other than indoors, where junk is kept shall be enclosed, except for exits and entrances to the junkyard, with a solid vertical wall or fence of a minimum height of ten feet measured from ground level. Such vertical wall or fence shall comply with all setback requirements of the district. All dismantling, storage, processing or repair work with respect to the junk shall take place within the walled or fenced area. Exits and entrances shall not be wider nor more numerous than reasonably necessary for the conduct of business. Junk located within the junkyard area shall be stored in piles not exceeding ten feet in height. No junkyard shall be authorized which will be located within 500 feet of any residential zone as defined by this Code. In the event that property is rezoned for use as a junkyard in accord with this Code, such use shall not commence until such time as the vertical wall or fence required by this provision shall have been constructed. 
(12)  Feed and seed processing plant. 
(13)  Veterinary hospitals and kennels, with outside boarding of dogs, cats and other domestic animals being permitted. 
(14)  Adult entertainment establishment. 
(15)  Nonresidential accessory building. 
(16)  Flea market. 
(17)  Self-service storage facility, provided, that the owner complies with the buffer requirements in section 94-194 prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for such facility. 
(18)  Carwash. 
(19)  Pest control. 
(20)  Waste transfer stations, provided that such waste transfer stations shall only be authorized to handle construction and demolition debris in accord with the provisions of Rule 391-3-4-06 of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as that rule may now exist or be hereafter amended. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such waste transfer station shall be located in an industrial district unless a special exception has been granted for such use particular to the property upon which such use is to be located. Such special exception shall be approved or denied by the planning commission in accord with the procedures established in subsections 94-32(1)-(3). In considering the grant or denial of such a special exception, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and, at the conclusion of the public hearing, shall grant or deny the application for special exception using the following standards: 
a.  The proposed use shall not have a substantial adverse impact upon the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
b.  The proposed use shall not cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools or other public facilities. 
c.  Any other relevant factors, including but not limited to, the conformity of the proposed use with duly adopted land use and other physical development plans or policies for the area, may also be considered. The provisions of subsection 94-32(5) shall be applicable to a special exception granted in accord with the provisions of this subsection. 
(21)  Materials recovery facility, provided that such materials recovery facility shall only be authorized to handle construction and demolition debris in accord with the provisions of Rule 391-3-4-06 and Rule 391-3-4-09 of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as that rule may now exist or be hereafter amended. Notwithstanding the foregoing, no such materials recovery facility shall be located in an industrial district unless a special exception has been granted for such use particular to the property upon which such use is to be located. Such special exception shall be approved or denied by the planning commission in accord with the procedures established in subsections 94-32(1)-(3). In considering the grant or denial of such a special exception, the planning commission shall hold a public hearing thereon and, at the conclusion of the public hearing, shall grant or deny the application for special exception using the following standards: 
a.  The proposed use shall not have a substantial adverse impact upon the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property. 
b.  The proposed use shall not cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, schools, or other public facilities. 
c.  Any other relevant factors, including but not limited to, the conformity of the proposed use with duly adopted land use and other physical development plans or policies for the area, may also be considered. The provisions of subsection 94-32(5) shall be applicable to a special exception granted in accord with the provisions of this subsection. 
(22)  Aquaculture, subject to special exception authorization pursuant to section 94-32 of the City Code. 
(Code 1962, § 27-29; Code 1986, § 23-29; Ord. No. O-88-02-05, 2-22-1988; Ord. No. O-92-02-07, 2-24-1992; Ord. No. O-93-06-23, 6-24-1993; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-94-09-32, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. O-95-09-32, 9-21-1995; Ord. No. O-97-04-11, 4-24-1997; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-04-17, 4-20-2000; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-05-12-46, 12-5-2005; Ord. No. O-08-03-04, 3-20-2008; Ord. No. O-10-06-21, 6-24-2010; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-160. - A-G agricultural district. 
    Within an A-G agricultural district, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Nonresidential accessory building. 
(2)  Any form of horticulture or agriculture. 
(3)  Airports. 
(4)  Telecommunications antennas and towers, provided that such antennas and towers are permitted, installed and maintained in accord with the standards for telecommunications antennas and towers provisions of chapter 14, article VI. 
(5)  Restaurants. 
(6)  Farm supply and equipment sales. 
(7)  Feed and seed processing plants. 
(8)  Stockyards, provided, that no structure shall be less than 200 feet from any property line. 
(9)  Churches and other places of worship provided they are located on a major or collector street as designated on the official major street map of the city and are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
(10)  Veterinary hospitals and kennels, with outside boarding of dogs, cats and other domestic animals being permitted. 
(11)  Aquaculture. 
(Code 1962, § 27-30; Code 1986, § 23-30; Ord. No. O-88-02-06, 2-22-1988; Ord. No. O-93-12-44, 12-27-1993; Ord. No. O-94-01-07, 1-25-1994; Ord. No. O-99-08-31, 8-19-1999; Ord. No. O-00-10-41, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-2012-21, 7-19-2012) 
Sec. 94-161. - Other requirements by district. 
Min. setback for front 
yard purposes Min. 
yards Corner lot 
Min. setback for 
side yards District Min. lot 
area per 
D.U.* 
(sq. ft.) Min. lot 
width per 
D.U.* 
(feet) Max. lot 
coverage 
by bldg. 
(gross) 
(per cent) Major 
streets 
(feet) Collector 
streets 
(feet) Other 
streets 
(feet) Side 
(feet) Rear 
(feet) Max. 
height 
(feet) Maj. 
sts. 
(feet) Collector 
sts. 
(feet) Other 
sts. 
(feet) R-1 Residential 30 40 35 30 8 25 35 40 35 30  Single 8,000 75  Rural ditch section (Single) 15,000 100 50 50 50 15 25 50 50 50 R-2 Residential 35 40 35 30 8 25 35 40 35 30  Single 7,000 60  Two-family 3,700 35  Rural ditch section (Single) 13,000 100 50 50 50 15 25 50 50 50 R-3 Residential  Multifamily 40 35 30 10 25 75 40 35 30 R-3A Residential  Multifamily 40 35 30 10 25 75 40 35 30 R-4 MH residential  MH Park 5,000 45 40 150** 75** 75** - - - - - -  MH Subdivision 6,000 50 40 30 30 30 8 20 25 25 25 25 N-S Neighborhood  Shopping 40 50 40 35 10 25 40 50 40 35 C-1 Roadside  Business 40 50 40 35 10 25 35 50 40 35 C-2 General Business 40 50 40 35 10 25 35 50 40 35 C-3 Downtown general business 100 - - - - - - - - - I-N Institutional 50 50 40 35 10 25 40 50 40 35 I Industrial 50 50 40 35 15 30 40 50 40 35 A-G Agricultural 30 60 50 40 8 25 35 50 40 35  
 *  Dwelling units. **  Lot line of entire park.    Provided parking and loading requirements are met.    Minimum of 75 feet shall apply when abutting any residential district.  
(Code 1962, § 27-31; Ord. No. O-88-08-29, 8-22-88; Ord. No. O-89-10-28, 10-23-89; Ord. No. O-90-02-04, 2-26-90; Ord. No. O-97-04-12, 4-24-97; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-98; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-02) 
Sec. 94-162. - PMUD (planned mixed-use district). 
(a)  Purposes of the planned mixed-use district. 
(1)  The purpose of this district is to provide for appropriate planned development of quality mixed-use projects within the City of Americus by allowing greater freedom of design, by improving the opportunity for flexibility and creativity in the land development process, by undertaking techniques which foster community and pedestrianism, and by limiting the expenditure of public funds in an effort to achieve the objectives and intent of the city's comprehensive plan. Specifically, this district is intended to: 
a.  Allow diversification of uses, structures, densities and open spaces when not in conflict with existing and permitted land uses on abutting properties; 
b.  Reduce development costs through a more efficient use of land and a smaller network of utilities and streets than is possible through the application of standards contained in conventional land development regulations; 
c.  Conserve the natural amenities of the land by encouraging the preservation of environmentally significant, scenic and functional open space; 
d.  Provide maximum opportunity for the application of innovative site planning concepts through the creation of aesthetically pleasing environments for living, shopping and working on properties of adequate size, shape and location; 
e.  Insure that development will occur according to the advantages and limitations of land, site design, population density, building coverage, improvement standards and construction phasing as authorized through the approval of a comprehensive site development plan; 
f.  Provide a mechanism to incorporate and implement the goals and intent of the City of Americus Comprehensive Plan; and 
g.  Encourage pedestrianism and transportation alternatives. 
(2)  This district is not intended to increase overall density or development intensity on a particular property except in relation to an improved design and benefit to the public. The use of open space, public meeting areas and recreational uses should be included as part of any project. This district is intended to provide a vehicle for improved development through creative design and appropriate mixtures of land uses. 
(3)  There are two variations of the planned mixed-use district: Mixed-use village and mixed-use center. The city's comprehensive plan should be consulted to determine when and where each of these variations may be appropriate. 
(b)  Minimum design requirements. 
(1)  Consistency with comprehensive plan. All projects must be reasonably consistent with the goals and intents of the City of Americus Comprehensive Plan. 
(2)  Variations to development standards. 
a.  Variations to local development standards (i.e. development and zoning regulations), including variations in lot sizes, widths, building setbacks, densities, parking requirements, right-of-way widths, street widths, buffers and other components may be approved to improve said project. Any variation to an adopted regulation or requirement must be expressly submitted and reviewed as part of an overall plan. All variations must be included in a "list of standards" agreed to and accepted by the city. 
b.  The city will not consider variations to standards or regulations of other regulating jurisdictions, such as erosion control regulations, fire codes, floodplain control, stream buffers or other similar regulations, without the express written consent and approval of applicable jurisdiction. Furthermore, said consent shall not guarantee, nor require the city to waive any or all requirements. 
(3)  Design requirements. All projects should incorporate traditional neighborhood design principles. Interconnectivity, pedestrianism, good design, architectural detail and appropriate scale are essential elements. Where appropriate, separate land uses are encouraged to be integrated both horizontally and vertically. 
(4)  At a minimum all projects shall include and/or incorporate the following components: 
a.  All planned mixed-use development projects must have a minimum of two distinct type of land use (commercial and single-family, industrial and multifamily, etc.). 
b.  All projects must have a professionally prepared master plan for the entire project. It must be designed and incorporated together to provide a harmonious transition from one use to another. Common architecture, themes, significant natural features, connectivity and other items must be included. 
c.  A functional town center, community green, park, or other focal point must be included to create character and identity. 
d.  Interconnections to adjoining property, whether developed or undeveloped, should be included and incorporated into the design where appropriate. 
e.  All projects should have adequate and appropriate access. 
f.  Other standards, as outlined in the City of Americus Comprehensive Plan Design Guidelines, which are appropriate for the site's specific location and character area should be included. 
(5)  When determining the appropriateness and viability of a proposed project, the city shall consult the City of Americus Comprehensive Plan. Projects that prove that the use of innovative or creative design will benefit the city may be considered for said district. 
(c)  Permitted uses. 
(1)  Planned mixed-use village. 
a.  Planned mixed-use villages shall be primarily residential in character and may include a mixture of single-family and multifamily residential uses. Overall residential density shall be limited to no more than _____ units per acre. Lower densities may be required by the city where appropriate. 
b.  Supplemental nonresidential uses (office and limited retail) are permitted when complimentary to and compatible with the orderly operation of the residential project, provided that all such uses shall not constitute more than 20 percent of the total project land area or gross floor area, whichever is less, or as otherwise permitted by the city council. Residential uses may be attached, semi-attached, detached and/or located within multi-story buildings above nonresidential office or commercial development. 
c.  Mixed-use villages shall be designed using the adopted Comprehensive Plan Design Guidelines adopted by the City of Americus. Favorable projects will incorporate most, if not all, of these standards. 
d.  All projects shall incorporate good design and engineering principles. 
(2)  Planned mixed-use center. 
a.  Planned mixed-use centers shall be primarily nonresidential in character and may include a mixture of office, commercial and industrial uses. 
b.  Supplemental residential uses may also be permitted when complimentary to and compatible with the orderly development of the planned project; provided that all such residential uses shall not exceed the net density in excess of what the least restrictive conventional residential zoning would permit or that density outlined by the city's comprehensive plan, whichever is greater. Lower residential densities may be required by the city council if adjacent to lower density residential areas, or where otherwise appropriate. 
c.  All projects shall incorporate good design and engineering principles. 
(d)  Site development standards. 
(1)  Minimum site area. The minimum site area shall consist of no less than _____ acres of contiguous land area. 
(2)  Perimeter development requirements. No housing type, use, setback, height, and coverage requirements are established. However, existing residential development along the perimeter of the planned mixed-use development shall be adequately protected by setbacks, landscaped walls and/or other buffers to be established as part of the site development plan review. 
(3)  Internal development requirements. 
a.  No minimum lot sizes or shapes shall be required, except as may be established as part of the site development plan review. 
b.  No minimum distance between on-site structures shall be required, except as may be established as part of the site development plan review; however, applicable fire code requirements shall be met. 
c.  No minimum yard setbacks shall be required, except as may be established as part of the site development plan review. 
(4)  Off-street parking and loading. Adequate off-street parking and loading areas shall be provided. However, reductions in total parking requirements is strongly encouraged. The sharing of off-street parking areas between uses is allowed and encouraged as well as parallel on-street where appropriate. The use of porous alternative parking areas is allowed and encouraged where appropriate. 
(5)  Landscaping. Landscaping shall meet or exceed all of the minimum requirements of the city's zoning ordinance. The preservation of mature trees and tree stands is strongly encouraged. 
(6)  Underground utilities. All on-site utilities shall be installed underground. The developer shall provide adequate landscaping to screen all above ground facilities. 
(7)  Accessibility. Every residential unit or permitted use shall have direct access to a public street via a private road, common easement, or other area dedicated or reserved for public use. 
(8)  Common open space requirements. 
a.  All designated common open spaces shall be preserved by one or more of the following methods: 
(i)  Public dedication, subject to acceptance by the city council by formal vote. 
(ii)  Conveyance to a property owners' association or nonprofit land conservation organization. 
(iii)  Retention of ownership, control and maintenance by the developer with a permanent conservation easement donated to a nonprofit land conservation organization. 
b.  All privately-owned common open space shall conform to its intended use and remain as expressed in the approved site development plan through the inclusion in all deeds of appropriate covenant. Said deed restrictions shall run with the land. 
(9)  Environmental considerations. Protections of wetlands, creeks and streams should be provided where appropriate. 
(e)  Application procedures. 
(1)  The following procedures, applications and exhibits shall be required when applying for rezoning to a planned unit development district: 
a.  Pre-application conference: Before submitting an application for rezoning to a planned mixed-use development district, the applicant shall confer with the community development director to determine the feasibility for the proposed plan and its relationship to the city's comprehensive plan. 
b.  Professional service requirement: Any plan or exhibit as part of an application for a planned unit development shall certify that the services of two or more of the following professionals were utilized in the design or planning process: 
(i)  A planner who is a member of the American Institute of Certified Planners; 
(ii)  A landscape architect registered by the State of Georgia; 
(iii)  An architect licensed by the State of Georgia; and/or 
(iv)  A professional civil engineer registered by the State of Georgia. 
c.  Application fees required: Fees shall be required at the time of submittal of an application for rezoning to a planned mixed-use development district in conformance with the city's fee schedule. 
d.  Review information required site development plan: All applications for rezoning to a planned mixed-use development district shall include the following information on the site development plan and supporting documents: 
(i)  A recent (less than three years) boundary survey with north arrow and scale; 
(ii)  A full legal description of the property with attached copies of any instruments referred to such as deeds, plats, covenants or restrictions; 
(iii)  The names and addresses of the owners of the property to be rezoned and evidence of unified control of the property; 
(iv)  The names and addresses of all adjoining property owners; 
(v)  The total area of the site in acres and square feet; 
(vi)  A map indicating the location, arrangement and dimensions of the following existing features within and immediately adjacent to the property: Vegetation (including tree preserve areas), state waters, land uses, buildings, structures, utilities, drainage ways, easements, public street rights-of-way, railways and property lines; 
(vii)  A statement as to how the proposed project conforms to the city's adopted comprehensive plan design guidelines; 
(viii)  Plans showing the location, arrangement and dimensions of all proposed land uses, including the number of floors per building (other than single-family residential); the height of all nonresidential and multifamily buildings above finished grade; building setbacks from perimeter boundaries and from public rights-of-way; a proposed traffic circulation plan showing the location and dimensions of all streets, driveways, walkways, bikeways, parking spaces and loading areas; and all proposed common elements including utilities, open spaces and recreation areas; 
(ix)  A plan or statement showing the manner of improving common open spaces, together with provisions, restrictions and conditions anticipated for the use, maintenance and operation of such common elements; 
(x)  A statement, in tabular form, of the anticipated gross residential density and overall project density, the total number of dwelling units by type, size and number of bedrooms, and gross floor area devoted to business or other nonresidential uses; 
(xi)  Proposals for providing stormwater drainage and on-site retention areas and, at the city's discretion, may include rough calculations, approximate size of retention areas, methods of pollutant removal, location of berms, swales, culverts, and sewers, anticipated finished grades and proposed slopes and grades adjacent to bodies of water; and 
(xii)  An architectural sketch or sketches of typical proposed structures. 
e.  Planning commission: After receiving a staff recommendation from the community development director, the planning commission shall make a recommendation to the governing body of the city as required in the city's the zoning ordinance. 
f.  City council: 
(i)  Upon receiving the recommendation of the planning commission, the city council shall, at a public hearing, review said recommendation and proposed project. The city council may then either approve, approve subject to conditions or disapprove the application. 
(ii)  Any and all variations to the city's development regulations, zoning ordinance, or other standards shall be outlined in a "list of standards" and illustrated on the site plan adopted by the city. 
(iii)  In the event the rezoning is approved by the city council, the site development plan shall be certified by the city, and said certified copy shall be filed as a permanent record. Without exception, the approved plan shall be binding upon all existing and future owners and assigns. 
(2)  Conformance to approved site development plan. 
a.  After rezoning to a planned mixed-use district, no permits shall be issued and no development shall commence unless in conformance with the approved site development plan, unless a change or deviation is approved by the city. 
b.  The community development director may approve minor changes and deviations from the approved site development plan which are in compliance with the provisions and intent of this article and which do not depart from the principal concept of the approved site development plan. 
c.  Should the community development director determine that a requested change or deviation from the approved site development plan does not comply with the provisions and intent of this article, or departs from the principles of the planned mixed-use development, the applicant may apply for approval of such change or deviation to the city council as a plan amendment. 
(3)  Failure to begin planned unit development. If no construction has been initiated or no use established in the planned unit development within 18 months from the time of rezoning, the approved site development plan shall lapse and become null and void until the plan is resubmitted for approval or a new site plan is approved as a plan amendment. 
(Ord. No. O-06-12-46, 12-21-2006) 
Sec. 94-163. - Commercial corridor district. 
(a)  Purpose and intent. The purpose of the commercial corridor district is to address issues of public safety, health and general welfare, including controlling the visual and architectural character of commercial corridors through the use of design requirements in order that commercial strips are visually compatible with the development of Americus. 
(b)  Requirements. All new development and existing development, when the building outline is proposed to change, shall adhere to the requirements of this section. 
(c)  Parking and on-site circulation. 
(1)  A landscape buffer strip at least ten feet wide around parking areas shall be densely planted with shrubs and trees of a type that possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact evergreen planting screen. 
(2)  In addition to a planted buffer, trees and shrubs shall be at least three feet high at the time of planting and capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. 
(3)  There shall be one tree with a 21/2-inch diameter planted for every eight parking spaces in a the parking lot. 
(4)  Raised pedestrian walkways shall be installed through parking areas of 50 or more spaces or more than 100 feet in average width or depth. 
(5)  Parking lots with 50 spaces or more shall be divided into separate areas and divided by landscaped areas or walkways at least ten feet in width, or by a building or group of buildings. 
(6)  Developments of two acres or more must provide a pedestrian circulation plan for the site. Pedestrian walkways shall be directly linked to entrances. 
(7)  Connections shall be made when feasible to any streets adjacent to the property and to any pedestrian facilities that connect with the property. 
(8)  Parking lots shall be connected with adjacent parking lots. 
(9)  Maximum allowable number of spaces. The number of spaces provided by any particular use in ground surface lots shall not exceed the required number of spaces provided by this chapter by more than 50 percent; except that for professional service and office uses, including medical and dental, parking spaces may be approved not to exceed a total of six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area under the staff permit procedure, provided that any parking that exceeds the required number of spaces by more than 50 percent shall be shown to be necessary and shall be on improved pervious surface with one tree per five spaces. Spaces provided on-street, or within the building footprint of structures, such as in rooftop parking, or under-structure parking, or in multi-level parking above or below surface lots, shall not apply towards the maximum number of allowable spaces. 
(10)  Curb cuts shall be kept to a minimum, and shall in no case be greater than 30 feet in length, nor closer than 200 feet to another curb cut. 
(d)  Connectivity. 
(1)  All developments shall provide sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet along all frontages of the lot that abut a public street. 
(2)  Continuous on-site sidewalks having a minimum width of four feet shall be provided from the public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance of all buildings on the site. Such sidewalks shall provide weather protection features such as awnings or arcades along the building facade within 30 feet of all customer entrances. Sidewalks shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, street crossings, building and store entrances. 
(3)  Sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet shall be provided along the full length of the building facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. 
(4)  All buildings shall provide direct pedestrian access from on-site parking areas as well as the public sidewalk. 
(5)  All on-site sidewalks shall be distinguished from vehicular surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety. 
(e)  Setbacks and buffer requirements. 
(1)  For setback requirements, see C-2 general business. 
District Max. lot 
coverage 
by bldg. 
(gross)* 
(percent) Min. 
Setback 
for Front 
Yard 
Purpose. 
Major 
Streets 
(Feet) Max. 
Setback 
for Front 
Yard 
Purpose. 
Major 
Streets 
(Feet) Collector 
Streets 
(Feet) Other 
Streets 
(Feet) Min. 
Yards Side 
(Feet) Rear 
(Feet) Corner Lot Min. 
Setback 
for Side 
Yards. 
Max. 
Height 
(Feet) Major 
Streets 
(Feet) Collector 
Streets 
(Feet) Other 
streets 
(Feet) C-1 
Roadside 
Business 40 25 60 40 35 10 25 35 50 40 35 C-2 
General 
Business 40 25 60 40 35 10 25 35 50 40 35 C-3 
Downtown 
General 
Business 100 - - - - - - - - - I-N 
Institutional 50 25 60 40 35 10 25 40 50 40 35 I Industrial 50 25 60 40 35 150 300 40 50 40 35  
(2)  A maximum front and side yard setback shall correspond to the size of the buffer requirement in all commercial development. 
(3)  Side and rear yard buffers. Whenever the zoning ordinances require side and rear yard buffers, one or more, or a combination of the following buffers shall be installed along the lot line of the subject property, as follows: 
a.  Natural buffer strip. A strip at least 25 feet wide, having an existing natural growth equivalent to a density planted evergreen screen. A landscape plan identifying all existing trees of six-inch caliper or greater which are to be retained inside the 25-foot natural buffer strip, along with any proposed trees and shrubs, must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; 
b.  Landscape buffer strip. A strip at least ten feet wide, densely planted with shrubs and trees at least three feet high at the time of planting, of a type that possesses growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact evergreen planting screen capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. A landscape plan identifying all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strips must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; or 
c.  Landscape buffer wall. A buffer strip at least ten feet wide, containing an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet in height. Buffer strips shall have five feet of landscape plantings on the exterior side of the wall and shall be planted with appropriate trees, shrubs and groundcover as to provide a transition from the wall to both edges of the buffer strip. A landscape plan identifying the location and construction of the wall or barrier and all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strip must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction. 
(4)  It is permissible for any part of subsections (3)b or (3)c of this section to be intermingled with some natural landscape materials, as long as they meet the intent of this section. 
(5)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city until any buffers required by this section are planted or installed. 
(6)  All developments shall to the extent practical provide entryway berming for the purpose of shielding parking areas, loading docks, dumpsters, and similar areas from view by employing the following methods, in order of preference: 
a.  Preservation of natural land forms, trees and other landscape elements. 
b.  Landscaped berms with asymmetrical groupings of plant materials, including trees and shrubs which are long lived, and indigenous to Americus and this part of Georgia and 50 percent of which shall be evergreen species. 
(7)  Buildings shall incorporate live plant materials as foundation plantings. 
(8)  Any site furnishings such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and bicycle racks shall complement the building design and style. 
(9)  One canopy tree shall be planted for every 250 square feet of landscaped area. Shrubs shall be planted at a ratio of three for every one tree. 
(10)  A minimum of 20 percent of all existing trees having a diameter of 16 inches or greater shall be retained. This requirement shall be in addition to the standards of any required landscape area; however, such retention may be achieved through tree preservation within such areas. 
(f)  Orientation and scale. 
(1)  Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward the street rather than the parking area. Public sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to a public street along the street frontage. 
(2)  For corner lots, buildings shall be oriented towards both roads by addressing the corner as the primary facade and the minimum front yard setback shall be observed on both street frontages. 
(3)  The building shall cover no more than 50 percent of the site width. When measuring site width, only buildable portions of the site shall be included. 
(4)  The maximum gross lot coverage of the building shall not exceed 40 percent of the lot. 
(5)  Trash storage areas, mechanical equipment and similar areas are not permitted to be visible from the street, nor are permitted between the building and the street. 
(6)  All dumpsters shall be screened with building material consistent with the main structure. 
(7)  All dumpsters shall have gates that act as screens. 
(8)  Building frontages greater than 100 feet in length shall have offsets, or other distinctive changes in the building facade. 
(9)  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish to give emphasis to entrances. 
(10)  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from the rain and sun. 
(11)  All on-site circulation systems shall incorporate a streetscape, which includes curbs, sidewalks, pedestrian scale light standards, and street trees. 
(g)  Roof shape. 
(1)  Roof lines shall be articulated to provide visual interest and minimize large expanses. This shall be accomplished through the use of gables, parapets, hi-roof design, or changes in the height of the roofline along the course of the building. 
(2)  Rooflines shall be broken up such that the roofline shall not exceed 60 feet without changing height on all sides of the building. 
(3)  The pitch of a structure's exposed (in plain view) roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of 21/2 feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction or a standing seam metal roof. 
(4)  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual relief. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at a minimum rate of every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or such features shall be one foot, and may be provided as height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. 
(5)  Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning district within 150 feet as viewed from five feet above ground level. Roof screens and parapet walls shall be coordinated with the building to present a unified appearance. 
(h)  Building materials. Exterior building finishes and materials shall be compatible with that of downtown Americus. 
(1)  Fifty percent of the front facade shall be constructed using brick or stone. 
(2)  The remainder of the facade shall be constructed using brick, wood, stucco, stone or Hardiplank(c) or Hardiplank(c) type materials. 
(3)  Trashcans and benches shall be constructed using brick, wood, stucco, stone, metal, or Hardiplank(c) or Hardiplank(c) type materials. 
(4)  All main and secondary power utilities must be underground including site lighting. 
(i)  Signage. 
(1)  Wall signs. Wall signs shall be allowed subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Maximum number. No more than one sign shall be allowed per business. Unless, the building has road frontage on two sides, one sign per side. 
b.  Maximum size. Shall not exceed one square foot per linear foot of store frontage. 
c.  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed the bottom of the roofline. 
(2)  Group signs. In addition to other permanent signs that are allowed, each group development shall be allowed group signs subject to the following limitations: 
a.  Maximum number. No more than one group ground sign shall be allowed per street frontage. 
b.  Maximum area. The maximum sign area for a ground sign shall be limited to 32 square feet per tenant and shall not exceed an aggregate size in excess of 120 square feet. 
c.  Maximum height. The maximum height shall not exceed 20 feet for a ground sign. A wall sign shall not exceed the signable area. 
d.  Minimum setbacks. The ground sign shall be setback five feet from all lot lines. 
(3)  Freestanding signs. Freestanding signs shall be no more than ten feet tall and ten feet wide and shall be a pedestal type sign with no more than 70 square feet of signage area. 
(4)  All signs shall only be constructed of brick, wood, stucco, stone and Hardiplank(c) type material. No exposed metal or wood post columns. 
(5)  Billboard signs. Billboard signs shall not exceed 300 square feet of sign area. Billboard signs shall not exceed ten feet in height or 35 feet in length (Americus Code § 74-85). 
(j)  Accessory buildings. 
(1)  Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with all requirements for the principal use except where specifically modified by this chapter and shall comply with the following limitations: 
a.  Mechanical equipment shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Such equipment shall not be located between the main structure on the site and any street adjacent to a front or side yard, and every attempt shall be made to place such equipment so that it is not visible from adjacent public streets. Any installation of mechanical equipment shall require a building permit. 
(2)  Signs, fences, parking, driveways, accessory dwellings, and temporary structures are not subject to the provisions of this section. 
(k)  Fenestration. 
(1)  All types of structures shall have regular fenestration. The length of facade without intervening fenestration or entryway shall not exceed 20 feet. 
(2)  Fenestration shall be provided for a minimum of 70 percent of the length of street frontages. Entryways may be counted towards fenestration requirements. 
(3)  Primary entrance. The primary public entrance of a building shall face a street and be directly linked to a public sidewalk. It shall be positioned no more than five feet above the finished grade at the front of the building. 
(4)  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface, or finish to give emphasis to entrances. 
(5)  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from the rain and sun. 
(6)  Transparency. Transparency at the street level shall be measured from the finished grade at the street to ten feet above grade for the entire width of the wall. 
(7)  The following alternative design treatments may be used, singularly or in combination, to meet half of the transparency requirement at the street level: 
a.  Wall art, including murals, sculptural and other decorative treatment of exterior walls; 
b.  Landscaping, which is to be at least three feet high at the time of planting and of a type that will produce an opaque, evergreen planting screen capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. 
(8)  Windows must allow views into working areas or lobbies, pedestrian entrances or display areas. 
(l)  Easements. 
(1)  Easements at least ten feet wide, five feet wide on each side of side lot lines shall be provided for utilities for utility service to those lots only. 
(2)  Easements at least 15 feet wide shall be provided along all rights-of-way of new roads and along the frontages of new developments and subdivisions developed on existing roads. 
(3)  Public water and sanitary sewer easements, if determined by the utilities authority to be necessary shall be required. Easement placement and widths will be determined by the utilities authority. 
(Ord. No. O-12-02-03, 2-23-2012) 
Sec. 94-164. - RR (railroad) district. 
    Railroads, railroad rights-of-way, and railroad crossings owned or leased by a railroad authorized to do business in the State of Georgia which are located within the corporate limits of the City of Americus. Such property zoned for railroads may only be used for railroad and railroad-related transportation purposes and for accessory uses and structures incidental to any legally permitted use. In addition, the following shall apply with respect to the RR district: 
(1)  Any structures located in such zoning district upon railroad owned or leased property shall be located solely within the railroad property and shall not be closer than five feet to the side or rear lot lines of the railroad property. 
(2)  No general advertising sign, off-premises sign, or any digital general advertising sign or digital off-premises sign shall be located within such railroad zoning district. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-20, 7-18-2013) 
Sec. 94-165. - Entertainment overlay zoning district. 
    There is hereby established in the incorporated limits of the city an entertainment overlay zoning district. Such district shall be subject to the provisions and regulations set out herein. 
(1)  Purpose and intent. 
a.  The purpose of the entertainment overlay district is to address issues of public safety, health, and general welfare, including controlling the visual and architectural character of commercial corridors through the use of design requirements in order that commercial strips are visually compatible with the development of Americus. 
b.  Requirements. All new development and existing development, when the building outline is proposed to change, or the building has an occupancy change to allow the sale of alcohol on or off premise, the requirements of this Section shall be followed. 
(2)  Parking. 
a.  There shall be a minimum ten foot vegetative buffer around parking areas. Buffers shall consist of densely planted trees and shrubs. 
b.  Trees shall be at least two and one-half inch diameter. 
c.  There shall be on tree planted for every eight parking spaces in the parking lot. 
d.  Shrubs shall be at least one and one-half feet in height. There shall only be one row of parking between the building and the curb. The majority of the parking shall be at the sides and rear of the building. 
e.  Raised pedestrian walkways shall be installed through parking areas of 50 or more spaces or more than 100 feet in average width or depth. 
f.  Parking lots with 50 spaces or more shall be divided into separate areas and divided by landscaped areas or walkways at least ten feet in width, or by a building or group of buildings. 
g.  Developments of two acres or more must provide a pedestrian circulation plan for the site. Pedestrian walkways shall be directly linked to entrances. 
h.  Curb cuts shall be kept to a minimum to prevent problems with vehicular and pedestrian traffic. 
i.  Parking lots shall connect with adjacent parking lots. 
j.  Where possible, curb cuts shall be shared between neighboring properties. 
k.  Maximum allowable number of spaces. The number of spaces provided by any particular use in ground surface lots shall not exceed the required number of spaces provided by this title by more than 50 percent; except that for professional service and office uses, including medical and dental, parking spaces may be approved not to exceed a total of six spaces per 1,000 square feet of gross floor area under the staff permit procedure, provided that any parking that exceeds the required number of spaces by more than 50 percent shall be shown to be necessary and shall be on improved pervious surface with one tree per five spaces. Spaces provided on-street, or within the building footprint of structures, such as in rooftop parking, or under-structure parking, or in multi-level parking above or below surface lots, shall not apply towards the maximum number of allowable spaces. (ACC § 9-30-2) 
l.  Curb cuts shall be kept to a minimum, and shall in no case be greater that 30 feet in length, nor closer that 200 feet to another curb cut. 
(3)  Setbacks. 
a.  A maximum front and side yard setback shall correspond to the size of the buffer requirement in all commercial development. 
b.  Structures shall front upon primary thoroughfares. 
c.  No structures other than signs shall be placed between the front property line and the building's façade. 
d.  Side and rear yard buffers. Whenever the zoning ordinances require side and rear yard buffers, one or more, or a combination of the following buffers shall be installed along the lot line of the subject property, as follows: 
1.  Natural buffer strip. A strip at least 25 feet wide, having an existing natural growth equivalent to a density planted evergreen screen. A landscape plan identifying all existing trees of six-inch caliper or greater which are to be retained inside the 25-foot natural buffer strip, along with any proposed trees and shrubs must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; 
2.  Landscape buffer strip. A strip at least ten feet wide, densely planted with shrubs and trees at least three feet high at the time of planting, of a type that possesses growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact evergreen planting screen capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. A landscape plan identifying all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strips must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; or 
3.  Landscape buffer wall. A buffer strip at least ten feet wide, containing an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet in height. Buffer strips shall have five feet of landscape plantings on the exterior side of the wall and shall be planted with appropriate trees, shrubs and ground cover as to provide a transition from the wall to both edges of the buffer strip. A landscape plan identifying the location and construction of the wall or barrier and all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strip must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction. 
e.  It is permissible for any part of subsection (e)(2) or (3) of this section to be intermingled. 
f.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city until any buffers required by this section are planted or installed. 
g.  All developments shall to the extent practical provide entryway berming for the purpose of shielding parking areas, loading docks, dumpsters, and similar areas from view by employing the following methods, in order of preference: 
1.  Preservation of natural land forms, trees and other landscape elements. 
2.  Landscaped berms with asymmetrical groupings of plant materials, including trees and shrubs which are long lived, and indigenous to Americus and this part of Georgia and 50 percent of which shall be evergreen species. 
h.  Buildings shall incorporate live plant materials as foundation plantings. 
i.  Any site furnishings such as railings, benches, trash receptacles and bicycle racks shall complement the building design and style. 
j.  One canopy tree shall be planted for every 250 square feet of landscaped area. Shrubs shall be planted at a ratio of three for every one tree. 
k.  A minimum of 20 percent of all existing trees having a diameter of 16 inches or greater shall be retained. This requirement shall be in addition to the standards of any required landscape area; however, such retention may be achieved through tree preservation within such areas. 
(4)  Orientation. 
a.  Buildings shall be oriented to face the primary thoroughfare. 
b.  Public sidewalks shall be provided adjacent to a public street along the street frontage. 
c.  For corner lots, buildings shall be oriented towards both roads by addressing the corner as the primary façade and the minimum front yard setback shall be observed on both street frontages. 
d.  Trash storage areas, mechanical equipment, and similar areas are not permitted to be visible from the street nor are permitted between the building and the street. 
e.  All dumpsters shall be screened with building material consistent with the main structure. 
f.  All dumpsters shall have gates that act as screens. 
g.  Building frontages greater than 100 feet in length shall have offsets or other distinctive changes in the building facade. 
h.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface or finish to give emphasis to entrances. 
i.  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from the rain and sun. 
j.  All on-site circulation systems shall incorporate a streetscape, which includes curbs, sidewalks, pedestrian scale light standards, and street trees. 
(5)  Connectivity. 
a.  All developments shall provide sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet or to match the existing sidewalks along all frontages of the lot that abut a public street. 
b.  Continuous on site sidewalks having a minimum width of four feet shall be provided from the public sidewalk to the principal customer entrance of all buildings on the site. Such sidewalks shall provide weather protection features such as awnings or arcades along the building facade within 30 feet of all customer entrances. Sidewalks shall connect focal points of pedestrian activity such as, but not limited to, street crossings, building and store entrances. 
c.  Sidewalks having a minimum width of six feet shall be provided along the full length of the building facade featuring a customer entrance, and along any facade abutting public parking areas. 
d.  All buildings shall provide direct pedestrian access from on-site parking areas as well as the public sidewalk. 
e.  All on site sidewalks shall be distinguished from vehicular surfaces through the use of durable, low maintenance materials such as pavers, bricks, or scored concrete to enhance pedestrian safety. 
(6)  Roof shape. 
a.  Roof lines shall be articulated to provide visual interest and minimize large expanses. This shall be accomplished through the use of gables, parapets, hi-roof design, or changes in the height of the roofline along the course of the building. 
b.  Rooflines shall be broken up so that the roofline shall not go for more than 100 feet without changing height. 
c.  Cornices shall be utilized on the front of the building. 
d.  The pitch of a structure's exposed (in plain view) roof shall have a minimum vertical rise of four feet for every 12 feet of horizontal run, and the roof is finished with a type of shingle that is commonly used in standard residential construction or a standing seam metal roof. 
e.  Roof parapets shall be articulated to provide visual relief. Parapets shall include articulations or architectural features at a minimum rate of every 100 linear feet. The minimum height of articulations or such features shall be one foot, and may be provided as height offset or facade projections such as porticoes or towers. 
f.  Roof-mounted equipment. Roof-mounted equipment shall be screened from view or isolated so as not to be visible from any public right-of-way or residential zoning district within 150 feet as viewed from five feet above ground level. Roof screens and parapet walls shall be coordinated with the building to present a unified appearance. A flat roof must be concealed by a parapet along the roofline so that mechanical equipment on the roof is concealed on all sides of the structure. 
(7)  Materials. 
a.  Exterior building finishes and materials shall be compatible with that of downtown Americus. 
1.  Fifty percent of the front façade shall be constructed using brick or stone, 
2.  The remainder of the façade shall be constructed using brick, wood, stucco, stone or Hardiplank(c) or Hardiplank(c) type materials. 
3.  Trashcans and benches shall be constructed using brick, wood, stucco, stone, metal, or Hardiplank(c) or Hardiplank(c) type materials. 
4.  All main and secondary power utilities must be underground including site lighting. 
b.  Roofing materials must be consistent with the pitch of the roof, form of the structure, and its use. Some appropriate materials include standing seam metal, asphalt shingles, and slate. Exposed storm drainage devices such as gutters and downspouts should be consistent with the roofing system and building forms, with references to Americus' historic built design. 
(8)  Fenestration. 
a.  All types of structures shall have regular fenestration. 
b.  Entryways may be counted towards fenestration requirements. 
(9)  Accessory structures. 
a.  Accessory structures shall be consistent with the design of the dominant structure. 
b.  Trashcans and benches shall be free from advertisements and shall be constructed using metal, wood, brick, or stone. 
(10)  Mechanical equipment, utilities, and dumpsters/receptacles. 
a.  Architectural features such as parapets shall be used to screen mechanical and HVAC equipment from view by pedestrian and vehicular traffic. 
b.  Mechanical equipment, HVAC systems, and/or utilities located at ground level shall be screened from pedestrian and vehicular traffic through the use of fencing and vegetation. 
c.  Any dumpster, trash, grease, or waste receptacle shall be located at the rear of the property. Any such receptacle shall not be visible from the public right-of-way and shall be enclosed (i.e., not seen from front, sides, or rear) by a wall. 
(11)  On premise alcohol sales. 
a.  Business that have a on premise alcohol license shall abide with the following requirements. 
1.  Outdoor seating must be divided off with a fence or wall. 
b.  Hours of operation. 
1.  Alcoholic beverages by the drink. Sale of any alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption: licensees shall not engage in the sale of any alcoholic beverages between the hours of 3:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. daily. All alcoholic beverages will be consumed or removed by 2:45 a.m. and all patrons must be out of the premises by 3:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. O-2017-8, 7-20-2017) 
Secs. 94-166-94-192. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - SUPPLEMENTAL DISTRICT REGULATIONS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 94-193. - Construction and related requirements for residential dwellings in certain zoning districts. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code, the following provisions shall apply to residential dwellings in the city: 
(1)  Minimum heated floor area. Residential dwellings within the city shall be required to have the following minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit, measured in square feet, as follows: 
a.  R-1 residential district. Eight hundred fifty square feet for single-family detached residences; 500 square feet per residence for nonsingle-family residences; 
b.  R-2 residential district. Eight hundred fifty square feet for single-family detached residences; 450 square feet per residence for nonsingle-family residences; 
c.  R-3 and R-3A residential district. Eight hundred fifty square feet for single-family detached residences; 450 square feet per residence for nonsingle-family residences; 
d.  R-4 MH residential district. Four hundred fifty square feet per residence. 
(2)  Minimum frontage and depth. Any structure constructed in a R-1, R-2, R-3 or R-3A residential district shall have a minimum frontage of not less than 24 linear feet and a minimum depth front building line to rear building line of not less than 24 feet. 
(3)  Number of doors. All single-family, detached dwellings, in any residential district, shall be required to have at least two doors that provide ingress and egress into and outside the residential dwelling. 
(4)  Applicability to all types. The provisions of this section shall apply to all types of residential dwellings, regardless of the manner or method of construction thereof. 
(5)  Applicability to construction. The provisions of this section shall be applicable to any construction of residential dwellings on any lot or lots upon which no such structure exists as of the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived. With respect to lots upon which there are located residential dwellings on September 1, 1994, in the event that such residential dwelling is completely or partially destroyed, or is otherwise required to be rebuilt, then, at a minimum, the owner shall be authorized to rebuild the same size residential dwelling, as to square footage that was formerly located on the lot as of September 1, 1994, or to rebuild in accord with the square footage requirements set out in subsection (1) of this section, whichever square footage is lesser. 
(6)  Cluster housing development. 
a.  Permitted uses. The following uses are permitted in cluster housing developments: 
1.  Single-family residence cluster housing. 
2.  Accessory buildings. 
b.  Density standards. The cluster housing development shall not be less than the following: 
Zoning Classification Density R-1 One dwelling unit per 8,000 square feet of land R-2 One dwelling unit per 7,000 square feet of land  
c.  Common areas. 
1.  A cluster housing development allows individual lot areas which may have less than the minimum lot area for dwelling units required in the zoning district from which the cluster housing development was created; provided, however, the land area at least equal to the reduction in each individual lot area shall be placed in usable common areas. 
2.  The land in streets, common off-street parking areas, and storm drainage detention facilities shall not be included as part of the usable common area requirement. However, full credit for lot reduction shall be allowed for usable detention facilities. 
3.  The plan for cluster housing development shall provide for ownership, maintenance and control of common areas. 
4.  The usable common area shall be fully credited to calculations of density. 
d.  Minimum design and development criteria. 
1.  Minimum cluster housing development site shall be 1 3/4 acres. 
2.  Buildings shall set back 25 feet from any street right-of-way. 
3.  Within a cluster housing development, the rear of a cluster housing dwelling unit will have no setback requirement and the sides of a cluster housing dwelling unit will have no setback requirement for one side only; provided, however, that every cluster housing dwelling unit shall have at least one side with a setback of at least 15 feet from another cluster housing dwelling unit. In addition, a cluster housing dwelling unit shall have a side setback of at least 15 feet and a rear setback of at least 40 feet from the property line of any adjacent property that is not developed as a part of the cluster development. 
4.  Maximum building height shall be 35 feet. 
5.  No more than 60 percent of the gross land area may be covered by impermeable surfaces including, but not limited to, buildings, off-street parking and drives, tennis courts, and the like, nor by swimming pools and drainage facilities. On the remaining 40 percent of the gross land area, permeable surfaces may be contained within either individual building lots or common areas or within a combination of the two areas. Usable detention facilities may be used to help achieve the 40 percent permeable surface requirement: 
6.  Usable detention facilities shall comply with the following criteria: 
i.  The maximum depth of the detention facility shall not exceed 2 1/2 feet below the existing ground elevation measured beneath the rim of the depression. 
ii.  The detention facility shall be designed and constructed to drain completely after each rain event. 
iii.  The detention facility shall be designed and constructed with a minimum ratio of 3:1 side slopes. 
iv.  The detention facility shall be grassed or sodded. 
7.  To preserve the integrity of the surrounding area, the planning commission may require certain screening buffers as part of the new development. 
8.  All cluster housing developments shall be designed so that no separate dwelling unit will be constructed on top of another separate dwelling unit. 
9.  In a R-1 zoning classification, there shall be a minimum lot width of 50 feet as measured at the building line and a minimum dwelling size of 1,500 square feet. As to cluster housing located in a R-2 zoning classification, there shall be a minimum lot width of 45 feet as measured at the building line and a minimum dwelling size of 1,200 square feet. 
e.  Review criteria. In reviewing a cluster housing development site plan, the city staff and the planning commission shall consider the following criteria to the extent relevant in each case, in evaluating the merits and purposes of a cluster plan. Individual lots, buildings, streets and parking areas should be designed and situated to: 
1.  Minimize alteration of the natural features and topography. 
2.  Minimize the adverse effects of noise and traffic on off-site residents. 
3.  Minimize the area devoted to serve motor vehicles. 
4.  Allow for proper and adequate access for firefighting purposes and access to service areas to provide garbage and waste collection and for other accessory services. 
5.  Achieve a compatible relationship between development and land as well as with adjacent developments and land. 
f.  Approval of cluster housing development required. No plat or plan of a cluster housing development shall be filed or recorded in the office of the clerk of the superior court of this county, or any building permit issued until it has been approved by the planning commission and such approval entered in writing on the plat by the secretary of the planning commission. 
g.  V ariances. Where the developer can show that a provision of these standards would cause unnecessary hardship if strictly adhered to, and where, because of topographical or other conditions peculiar to the site, in the opinion of the planning commission a departure may be made without destroying the intent of such provisions, the planning commission may authorize a variance. Any variance thus authorized is to be stated in writing in the minutes of the planning commission with the reasoning on which the departure was justified set forth. 
(7)  Manufactured homes located in R-3 and R-3A districts. With respect to manufactured homes to be located in zoning districts R-3 and R-3A: 
a.  Each manufactured home in such zoning districts must be set on an appropriate permanent foundation; 
b.  The transportation mechanisms, including wheels, axles, and hitches, must be removed prior to the occupancy of a manufactured home or an industrialized home in such zoning districts; 
c.  Each manufactured home in such zoning districts shall be installed in accord with installation instructions provided by the manufacturer; 
d.  Each manufactured home located in such zoning districts shall be connected to a public sewer system, if available, or if such public sewer system is not available, to a community sewage system or to an on-site septic system with available capacity, such community sewage system and such on-site septic system to be approved by the appropriate health officials of the city or the county, as the case may be. 
e.  The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure of each manufactured home in such districts and the ground, including stairways, shall be underpinned with masonry that completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage and attached stairways, except for proper ventilation and access openings; 
f.  The exterior siding of each manufactured home located in such districts shall consist of brick, vinyl, wood or hardboard siding material; 
g.  Each manufactured home located in such districts shall have a pitched roof with a slope of at least four feet in height for each 12 feet in width, and roof materials shall be wood shake, tile, or asphalt shingle material; 
h.  A covered porch, deck, or entry area at least 48 inches by 48 inches shall be added for each entrance to the manufactured home prior to occupancy. 
(8)  Manufactured homes in R-4 MH districts. With respect to manufactured homes located in the R-4 MH residential districts within the city, the following installation and compatibility standards shall apply: 
a.  Each manufactured home located in such zoning district must be set on an appropriate foundation as approved by the city building official; 
b.  The transportation mechanisms, including wheels, axles, and hitches, must be removed prior to occupancy of any manufactured home in such zoning district prior to occupancy; 
c.  The manufactured home in such zoning districts shall be installed in accordance with installation instructions provided by the manufacturer of the home; 
d.  Each manufactured home located in such zoning districts shall be connected to a public sewer system, if available, or if such public sewer system is not available, to a community sewage system or to an on-site septic system with available capacity, such community sewage system and such on-site septic system to be approved by the appropriate health officials of the city or the county, as the case may be. 
e.  The entire perimeter area between the bottom of the structure and the ground of each manufactured home located in such districts shall be skirted or underpinned with brick, masonry, finished concrete, or siding, of like or similar character to the manufactured home, which completely encloses the perimeter of the undercarriage, except for proper ventilation and access openings. 
f.  At each exit door there must be a landing that is a minimum of 36 inches by 36 inches. 
(Code 1986, § 23-32; Ord. No. O-94-09-31, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. O-98-12-47, 12-17-1998; Ord. No. O-00-10-40, 10-19-2000; Ord. No. O-02-10-29, 10-24-2002) 
Sec. 94-194. - Buffer requirements. 
(a)  Side and rear yard buffers. Whenever the zoning ordinances require side and rear yard buffers, one or more, or a combination of the following buffers shall be installed along the lot line of the subject property, as follows: 
(1)  Natural buffer strip. A strip at least 25 feet wide, having an existing natural growth equivalent to a density planted evergreen screen. A landscape plan identifying all existing trees of six-inch caliper or greater which are to be retained inside the 25-foot natural buffer strip, along with any proposed trees and shrubs, must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; 
(2)  Landscape buffer strip. A strip at least ten feet wide, densely planted with shrubs and trees at least three feet high at the time of planting, of a type that possesses growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact evergreen planting screen capable of growing to a height of at least six feet within three years. A landscape plan identifying all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strips must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction; or 
(3)  Landscape buffer wall. A buffer strip at least ten feet wide, containing an opaque wall or barrier or uniformly painted fence at least six feet in height. Buffer strips shall have five feet of landscape plantings on the exterior side of the wall and shall be planted with appropriate trees, shrubs and groundcover as to provide a transition from the wall to both edges of the buffer strip. A landscape plan identifying the location and construction of the wall or barrier and all plants to be incorporated in the buffer strip must be approved by the building code enforcement officer prior to any site construction. 
(b)  It is permissible for any part of subsections (a)(2) or (3) of this section to be intermingled with some natural landscape materials, as long as they meet the intent of this section. 
(c)  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued by the city until any buffers required by this section are planted or installed. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this Code to the contrary, the buffers required by this section shall not be required unless the subject lot abuts a residential zoning district. 
(Code 1986, § 23-33; Ord. No. O-95-09-29, 9-21-1995) 
Sec. 94-195. - Construction of fences. 
(a)  The following definitions shall be applicable to this subsection: 
(1)  Fence means any structure constructed or erected to provide a barrier, either physical or visual, for the purpose of protecting property, providing for security and privacy, and properly containing activities on the property. 
(2)  Fence height means the vertical dimension from the natural ground level to the top of the fence measured at any point along the length of the fence. 
(3)  Yard, front means that area bounded by a line along the front of the principal structure extended to intersect the side property lines; those side property lines; and the front property line. 
(4)  Principal structure means the principal building or other structure on a lot or building site designed or used to accommodate the primary use to which the premises are devoted, excluding attached accessory structures or architectural features (i.e., bay windows, chimneys, decks and porches). 
(b)  Fences upon private property in the City of Americus shall be located as follows: 
(1)  Fences (walls and decorative fences) shall not be located outside or beyond the property or lot lines of the lot to be served by such fence. 
(2)  Fences located in side and front yards shall be placed no closer than eight feet from the back of the street curb, or when curbing does not exist, from the edge of pavement but no closer than two feet from the sidewalk. 
(3)  No fence or wall constructed hereunder shall be constructed or maintained in a manner that will create a hazard to vehicular traffic or that will impair the ability of drivers to see and avoid other traffic or pedestrians. 
(c)  All fences shaii conform to the following height designs and fence types: 
(1)  Fences shall not be constructed of exposed concrete block, tires, or other discarded materials. 
(2)  Barbed wire fences or barbed wire assemblies or additions atop fences shall be prohibited in all residential and commercial districts. 
(3)  Barbed wire fences are permitted in agricultural and industrial districts with the following restrictions: 
a.  Barbed wire assemblies or additions shall be restricted to three horizontal wire strands not to exceed a maximum of 18 inches; 
b.  Barbed wire assemblies shall only be erected atop fences which have a minimum height of six feet; and 
c.  Razor ribbon or razor wire shall be prohibited. 
(4)  Fences shall lean at a vertical plane of no more than five percent. 
(d)  This section shall be applicable only to fences permitted and constructed beginning on July 19, 2013; provided, however, that if any fence constructed prior to said date is destroyed or substantially damaged, from whatever cause, such fence shall only be reconstructed in compliance with the provisions of this section. For purposes of this subsection, the terms "destroyed" or "substantially damaged" mean that the fence structure is damaged to the extent of more than 75 percent of its assessed value for city tax purposes. 
(Ord. No. O-2013-21, 7-18-2013) 
Secs. 94-196-94-211. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LOT AND BULK RESTRICTIONS 

Sec. 94-212. - Districts limited to one principal building per lot. 
    Within residential districts only, except group housing developments, no more than one principal building with its customary accessory buildings may occupy or be constructed upon any lot of record. 
(Code 1962, § 27-34; Code 1986, § 23-34) 
Sec. 94-213. - Street access. 
    No building shall hereafter be constructed on one lot which does not have at least 30 feet of frontage on a publicly dedicated, accepted, and maintained street. 
(Code 1962, § 27-35; Code 1986, § 23-35; Ord. No. O-00-06-26, 6-23-2000; Ord. No. O-04-11-28, 11-18-2004) 
Sec. 94-214. - Classification of streets. 
(a)  For the purposes of this chapter, all streets in the city and all streets located in the county but fronting upon property located within the city are hereby divided into three classes: 
(1)  Major streets. 
(2)  Collector streets. 
(3)  Residential streets. 
(b)  Major streets within the city are more particularly designated as follows: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 280, GA. Highway 30, GA. Highway 49, GA. Highway 27, U.S. Highway 19; 
(2)  Lee Street; 
(3)  Tripp Street; 
(4)  Felder Street; 
(5)  McGarrah Street; 
(6)  Reese Street; 
(7)  Cotton Avenue, from Forsyth Street to McGarrah Street; 
(8)  Souther Field Road; 
(9)  Carter Street, from Lee Street to Souther Field Road; 
(10)  Upper River Road from Georgia Highway 49 East; 
(11)  Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard from the southern city limits of the city to the northern city limits of the city. 
(c)  Collector streets within the city are more particularly designated as follows: 
(1)  Glessner Street, from Oak Avenue to Wheatley Street; 
(2)  Forrest Street, from Lamar Street to Oak Avenue; 
(3)  Elm Avenue, from Lee Street to Reese Street; 
(4)  College Street, from Oak Avenue to Elm Street; 
(5)  Taylor Street, from Lee Street to Reese Street; 
(6)  Spring Street, from U.S. Highway 19 to Church Street; 
(7)  North Jackson Street, from Church Street to Rucker Street; 
(8)  Prince Street, from Cotton Avenue to Church Street; 
(9)  Ashby Street, from Lee Street to Mayo Street; 
(10)  Jefferson Street, from Prince Street to Oglethorpe Avenue; 
(11)  Mayo Street, from Souther Field Road to Lamar Street; 
(12)  Oglethorpe Avenue, from Jefferson Street to U.S. Highway 49; 
(13)  Rucker Street, from U.S. Highway 19 to Northside Drive; 
(14)  Northside Drive, from Rucker Street to Souther Field Road; 
(15)  Cotton Avenue, from Forsyth Street to Lamar Street; 
(16)  Brown Street, from Taylor Street to Church Street; 
(17)  North Lee Street, from Carter Street to Rucker Street; 
(18)  Wheatley Street, from Glessner Street to Simmons Street; 
(19)  Simmons Street, from Wheatley Street to Tripp Street; 
(20)  Oak Avenue, from West Glessner Street to Forrest Street; 
(21)  Magnolia Street, from Georgia Highway 30 to Martin Luther King, Jr. Boulevard; 
(22)  Rose Avenue, from Glessner Street to Lee Street; 
(23)  Armory Drive, from Georgia Highway 30 to Patton Drive; 
(24)  Patton Drive, from U.S. Highway 19 to Armory Drive; 
(25)  Railroad Street from N Lee Street to Mayo Street; 
(26)  Magnolia Street from Highway 30 to Highway 19; 
(27)  Amory Drive from Patton Drive to Highway 30; 
(28)  Rose Avenue from S Lee Street to West Glessner Street. 
(d)  All streets not specifically designated as major streets or collector streets in this section are deemed to be residential streets for the purposes of this chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 27-36; Code 1986, § 23-36; Ord. No. O-88-12-42, 12-27-1988; Ord. No. O-98-12-48, 12-17-1998) 
Sec. 94-215. - Curb cuts. 
    Curb cuts shall in no case, except in residential districts, be greater than 30 feet in length, nor closer than 20 feet to another curb cut. 
(Code 1962, § 27-43; Code 1986, § 23-43) 
Secs. 94-216-94-238. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - OFF-STREET PARKING AND LOADING 

Sec. 94-239. - Generally. 
    At the time of the erection of any type of building or structure hereinafter listed or at the time any such building or structure is enlarged or increased in capacity, there shall be provided for such new construction, enlargement or increased capacity only, off-street automobile parking or storage space in accordance with the following minimum requirements. Such parking space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street, and can be provided in a required setback. For all nonresidential uses, off-street parking must not be so planned or designed where vehicles ingress or egress from a parking space which enters or exits directly onto any street; a physical division must be provided between the street and parking area. 
(1)  Residential uses. 
a.  Dwellings; one space per dwelling unit. 
b.  Multiple-family dwelling; 1 1/2 parking spaces for each dwelling unit located in a multifamily district. 
c.  Dormitories; one parking space for each bed. 
d.  Hotels and motels, including clubs; one parking space for each sleeping room. If, in addition to sleeping rooms, there are other uses operated in conjunction with and as part of the hotel/motel, additional off-street parking spaces shall be provided for such other uses as would be required by this section if such uses were separate from the hotel/motel to the extent of 35 percent of the off-street parking specified in this article for retail stores, offices, services, establishments, bars, restaurants, dining rooms, night clubs, cabarets, ballrooms, banquet halls, meeting rooms, auditoriums. 
e.  Housing for elderly; one parking space for each unit. 
f.  Fraternities and sororities; one parking space for each 75 square feet of total floor area of building. 
g.  Where upper floor residential use is permitted in multistory buildings in zoning district C-3 downtown business district, and where more than three such units are proposed in a multistory building, the developer must submit plans which will provide for 1 1/2 off-street parking spaces per unit for proposed tenants of such multistory building. 
(2)  Commercial uses. One parking space is required per square footage indicated in each category: 
a.  One hundred square feet: 
Bars. 
Beer gardens. 
Cafeterias. 
Cocktail lounges. 
Nightclubs. 
Restaurants. 
Taverns. 
Theaters. 
b.  One hundred fifty square feet: 
Auto repairs shops. 
Auto service stations. 
Bakeries. 
Beauty shops. 
Butcher shops. 
Carwash. 
Convenience stores. 
Delicatessens. 
Dry cleanings. 
Grocery stores. 
Ice cream parlors. 
Laundries. 
Liquor/package stores. 
Self-service laundries. 
Take-out foods. 
Adult entertainment establishments. 
c.  Two hundred square feet: 
Animal hospitals. 
Auction galleries. 
Automotive parts and supply stores. 
Barbershops. 
Business schools. 
Child care centers. 
Civic clubs. 
Community centers (nongovernmental). 
Contractor shops: general, electrical, plumbing, roofing, air conditioning, etc. 
Dance schools. 
Dental clinics. 
Drugstores. 
Health institutions. 
Kennels. 
Libraries. 
Medical and dental offices. 
Medical clinics. 
Post offices. 
Trade school. 
Vehicle salesrooms. 
Veterinarians. 
Vocational schools. 
Video stores. 
Physical fitness center 
d.  Three hundred square feet: 
Bank, savings and loans and finance companies. 
Building supply stores. 
Business and professional offices. 
Financial companies. 
Government offices. 
Hardware stores. 
Household equipment. 
Household repairs. 
Marine supplies. 
Pet grooming. 
Retail stores. 
Swimming and pool supplies. 
Travel agencies. 
Wholesale medical supplies. 
Wholesale stores. 
e.  Five hundred square feet: 
Art galleries. 
Carpet and flooring materials retail stores. 
Furniture stores. 
Industrial uses. 
Manufacturing uses. 
Printing and engraving. 
Research and testing laboratories. 
Sign shops. 
Storage buildings. 
Telephone exchange, housing automatic equipment only. 
Warehouses. 
(3)  Miscellaneous uses. 
a.  Hospitals: one space for each two beds intended for patients. 
b.  Places of public assembly, assembly halls, convention halls, exhibition halls, dance halls, skating rinks, sport arenas, community center, libraries, theater, museums, amusement centers: one parking space for each five seats or one parking space for each 200 square feet of gross area; whichever is greater. 
c.  Places of worship: one parking space for each 50 square feet of auditorium or chapel area, not including Sunday-school classrooms. 
d.  Funeral homes: one parking space for each four fixed seats in public rooms, plus one parking space for 90 square feet in public rooms with moveable seat. 
e.  Bowling centers: six parking spaces for each lane. 
f.  University or college, senior high schools, junior high schools, public or private schools: one parking space for each classroom, plus one parking space for each five students or one-half of the additional parking spaces for rooms used for public assembly as otherwise required by this section, whichever may be greater. 
g.  Elementary schools, public or private: one parking space for each classroom, plus one-half of the additional parking spaces for rooms used for public assembly as otherwise required by this section. 
h.  Private clubs, lodges, fraternal buildings, union halls: one parking space for each 100 square feet of assembly hall and auditorium, and one parking space for each 50 square feet of gross floor area occupied by guests, customers, patrons, members or other occupants, whichever may be greater. 
i.  Sanitarians, asylums, orphanages, convalescent homes, home for the infirm: one parking space for each five beds for patients. 
j.  Stadiums: one parking space for each five seats. 
k.  Shopping centers: one parking space for each 150 square feet of total floor area. 
l.  Private court club: five spaces per court. 
m.  Flea markets: one parking space for each 100 square feet of booth or floor area of the flea market. 
n.  Nursery schools and kindergartens: one parking space for each six children enrolled. 
(4)  Calculating required parking spaces. 
a.  Uses not specifically mentioned. The requirements for off-street parking for any unspecified uses in this section shall be the same as provided in this section for the use most similar to the one sought as determined by the planning department. It is the intent to require all uses, except agricultural to provide off-street parking. 
b.  Fractional spaces. When units or measurements determining number of required off-street parking spaces result in requirement of fractional space, any such fraction equal to or greater than one-half shall require a full off-street parking space. 
c.  Mixed uses. In the case of mixed uses, the total requirements for off-street parking shall be the sum of the requirements of the various uses computed separately, and off-street parking space for one use shall not be considered as providing the required off-street parking for any other use. 
d.  Measurements . For the purposes of this article, gross floor area shall mean the floor area inside of the exterior walls excluding elevators, stairwells, meter rooms and power equipment rooms. In hospitals, bassinets shall not count as beds. In stadiums, sport arenas, places of worship and other places of assembly in which occupants utilize benches, pews or other similar seating facilities, each 20 lineal inches of such seating shall be counted as one seat for the purpose of computing off-street parking requirements. 
e.  Areas over 2,000 square feet. All off-street parking areas over 2,000 square feet, shall meet landscaping requirements as provided in chapter 14, article III. 
(Code 1962, § 27-38; Code 1986, § 23-38; Ord. No. O-94-09-32, 9-22-1994; Ord. No. O-95-04-13, 4-20-1995; Ord. No. O-96-07-26, 7-18-1996; Ord. No. O-00-11-40, 11-16-2000) 
Sec. 94-240. - Principal use vehicle parking and storage space requirements. 
    If vehicle parking or storage space required cannot be reasonably provided on the same lot on which the principal use is conducted, such space may be provided on other off-street property provided such space lies within 400 feet of the main entrance to such principal use. Such vehicle parking space shall be associated with the permitted use and shall not thereafter be reduced or encroached upon in any manner. 
(Code 1962, § 27-39; Code 1986, § 23-39) 
Sec. 94-241. - Combined parking spaces. 
    The required parking space for any number of separate uses may be combined in one lot, but the required space assigned to one use may not be assigned to another use at the same time, except that one-half of the parking space required for churches, theaters or assembly halls, the peak attendance of which will be at night on Sundays may be assigned to a use which will be closed at nights or on Sundays. 
(Code 1962, § 27-40; Code 1986, § 23-40) 
Sec. 94-242. - Size of spaces. 
(a)  Each space shall have not less than 180 square feet and shall be not less than nine feet wide and 20 feet in length, exclusive of passageways. There shall be adequate interior drives to connect each space with a public street. In the cases of 25 or more required parking spaces, one-quarter or 25 percent of the required spaces may be of an area not less than eight feet by 16 feet and must be so marked for compact vehicles. 
(b)  Off-street parking requirements for handicapped parking shall be provided per the "Americans with Disabilities Act Handbook," appendix B, section 4, pertaining to accessible elements and spaces: scope and technical requirements. 
(Code 1962, § 27-41; Code 1986, § 23-41; Ord. No. O-95-04-13, 4-20-1995) 
Sec. 94-243. - Loading and unloading space. 
    Every building or structure used for business, trade, or industry shall provide as indicated herein for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to a public alley or, if there is no alley, to a public street. 
(1)  Retail business. One space,ten feet by 25 feet, for each 3,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(2)  Wholesale and industry. One space, ten feet by 50 feet, for each 10,000 square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
(3)  Bus and truck terminals. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
(Code 1962, § 27-42; Code 1986, § 23-42) 
Secs. 94-244-94-264. - Reserved. 
DIVISIONS 4. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 

Sec. 94-265. - Lot of record. 
    Any lot of record on December 17, 1959, which did not meet the lot width and/or lot area requirements herein provided, may be used as a building site for a single-family residence, provided, however, the required yards are maintained. 
(Code 1962, § 27-46; Code 1986, § 23-46) 
Sec. 94-266. - Adjoining and vacant lot of record. 
    If two or more adjoining and vacant lots with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at any time after December 17, 1959, and such lots individually are less than the lot width requirements for the district in which they are located, such groups of lots shall together be considered as a single lot or shall be grouped into several lots of minimum permitted size and the resulting lot or lots shall be subject to the dimensional requirements of the chapter. 
(Code 1962, § 27-47; Code 1986, § 23-47) 
Sec. 94-267. - Dwelling setback requirement exceptions. 
    The setback requirements of this chapter for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on developed lots which are located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot and within the same block and zoning district and fronting on the same street as such lot is less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the minimum required setback. In such cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on developed lots. 
(Code 1962, § 27-48; Code 1986, § 23-48) 
Sec. 94-268. - Group housing developments. 
    Group housing developments may be permitted in R-3 residential districts and I-N institutional districts provided that all of the following conditions are met: 
(1)  Such housing development shall consist of two or more buildings; 
(2)  These buildings will be constructed on a plot of ground of not less than two acres in area, and in one ownership; 
(3)  This parcel is not subdivided into the customary streets and lots, and will not be so subdivided, or where the existing or contemplated street and lot layout make it impractical to apply the requirements of this chapter to individual dwellings in such group developments; 
(4)  Provided the arrangement of buildings is such that access of firefighting equipment to the buildings is maintained, as certified in writing by the fire chief; and 
(5)  Provided that the minimum lot area per family set forth in this chapter for the district is observed, and that the height requirements are observed. 
(Code 1962, § 27-49; Code 1986, § 23-49) 
Sec. 94-269. - Exceptions to height limits. 
    The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas, and domes not intended for human occupancy; monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, aerials. 
(Code 1962, § 27-50; Code 1986, § 23-50) 
Sec. 94-270. - Satellite dish antennas. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial and industrial districts means those districts established in the zoning ordinance of the city described as N-S neighborhood shopping, C-1 roadside business, C-2 general business, C-3 downtown general business, I-N institutional, I industrial, and AG agricultural, according to the system of zoning classifications appearing in this Code. 
    Rear yard means that portion of the yard of a residence or business located opposite the front entrance of said residence or business. 
    Residential district means those districts established in the zoning ordinance of the city described as R-1, R-2, R-3 and R-4 according to the system of zoning classification appearing in this Code. 
    Satellite dish antenna means a satellite earth station, which is more than one meter in size, capable of being used to receive or send satellite signals from a space station, stations, or satellite. 
    Uninhabited lot means a lot of land within the city limits of the city upon which there is no building, residence, business or other structure. 
(b)  Requirements. Satellite dish antennas shall be permitted in all zoning districts of the city, provided that the following requirements are met at the time such antennas are installed and at all times thereafter: 
(1)  Such antennas shall be allowed in residential districts, so long as the antenna is located only in the rear yard of the residence. There shall be no such antennas located on the roof of any building in a residential zone. 
(2)  Such antennas shall be allowed in commercial and industrial districts, so long as the antenna is located in the rear yard of the main building or any accessory buildings to the rear of the main building, or upon the roof of the main building or any accessory buildings to the rear of the main building. 
(3)  Such antennas shall not be located on any uninhabited lots within the city. 
(4)  There shall be no more than one satellite dish antenna per lot, except for satellite dish antennas required for radio stations and television stations in the conduct of their business. 
(5)  All satellite dish antennas shall meet applicable building setback requirements for the districts in which said antennas are located. 
(6)  In residential districts, the ground-based satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 20 feet in height. In commercial and industrial districts, a ground-based satellite dish antenna shall not exceed 20 feet in height. No such antenna, whether ground-based or otherwise, shall exceed the department of transportation, Federal Aviation Administration height limitations for the zoning district in which said antenna is located. 
(c)  Exception. Any satellite dish antenna installed prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this section is derived shall not be affected by the requirements contained herein; provided, however, that, in the event that such antenna installed prior to such effective date is removed or replaced by another such satellite dish antenna, then the new satellite dish antenna shall be subject to the provisions hereof. 
(Code 1986, § 23-51; Ord. No. O-88-06-23, 6-20-1988; Ord. No. O-94-10-35, 10-27-1994; Ord. No. O-97-06-21, 6-19-1997) 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1962 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1986 Code. 
1962 Code 
Section Section  
New Code 1-4 1-4 2-5 2-143 2-9 2-55 2-10 2-48 2-12, 2-13 2-50 2-14, 2-15 2-51, 2-52 2-17 2-53 2-19 2-54 2-28, 2-29 2-21, 2-22 2-32, 2-33 2-113 2-33 2-114 2-38 2-92 2-39, 2-40 2-56, 2-57 2-43, 2-44 2-89, 2-90 2-74, 2-75 58-1, 58-2 3-2 6-2 3-3 6-1 3-5-3-10 6-6-6-11 3-11 6-11 3-12 6-3 3-22 6-36 3-29 6-38 3-39-3-45 6-42-6-48 3-46(a), (b) 6-49 3-46(c) 6-4 3-46(d)-(h) 6-49 3-47, 3-48 6-50, 6-51 3-50 6-37 3-52 6-52 3-53, 3-54 6-40, 6-41 3-55 6-15 3-61, 3-62 6-12, 6-13 3-62a 6-14 4-1 10-1 4-2, 4-3 10-5, 10-6 4-4, 4-5 10-3, 10-4 4-6 10-2 4-7 10-7 4-8-4-10 10-9-10-11 4-11 10-8 4-22 10-12 5-1-5-1.3 14-29 5-2 14-30 6-1 18-1 6-2 18-11 6-3 18-10 6-4 18-9 6-5, 6-6 18-6, 18-7 6-7, 6-8 18-7, 18-8 6-9 66-1 6-10 18-2 6-12-6-14 18-3-18-5 6-15 66-3 6-16 66-2 7-8 30-22 8-1 14-29 8-4, 8-5 14-51 8-5 14-54 8-5-8-8 14-53 14-55 8-7 14-51 14-54 14-56-14-59 8-8 14-56 8-10 14-52 9-5 38-1 9-6 30-1 9-8 38-2, 38-3 9-10, 9-11 38-4, 38-5 9-13-9-15 38-49-38-51 9-16-9-18 38-53-38-55 9-19 38-52 10-22 90-1 11-1 14-29 11-2 14-107 11-3, 11-4 14-109, 14-110 11-5 14-106 11-6 14-29 11-11 14-108 12-3 34-1 12-4 14-5 12-5 14-4 13-1, 13-2 46-94, 46-95 13-6 46-93 13-16 46-93 13-25 46-92 13-29, 13-30 46-90, 46-91 13-71 46-331 13-72 46-330 13-73-13-75 46-332-46-334 13-76 46-338 13-77-13-79 46-335-46-337 13-82 46-339 15-2 62-26 15-5 62-173 15-6 62-116 15-7 62-113 15-9 62-23 15-11, 15-12 62-208, 62-209 15-13 38-6 15-14 62-153 15-15 62-59 15-17 46-2 15-18, 15-19 62-114, 62-115 15-20, 15-21 62-110, 62-111 15-22 62-174 15-27 62-58 15-27.01 78-5 15-28 62-151 15-30 66-3 15-31, 15-32 62-206 15-33 62-204 15-34 62-206 15-35.1 62-205 15-37 62-207 15-38-15-40 62-150 15-41 62-21 15-42 62-25 15-46 62-24 15-48-15-50 62-81-62-83 15-51 62-152 17-1 14-29 17-9 14-78 17-11 14-81 17-15 14-79 17-18 14-77 18-5 62-61 19-1 1-13 19-2-19-5 54-1 20-3, 20-4 78-3, 78-4 20-5 62-117 20-6 62-114 20-7 62-118 20-8, 20-9 78-1, 78-2 20-10 62-22 20-12 62-60 20-16-20-19 78-29-78-32 20-24(a), 20-24(b) 78-93, 78-94 20-24(f) 78-96 20-24(g) 78-98 20-24(h) 78-97 20-24(i) 78-95 22-5 46-24 22-13 46-23 23-6 86-208 23-8 86-209 23-9, 23-10 86-25, 86-26 23-12 86-27 23-15-23-19 78-125-78-129 23-27 86-3 23-28 86-76 23-31 86-77 23-32 86-27 23-34 86-80 23-38 86-82 23-40 86-83 23-41 86-81 23-42 86-79 23-45 86-84 23-47 86-85 23-48 86-87 23-49 86-86 23-54, 23-55 86-27 23-58 86-88 23-62 86-28 23-64 86-27 23-71 86-29 23-79 86-113 23-82, 23-83 86-114, 86-115 23-97 86-118 23-98 86-117 23-106, 23-107 86-172, 86-173 23-108, 23-109 86-173, 86-174 23-109.1 86-175 23-110 86-176 23-112 86-176, 86-177 23-118, 23-119 86-27 23-120 86-89 23-142, 23-143 86-48, 86-49 23-144 86-47 23-146 86-50 23-150 86-51 23-152(a) 86-1 23-153 86-2 26-1, 26-2 90-162, 90-163 26-3, 26-4 90-165, 90-166 26-4 90-291 26-4.1 90-167 26-5 90-161 26-6 90-160 26-7 90-130 26-8, 26-9 90-169, 90-170 26-11 90-159 26-12 90-168 26-16-26-18 90-293-90-295 26-18.1 90-292 26-19, 26-20 90-296, 90-297 26-21 90-289 26-22 90-165 90-290 26-23 90-288 26-24-26-26 90-298-90-300 27-2 94-1 27-3, 27-4 94-115, 94-116 27-5 94-53 27-8 94-56 27-9 94-117 27-10 94-4 27-11-27-14 94-27-94-30 27-16 94-2 27-18 94-3 27-22-27-24 94-148-94-150 27-24.1 94-151 27-24.2 94-153 27-25, 27-26 94-154, 94-155 27-27(p) 94-156 27-28-27-31 94-158-94-161 27-34-27-36 94-212-94-214 27-37 94-31 27-38-27-42 94-239-94-243 27-43 94-215 27-46-27-50 94-265-94-269 27-54-27-61 94-86-94-93 27-72-27-74 70-21-70-23 71-10 14-80  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1986 CODE 
This table gives the location within the Code of those sections of the 1986 Code. 
1986 Code 
Section Section  
New Code 1-1-1-10 1-1-1-10 1-11 1-12 1-13 70-1 2-1, 2-2 2-89, 2-90 2-6, 2-7 2-113 2-7 2-114 2-10.1 2-91 2-12 2-92 2-13 2-142 2-21, 2-22 2-21, 2-22 2-24 2-48 2-24.1 2-49 2-26-2-28 2-50-2-52 2-30 2-53 2-32, 2-33 2-54, 2-55 2-35, 2-36 2-56, 2-57 2.5-1-2.5-23 46-187-46-209 2.5-24 46-2010 2.5-25 46-211 3-1 6-1 3-3, 3-4 6-2, 6-3 3-7 62-116 3-8-3-20 6-4-6-16 3-30-3-32 6-36-6-38 3-50-3-62 6-40-6-52 4-1-4-11 10-1-10-11 4-20-4-23 10-43-10-46 4-24, 4-25 10-67, 10-68 4-26 10-66 4-30 10-12 5-1, 5-2 14-29, 14-30 5-5, 5-6 14-4, 14-5 5-7 14-31 5-8 14-1 5-9 14-3 5-23, 5-24 14-51, 14-52 5-31-5-37 14-53-14-59 5-50-5-69 34-21-34-40 5-70-5-78 34-69-34-77 5-79.1 14-2 5-80-5-84 14-166-14-170 5-85(a) 14-171 5-85(b)-(f) 14-172 5-86-5-91 14-173-14-178 5-93, 5-94 14-179, 14-180 5-106 14-77 5-108 14-78 5-110 14-79 5-112, 5-113 14-80, 14-81 5-120 14-106 5-123-5-126 14-107-14-110 5-130-5-137 14-268-14-275 5-151-5-154 14-199-14-202 5-156 14-203 5-171 74-2 5-172 74-1 5-173-5-178 74-49-74-54 5-179 74-4 5-180-5-185 74-82-74-87 5-186, 5-187 74-29, 74-30 5-188 74-3 5-189 74-88 5-189.1 74-5 5-190-5-197 14-134-14-141 5-210-5-220 34-98-34-108 5-251-5-258 14-230-14-237 5-271-5-274 34-131-34-134 5-277 34-135 5-279 34-130 5-331-5-334 34-155-34-158 5-336, 5-337 34-159, 34-160 5-339 34-161 5-341 34-154 6-1, 6-2 18-1, 18-2 6-4-6-12 18-3-18-11 7-8 30-22 8-2 1-13 8-3-8-6 54-1 8-9 54-2 9-7 26-1 9-9, 9-10 26-2, 26-3 9-13 26-4 10-1-10-4 2-199-2-202 10-4.1-10-4.4 2-203-2-206 10-5-10-7 2-143-2-145 10-23 46-23 10-25 46-24 10-28 46-25 10-30-10-41 46-54-46-65 10-50-10-56 2-174-2-180 11-2 38-1 11-3 30-1 11-4-11-8 38-2-38-6 11-20-11-26 38-49-38-55 12-1 34-1 12-2-12-4 62-58-62-60 12-5, 12-6 62-110, 62-111 12-7, 12-8 58-1, 58-2 12-35-12-42 58-47-58-54 12-70-12-73 42-19-42-22 13-1, 13-2 90-1, 90-2 13-20-13-25 90-159-90-164 13-25 90-199 13-26-13-29 90-165-90-168 13-30 90-130 13-31, 13-32 90-169, 90-170 13-40-13-49 90-23-90-32 13-60-13-72 90-288-90-300 13-80-13-91 90-251-90-262 13-100-13-106 90-340-90-346 13-130 90-366 13-150 90-78 13-161-13-169 90-100-90-108 13-200-13-204 90-194-90-198 14-1-14-7 46-90-46-96 14-8 46-89 14-9-14-39 46-97-46-127 14-39.1 46-128 14-40 46-1 14-50 46-261 14-51, 14-52 46-294, 46-295 14-53, 14-54 46-262, 46-263 14-55-14-57 46-296-46-298 14-58, 14-59 46-264, 46-265 14-60-14-69 46-330-46-339 14-70 46-2 14-80-14-86 22-19-22-25 14-91-14-95 46-155-46-159 14-200, 14-201 46-230, 46-231 14-202 46-229 14-203-14-212 46-232-46-241 15-1 62-204 15-3 62-205 15-5, 15-6 62-206, 62-207 15-7-15-11 62-21-62-25 15-13 62-26 15-15, 15-16 62-112, 62-113 15-17, 15-18 62-150, 62-151 15-19, 15-20 62-114, 62-115 15-21 62-27 15-22 62-173 15-24 62-174 15-25, 15-26 62-117, 62-118 15-27, 15-28 62-152, 62-153 15-29, 15-30 62-208, 62-209 15-31, 15-32 62-81, 62-82 15-34 62-83 15-35 62-28 15-36 62-175 16-1-16-3 66-1-66-3 16-10-16-24 78-53-78-67 17-8 2-88 18-1-18-4 78-29-78-32 18-5-18-8 78-1-78-4 18-20, 18-21 78-93, 78-94 18-25-18-28 78-95-78-98 19-1 82-1 19-2-19-4 82-4-82-6 19-20-19-23 82-31-82-34 19-30-19-37 82-57-82-64 19-38, 19-39 82-2, 82-3 20-1, 20-2 86-1, 86-2 20-4-20-6 86-25-86-27 20-8-20-12 78-125-78-129 20-13 78-5 20-15, 20-16 86-208, 86-209 20-17 86-28 20-22 62-61 20-30 86-3 20-31-20-33 86-76-86-78 20-35-20-37 86-79-86-81 20-39 86-82 20-40 86-29 20-41 86-83 20-43-20-46 86-84-86-87 20-48-20-52 86-88-86-92 20-60-20-69 86-113-86-122 20-70-20-75 86-172-86-177 20-80-20-83 86-47-86-50 20-86 86-51 20-91, 20-92 86-143, 86-144 21-1-21-12 50-21-50-32 21-16 50-1 22-1-22-16 46-367-46-382 23-1 94-1 23-2, 23-3 94-115, 94-116 23-4-23-7 94-53-94-56 23-8 94-117 23-9 94-4 23-10-23-13 94-27-94-30 23-15, 23-16 94-2, 94-3 23-20-23-23 94-148-94-151 23-23.5 94-152 23-24-23-27 94-153-94-156 23-27.5 94-157 23-28-23-31 94-158-94-161 23-32, 23-33 94-193, 94-194 23-34-23-36 94-212-94-214 23-37 94-31 23-38-23-42 94-239-94-243 23-43 94-215 23-46-23-51 94-265-94-270 23-60-23-67 94-86-94-93 23-70-23-72 70-21-70-23 23-73 94-32  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within the Code of Ordinances 
Ordinance 
Number  Date Section  Section 
in Code 12-28-1983(Ord.) 1-5 46-155-46-159 12-27-1984(Ord.) 2-88  4-22-1985(Ord.) 6-1 6-11 6-13-6-15 6-40, 6-41 O-85-05-12  5-27-1985 90-166 90-291, 90-292 O-85-07-16  6-27-1985 1.1, 1.2 90-24, 90-25 2 90-23 3.1 90-26 3.2.1, 3.2.2 90-27 3.2.3-3.2.7 90-28-90-32  3-26-1986(Ord.) 1 14-269 2 14-268 3-7 14-270-14-274  6-30-1986(Ord.) 94-156  8-25-1986(Ord.) 6-11 11-24-1986(Ord.) 2-88 12-22-1986(1)(Ord.) 1 94-150 2 94-32 12-22-1986(2)(Ord.) (a) 90-165 (b) 90-290 O-87-03-05  3-23-1987 2-89 O-87-04-07  4-27-1987 86-78 O-87-04-08  4-27-1987 2-89 O-87-06-11  6-22-1987 86-90 O-87-06-12  6-22-1987 A-C 86-119 O-87-06-13  6-22-1987 86-91 O-87-08-17  8-24-1987 1-4 2-142 O-87-10-18 10-19-1987 38-51 O-87-10-19 10-19-1987 14-203 14-199-14-202 O-87-10-20 10-19-1987 94-149 O-87-11-23 11-23-1987 70-21 O-87-11-24 11-23-1987 94-54, 94-55 O-87-11-25 11-23-1987 62-28 O-87-12-27 12-21-1987 90-163, 90-164 90-343, 90-344 O-88-02-04  2-22-1988 1 94-1 O-88-02-05  2-22-1988 94-159, 94-160 O-88-02-08  2-22-1988 6-38 O-88-02-09  2-22-1988 90-165 O-88-03-10  3-28-1988 14-29, 14-30 14-53 O-88-03-11  3-28-1988 86-120 O-88-03-13  3-28-1988 86-143, 86-144 O-88-04-16  4-25-1988 90-290 O-88-05-19  5-23-1988 94-155, 94-156 O-88-05-21  5-23-1988 94-155 O-88-06-22  6-20-1988 94-1 O-88-06-23  6-20-1988 94-270 O-88-07-25  7-25-1988 2-199-2-206 O-88-08-28  8-22-1988 94-155 O-88-08-29  8-22-1988 94-161 O-88-08-30  8-22-1988 14-270 O-88-08-31  8-22-1988 66-3 O-88-11-38 11-28-1988 46-23 O-88-12-42 12-27-1988 94-214 O-89-01-01  1-23-1989 90-290 O-89-01-03  1-23-1989 6-38 O-84-03-05b  3-27-1989 90-291 O-89-03-05a  3-27-1989 90-166 O-89-03-06  3-27-1989 90-162 O-89-04-09  4-24-1989 94-154 94-156 O-89-04-10  4-24-1989 2-144 O-89-6-17  6-26-1989 86-91 O-89-7-23  7-24-1989 86-91 O-89-07-19  7-24-1989 2-144 O-89-10-28 10-23-1989 94-148 94-157 94-161 O-89-10-29 10-23-1989 86-119 O-89-12-41 12-18-1989 90-290 O-89-12-42 12-18-1989 2-89 O-89-12-43 12-18-1989 86-119 O-90-02-04  2-26-1990 94-161 O-90-02-06  2-26-1990 10-43-10-46 10-66-10-68 O-90-05-14  2-26-1990 34-69-34-76 O-90-04-10  4-24-1990 90-293 O-90-06-16  6-28-1990 86-121 O-90-07-18  7-23-1990 50-24 O-90-07-18A  7-23-1990 94-153 O-90-07-19  7-23-1990 50-21-50-23 50-25-50-32 O-90-09-22  9-24-1990 10-12 10-44 10-46 O-90-12-20 12-26-1990 6-38 O-90-12-31 12-26-1990 90-162 O-90-12-33 12-26-1990 38-51 O-90-12-35 12-26-1990 90-290 O-91-02-04  2-25-1991 14-31 O-91-03-07  3-25-1991 2-89 O-91-03-08  3-25-1991 90-160 O-91-04-12  4-24-1991 94-1 94-150 O-91-06-18  6-20-1991 86-209 O-91-07-23(a)  7-29-1991 86-91 O-91-08-25  8-26-1991 86-209 O-91-10-34 10-28-1991 86-209 O-91-10-35 10-28-1991 86-122 O-91-10-36 10-28-1991 86-91 O-91-10-38 10-28-1991 94-1 O-91-11-40 11-25-1991 38-51 O-92-01-01  1-28-1992 90-165 O-92-01-02  1-28-1992 90-290 O-92-01-04  1-28-1992 90-166 90-291 O-92-01-05  1-28-1992 14-29 O-92-02-07  2-24-1992 94-154-94-156 94-159 O-92-03-12  3-23-1992 86-209 O-92-03-13  3-23-1992 14-29 O-92-03-15  3-23-1992 78-30 78-32 78-95 78-97 86-27 86-29 86-143, 86-144 O-92-03-16  3-23-1992 86-78 O-92-06-18  6-22-1992 86-113 O-92-08-23  8-24-1992 94-149 O-92-08-24  8-24-1992 90-159, 90-160 O-92-08-26  8-24-1992 86-116 O-92-09-29  9-25-1992 90-167 O-92-09-28  9-28-1992 1-7 14-134-14-140 O-92-10-105 10-26-1992 42-19-42-22 O-92-11-107 10-26-1992 2-174-2-180 O-92-12-109 12-28-1992 14-136 O-93-01-02  1-26-1993 90-165 O-93-01-03  1-28-1993 90-290 O-93-02-05  2-22-1993 2-144 O-93-02-06  2-22-1993 14-29 O-93-02-07  2-22-1993 90-165 O-93-02-08  3-26-1993 90-345 O-93-04-15  4-26-1993 86-120 O-93-06-20  6-24-1993 14-134 14-136 O-93-06-23  6-24-1993 94-155, 94-156 94-159 O-93-06-25  6-24-1993 46-187-46-209 46-211 46-2010 O-93-11-36 11-22-1993 14-136 O-93-11-37 11-22-1993 38-51 O-93-12-40 12-27-1993 6-16 O-93-12-41 12-27-1993 2-145 O-93-12-44 12-27-1993 94-149 94-154-94-156 94-159, 94-160 O-93-12-45 12-27-1993 94-158 O-94-01-02  1-25-1994 62-173 O-94-01-04  1-25-1994 90-165 O-94-01-05  1-25-1994 90-290 O-94-01-07  1-25-1994 94-1 94-154-94-160 O-94-01-08  1-25-1994 2-145 O-94-02-09  1-25-1994 2-145 O-94-05-14  5-19-1994 86-120 O-94-05-15  5-19-1994 14-275 O-94-07-23  7-21-1994 34-1 O-94-07-24  7-21-1994 86-120 O-94-07-26  7-21-1994 14-29 O-94-09-31  9-22-1994 94-193 O-94-09-32  9-22-1994 94-1 94-159 94-239 O-94-10-35 10-27-1994 94-270 O-94-10-36 10-27-1994 14-29 O-94-11-38 11-28-1994 14-29 O-94-12-40 12-22-1994 86-120 O-94-12-41 12-22-1994 46-1 O-94-12-46 12-22-1994 2-56 O-95-01-01  1-26-1995 86-78 O-95-02-08  2-23-1995 94-155-94-157 O-95-02-05  2-27-1995 2-89 O-95-02-06  2-27-1995 70-1 O-95-03-10  3-23-1995 90-163 90-343 O-95-03-09  3-24-1995 94-154, 94-155 O-95-04-13  4-20-1995 94-239 94-242 O-95-05-15  5-18-1995 78-1 O-95-06-22  6-22-1995 86-78 O-95-06-23  6-22-1995 86-120 O-95-07-26  7-20-1995 58-47-58-54 O-95-09-29  9-21-1995 94-194 O-95-09-30  9-21-1995 38-51 O-95-09-31  9-21-1995 14-272 34-69-34-76 O-95-09-32  9-21-1995 94-1 94-155, 94-156 94-159 O-95-11-35 11-30-1995 90-23 90-25 90-27, 90-28 90-30-90-32 O-95-11-36 11-30-1995 14-29 O-95-11-37 11-30-1995 46-25 O-95-12-41 12-21-1995 46-89 46-96-46-128 O-95-12-42 12-21-1995 6-38 O-95-12-44 12-21-1995 2-89 O-95-12-45 12-21-1995 14-136 14-141 O-95-12-47 12-21-1995 94-1 94-155-94-157 O-95-12-50 12-21-1995 6-38 O-96-01-04  1-25-1996 90-290 O-96-03-11  3-21-1996 86-91 O-96-03-12  3-21-1996 86-120 O-96-03-13  3-21-1996 86-78 O-96-04-15  4-18-1996 90-78 O-96-06-20  6-20-1996 86-120 O-96-06-24  6-20-1996 6-42 O-96-07-26  7-18-1996 94-239 O-96-08-33  8-22-1996 86-88 O-96-09-40  9-19-1996 14-29 O-96-09-41  9-19-1996 2-91 O-96-09-38  9-22-1996 94-1 94-149, 94-150 94-154-94-156 94-158 O-96-10-46 10-24-1996 62-175 O-96-11-48 11-21-1996 94-1 94-149, 94-150 94-154-94-156 94-158 O-96-11-49 11-21-1996 46-23 O-96-11-50 11-21-1996 94-32 94-53 O-97-01-01  1-23-1997 90-346 O-97-02-03  2-20-1997 50-1 O-97-03-05  3-20-1997 82-1-82-6 82-31-82-34 82-57-82-64 O-97-03-06  3-20-1997 14-2 O-97-03-07  3-20-1997 14-29 O-97-04-11  4-24-1997 94-154-94-156 94-159 O-97-04-12  4-24-1997 94-161 O-97-05-16  5-22-1997 90-428 O-97-06-21  6-19-1997 94-270 O-97-07-25  7-24-1997 46-95 O-97-08-30  8-21-1997 14-141 O-97-08-31  8-21-1997 14-141 O-97-08-31A  8-21-1997 86-119 O-97-11-34 11-20-1997 1-3 78-29-78-31 O-97-11-36 11-20-1997 90-2 O-97-11-38 11-20-1997 14-1 O-97-12-39 12-18-1997 46-1 O-98-01-01  1-22-1998 90-165 O-98-01-02  1-22-1998 90-290 O-98-01-04  1-22-1998 90-170 O-98-03-11  3-19-1998 94-54 O-98-03-12  3-19-1998 94-1 O-98-03-13  3-20-1998 90-31 O-98-05-19  5-21-1998 90-251-90-262 O-98-06-24  6-18-1998 14-29 O-98-11-39 11-19-1998 86-78 O-98-11-41 11-19-1998 86-91 O-98-12-47 12-17-1998 94-1 94-149-94-152 94-161 94-193 O-98-12-48 12-17-1998 94-214 O-99-01-05 12-17-1998 90-165 O-99-01-06 12-17-1998 90-290 O-99-01-03  1-21-1999 1-9 90-100-90-108 O-99-02-08  2-18-1999 82-33 O-99-03-11  3-18-1999 14-2 O-99-04-12  4-22-1999 94-1 O-99-04-16  4-22-1999 86-91 O-99-05-18  5-20-1999 62-117 O-99-05-19  5-20-1999 94-1 94-150, 94-151 94-153 O-99-06-25  6-24-1999 2-144, 2-145 O-99-08-31  8-19-1999 94-149-94-160 O-99-08-34  8-19-1999 82-34 O-99-08-35  8-19-1999 1-4 14-230-14-233 4 14-234 5 14-236 6 14-235 8 14-237 O-99-10-39 10-18-1999 6-40 O-99-10-40 10-21-1999 1-4 34-131-34-134 7 34-135 9 34-130 O-99-10-41 10-21-1999 46-107 O-99-11-42 11-18-1999 14-3 O-99-11-45 11-18-1999 86-91 O-99-12-46 12-16-1999 90-289 O-00-01-01  1-20-2000 94-155, 94-156 O-00-01-02  1-20-2000 1-4 34-155-34-158 6, 7 34-159, 34-160 9 34-161 11 34-154 O-00-03-10  3-23-2000 94-154, 94-155 O-00-04-17  4-20-2000 94-1 94-155, 94-156 94-159 O-00-04-21  4-20-2000 2-200 O-00-05-22  5-18-2000 38-49, 38-50 O-00-06-24  6-22-2000 1-4 34-155-34-158 6, 7 34-159, 34-160 9 34-161 11 34-154 O-00-06-26  6-23-2000 94-213 O-00-07-32  6-23-2000 90-162 O-00-07-31  7-20-2000 86-92 O-00-08-34  8-24-2000 78-53-78-66 O-00-09-38  9-21-2000 58-51 O-00-10-40 10-19-2000 94-193 O-00-10-41 10-19-2000 94-1 94-156, 94-157 94-159, 94-160 O-00-11-40 11-16-2000 94-239 O-00-11-47 11-16-2000 34-21-34-40 O-00-12-48 12-21-2000 1 34-69 2-4 34-70 5, 6 34-71 7, 8 34-74 9, 10 34-76, 34-77 O-00-12-49 12-21-2000 94-1 94-155-94-157 O-01-01-03  1-18-2001 90-165 O-01-01-04  1-18-2001 90-290 O-01-01-05  1-18-2001 90-165 90-345 O-01-04-15  4-19-2001 86-120 O-01-04-17  4-19-2001 46-54-46-64 O-01-06-21  6-21-2001 94-1 94-155, 94-156 O-01-10-37 10-18-2001 86-120 O-01-12-40 12-20-2001 14-275 O-01-12-42 12-20-2001 6-40 O-02-01-02  1-24-2002 90-165 O-02-01-03  1-24-2002 90-290 O-02-02-06  2-21-2002 94-155, 94-156 O-02-02-07  2-21-2002 86-88 O-02-03-08  3-21-2002 30-1 O-02-03-09  3-21-2002 6-16 O-02-03-12  3-21-2002 2-144 O-02-04-14  4-18-2002 14-166-14-180 O-02-07-18  7-18-2002 86-78 O-02-07-19  7-18-2002 94-1 94-149 94-158 O-02-07-21  7-18-2002 94-54 94-89 O-02-09-25  9-19-2002 2-144, 2-145 O-02-10-29 10-24-2002 94-1 94-149 94-151-94-153 94-161 94-193 O-02-12-33 12-19-2002 22-19-22-25 O-03-01-01  1-23-2003 90-165 O-03-01-02  1-23-2003 90-290 O-03-01-04  1-23-2003 6-11 O-03-01-07  2-20-2003 94-149 O-03-05-09  5-22-2003 94-149 O-03-05-10  5-22-2003 86-120 O-03-08-18  8-21-2003 86-120 O-03-08-19  9-18-2003 90-162 O-03-09-22  9-18-2003 94-150 O-03-09-23  9-18-2003 54-1 O-03-09-24  9-18-2003 86-78 O-03-09-25  9-18-2003 46-229-46-241 O-03-09-26  9-18-2003 86-88 O-03-09-27  9-18-2003 2-144, 2-145 O-03-10-33 10-23-2003 34-98-34-108 O-03-11-34 11-20-2003 94-151, 94-152 O-03-11-36 11-20-2003 86-120 O-03-11-37 11-20-2003 46-261-46-265 46-294-46-298 O-03-12-41 12-18-2003 46-367-46-382 O-04-01-03  1-22-2004 86-78 O-04-02-04  2-19-2004 86-92 O-04-03-06  3-18-2004 54-2 O-04-06-10  6-24-2004 94-150 O-04-06-11  7-22-2004 90-194-90-199 O-04-07-13  7-22-2004 86-88 O-04-08-14  8-19-2004 94-148 94-156, 94-157 O-04-09-19  9-23-2004 34-70 34-72-34-74 O-04-10-20 10-21-2004 86-78 O-04-10-21 10-21-2004 86-120 O-04-11-23 11-18-2004 2-49 O-04-11-24 11-18-2004 86-78 O-04-11-28 11-18-2004 94-213 O-04-11-29 12-16-2004 90-162 90-289 O-04-12-32 12-16-2004 2-200 O-04-12-33 12-16-2004 1-2 2-56 2-89 2-91, 2-92 2-113, 2-114 18-1 38-51 46-1 46-23-46-25 46-54 46-58-46-63 46-90, 46-91 46-96 46-104 46-109 46-116 46-122 46-157-46-159 46-189 46-231 46-234 46-241 46-261 46-294, 46-295 46-297, 46-298 46-367, 46-368 46-371 46-373 46-382 54-1 58-47 58-50, 58-51 78-31 78-60 78-66 82-6 82-32 90-1, 90-2 90-104 90-106, 90-107 90-163, 90-164 90-167 90-343, 90-344 90-346 94-53 O-05-01-04  1-20-2005 14-29 O-05-01-06  1-20-2005 exh. A 2-91, 2-92 2-143 6-3 6-42 6-52 46-195, 46-196 46-198-46-200 46-207 58-47 58-50, 58-51 O-05-02-07  2-24-2005 94-1 94-149 94-155, 94-156 94-158 O-05-04-11  4-21-2005 34-104 O-05-05-13  5-19-2005 94-155, 94-156 O-05-05-14  5-19-2005 78-53-78-55 78-57 78-60 78-66, 78-67 O-05-07-15  7-21-2005 86-120 O-05-07-16  7-21-2005 46-65 O-05-07-17  7-21-2005 86-91 O-05-07-18  7-21-2005 90-163 90-166 O-05-08-19  8-18-2005 74-1-74-5 74-29, 74-30 74-49-74-54 74-82-74-88 O-05-08-21  8-18-2005 90-291 O-05-08-22  8-18-2005 90-166 O-05-08-20  8-19-2005 86-120 O-05-09-29  9-22-2005 86-120 O-05-10-33 10-20-2005 70-21 O-05-10-37 10-20-2005 6-11 O-05-11-39 11-17-2005 14-271 O-05-11-41 11-17-2005 6-40 O-05-12-46 12- 5-2005 94-1 94-155, 94-156 94-159 O-06-01-03  1-19-2006 90-165 O-06-01-04  1-19-2006 90-290 O-06-04-11  4-20-2006 86-92 O-06-05-15  5-18-2006 58-23-58-29 O-06-06-19  6-22-2006 74-84 O-06-07-22  7-20-2006 86-209 O-06-98-26  8-24-2006 78-1 O-06-09-35  9-21-2006 14-272 5-138 14-276 O-06-10-36 10-20-2006 6-1 6-5 6-9 6-37, 6-38 6-40 6-50, 6-51 3-33 6-39 O-06-11-41 11-16-2006 exh. A, § 13-110 90-365 exh. A, § 13-111- 90-397-90-403 exh. A, § 13-117 exh. A, § 13-118, 90-428, 90-429 exh. A, § 13-119 exh. A, § 13-120 90-404 exh. A, § 13-121- 90-430-90-432 exh. A, § 13-123 exh. A, § 13-124 90-405 exh. A, § 13-125 90-367 exh. A, § 13-126 90-406 exh. A, § 13-127 90-369 exh. A, § 13-128 90-368 exh. A, § 13-129 90-407 O-06-12-46 12-21-2006 94-148       Added 94-162 O-07-03-11  3-22-2007 18-201-18-206       Added 78-201-78-206 O-07-03-12  3-22-2007 18-100-18-104       Added 78-150-78-154 O-07-03-13  3-22-2007 18-150-18-154       Added 78-180-78-184 O-07-07-20  7-19-2007 20-16.1       Added 86-210 O-07-07-21  7-19-2007 20-16 86-209 O-07-08-23  8-23-2007       Added 86-91(13) O-07-08-24  8-23-2007       Added 86-91(14) O-07-08-25  8-23-2007 5-1.1       Added 94-28.1 O-07-09-31  9-20-2007       Added 86-92(4) O-07-09-33  9-20-2007 10-2.1       Added 2-207 O-07-10-36 10-18-2007 14-71       Added 46-3 O-07-11-39 11-15-2007       Rpld 46-261-46-298 14-300-14-308       Added 46-261-46-269 O-07-11-41 11-15-2007 94-1 O-08-02-01 2-21-2008 exh. A       Added 46-401 O-08-03-06 3-20-2008       Added 90-456 O-08-03-04 3-20-2008       Added 94-159(20) O-08-05-11 5-22-2008       Added 6-40.1 O-08-05-12 5-22-2008       Added 6-37(b)(5)       Added 6-37.1 O-08-06-13 6-19-2008 90-196 O-08-08-19 8-21-2008       Added 86-120(a)(24) O-08-08-20 8-21-2008       Added 62-2 O-08-10-33 10-23-2008 78-55(4), (5) 78-56 O-08-10-34 10-23-2008       Added 86-120(a)(25) O-08-11-37 11-20-2008       Added 6-11.1       Added 6-37(b)(6), (7)       Added 6-39(t), (u)       Added 6-40.2-6-40.5 O-08-12-40 12-18-2008 2-143 O-08-12-42 12-18-2008 exh. A 46-401 O-09-03-06 3-19-2009 exh. A 46-401 O-09-03-07 3-19-2009       Added 90-171       Added 90-347, 90-348 O-09-04-12 4-23-2009 exh. A 46-401 O-09-04-13 4-23-2009 exh. A 46-401 O-09-04-14 4-23-2009       Added 2-301-2-313 O-09-05-16 5-21-2009 exh. A 46-401 O-09-05-17 5-21-2009       Added 34-200-34-203 O-09-06-18 6-18-2009       Added 6-37.2 O-09-06-19 6-18-2009       Added 34-41 O-09-07-21 7-23-2009       Added 78-301 O-09-07-22 7-23-2009 10-43       Added 10-67.1 10-68(d)       Added 10-69 O-09-07-23 7-23-2009       Added 86-120(a)(26) O-09-08-27 8-20-2009 90-397(b) 90-398(d) 90-402(d), (e) O-09-08-28 8-20-2009       Added 34-36(3)d.3 34-41 O-09-08-29 8-20-2009       Added 46-451, 46-452 O-09-12-35 12-17-2009 46-401 O-10-01-02 1-21-2010 90-167(e) O-10-02-04 2-19-2010       Dltd 34-69-34-77       Added 34-69-34-78 O-10-04-09 4-22-2010 exh. A 46-401 O-10-04-10 4-22-2010       Added 14-170.1-14-70.3 O-10-04-11 4-22-2010 14-167 O-10-04-12 4-22-2010 58-1, 58-2       Rpld 58-54 O-10-04-13 4-22-2010       Added 90-501-90-510 O-10-05-15 5-20-2010 1       Added 90-601-90-610 O-10-05-16 5-20-2010 86-209(b) O-10-05-17 5-20-2010 90-398(d) 90-402(a), (f), (h)       Added 90-402(j) O-10-05-18 5-20-2010       Added 10-13 O-10-05-19 5-20-2010       Added 70-100-70-103 O-10-06-20 6-24-2010 74-5 O-10-06-21 6-24-2010       Added 94-159(21) O-10-07-23 7-22-2010 38-4(c)       Dltd 38-49-38-55       Added 38-49-38-52 O-10-08-24 8-19-2010       Added 6-39(v), (w) O-10-08-25 8-19-2010 86-209(b) O-10-08-26 8-19-2010 90-194       Rpld 90-195-90-197 O-10-08-27 8-19-2010 90-398(d)       Dltd 90-402(j) O-10-09-31 9-20-2010 90-161(b) O-10-11-40 11-18-2010       Added 86-93 O-10-11-42 11-18-2010 6-11(a) O-10-12-43 12-16-2010 exh. A 46-401 O-11-05-04 5-19-2011       Added 94-155(24) O-11-08-15 8-18-2011 34-1(a) O-11-09-18 9-22-2011       Added 58-54 O-11-11-24 11-17-2011 exh. A       Added 90-641-90-662 O-11-11-25 11-17-2011 exh. A       Dltd 90-23-90-31       Added 90-23-90-31.1 O-11-12-31 12-15-2011       Added 86-91(15) O-11-12-34 12-15-2011 46-401 O-12-01-01 1-19-2012       Dltd 62-153       Dltd 62-174       Added 62-241-62-261 O-12-02-02 2-23-2012 exh. A 46-401 O-12-02-03 2-23-2012       Added 94-163 O-12-03-06 3-22-2012 1       Rpld 46-54-46-65 2(exh. A)       Added 46-54-46-65 O-12-03-08 3-22-2012 2-49(b) O-12-04-08 4-19-2012       Added 86-94 O-12-04-09 4-19-2012 90-25.1(1) O-12-04-11 4-19-2012 exh. A 46-401 O-2012-13 5-24-2012       Added 86-88(a)(3) O-2012-14 5-24-2012 6-11(a) O-2012-18 5-24-2012 2-51 O-2012-19 7-19-2012 46-261-46-269       Added 46-270-46-285 O-2012-21 7-19-2012 94-1 94-32       Added 94-155(25)       Added 94-156(67)       Added 94-158(26)       Added 94-159(22)       Added 94-160(11) O-2012-26 10-18-2012 46-117 46-401 O-2012-29 12-20-2012 exh. A 46-401 O-2012-31 12-20-2012 6-11(a) O-2013-3  2-21-2013       Added 62-119 O-2013-4  2-21-2013 1, 2 86-1, 86-2 O-2013-6  1-17-2013 94-157(2), (3) 94-157(15), (19) 94-157(27) 94-157(42), (47)       Added 94-157(52)-(58) O-2013-10  4-18-2013 46-401 O-2013-19  7-18-2013       Added 94-155(26) O-2013-20  7-18-2013       Added 94-164 O-2013-21  7-18-2013       Added 94-195 O-2013-24  9-19-2013       Added 90-110-90-115 O-2013-25  8-22-2013 2-89(a) O-2013-29 10-24-2013       Added 2-89(a)(1)i.       Rnbd 2-89(a)(1)i.       as 2-89(a)(1)j. O-2013-31 11-21-2013 14-29(a)       Added 14-29(c)(4)       Added 14-32 O-2014-8  3-20-2014 2-49(b) O-2014-16  9-18-2014 1       Rpld 14-166-14-180       Added 14-166-14-184 2       Added 14-300-14-307 O-2014-17 10-20-2014 2-49 O-2014-20 10-20-2014 6-1, 6-2 6-40 6-52 O-2014-21 12-18-2014 46-401 O-2014-26 11-20-2014 34-1 O-2015-7  4-15-2015 exh. A 46-401 O-2015-8  3-19-2015 6-11(c)       Added 6-11(d) O-2015-9  6-18-2015 Exh. A 74-1 74-3(b)(1) 74-4(9)       Added 74-4(10), (11) 74-30 74-49 74-50(8)       Added 74-81 74-85(c), (d)       Dltd 74-85(g) 74-88       Added 74-89 O-2015-10  6-18-2015 2-49(a) O-2015-12  7-23-2015       Rpld 2-174-2-180       Added 2-174-2-183 O-2015-14  7-23-2015 2-56 O-2015-15  7-23-2015 2-49(e)       Rpld 2-89       Added 2-89.1-2-89.4 2-92 2-142(a), (b) 2-199 2-202 2-207(2) 2-306(d) 2-311 6-37.2(d) 10-67.1(a) 34-1(c) 46-195(2) 46-209 46-234(b) 46-382(c) 46-452 50-28 58-54(b) 70-21(b) 78-53(b), (d) 78-54(2) 78-55(5) 78-57 78-59, 78-60 78-66, 78-67 90-101 90-102(a) 90-103(c) 90-104(a) 90-106(3) 90-368 90-397, 90-398 90-399(a) 90-400(a) 90-404 90-405(g)(6) 90-406(a) 90-608 94-54(d) O-2015-17 10-22-2015 exh. A 46-401 O-2015-18 11-19-2015 90-290(b) O-2015-19 12-17-2015 exh. A 46-401 O-2016-1  3-24-2016       Added 2-89.2(a)(8) O-2016-4  7-21-2016 6-11(b) O-2016-7 12-22-2016 46-401 O-2017-3  3-23-2017 6-40.1 O-2017-4  4-20-2017       Rpld 6-1-6-16 6-36-6-52       Added 6-1-6-5 6-31-6-73 6-87-6-112 6-131-6-138 O-2017-5  6-22-2017 6-11 O-2017-6  6-22-2017 46-401 O-2017-8  7-20-2017       Added 94-165 O-2017-9  9-21-2017       Rpld 6-70 O-2017-11 10-19-2017       Added 6-74 O-2017-12 10-19-2017 90-430(b) O-2017-14 12-21-2017 46-40  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE COURT ORDERS 
This is a listing of the court orders of the city used in this Code. 
Court Order 
Section Section 
this Code 7A-7 26-4 8 26-1 10 26-2 11 26-3  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within the Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.C.G.A. Section  
in Code 1-3-1 et seq. 1-2 1-3-3 34-70, 34-71 90-194 2-10-105 46-110 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 3-2-26 6-111 3-3-2 Ch. 6 3-3-2(a) 6-31 3-3-2(b)(1) 6-32 3-3-7(1) 6-93 3-3-9 6-71 3-3-20 6-93 3-3-21 6-41 6-42 3-3-23 6-89 6-91 6-134 6-135 6-138 3-3-26 6-99 3-3-23(h) 6-91 3-4-3 6-104 3-3-24.2 6-90 3-3-42 6-88 3-6-5 6-93 3-6-21.1 6-1 3-11-1 et seq. 6-56 3-11-2(e) 6-52 4-3-1 et seq. Ch. 10 4-8-6 Ch. 10 4-8-20 et seq. Ch. 10 Ch. 10, Art. II, 
Div. 2 4-8-25 10-67 4-8-28 10-66 4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 10 5-3-29 14-175 tit. 8, ch. 2 14-167 8-2-20 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. II 8-2-20(9)(B)(i)(I)-(VIII) 14-29 8-2-23 14-29 8-2-25 14-29 10-1-622(1) 46-101 tit. 11, ch. 15 62-175 11-15-1 et seq. 62-175 12-2-8 34-72 12-4-72 34-71 12-5-20 et seq. 34-70 12-5-20 34-70 12-5-23 34-72 12-5-30(f) 34-70-34-72 12-5-440 et seq. 34-70, 34-71 ch. 12-7 34-70 12-7-1 et seq. Ch. 34, Art. III 34-72 34-76 12-7-4 Ch. 34, Art. III 12-7-6 34-71 12-7-6(b) 34-71, 34-72 12-7-6(c) 34-72 12-7-7 et seq. 34-72 12-7-7(f)(1) 34-73 12-7-7.1 34-71 12-7-8(a) 34-73 12-7-12 et seq. 34-74 12-7-17(9), (10) 34-73 12-7-19(b)(1) 34-76 12-7-19(b)(4) 34-76 12-7-20 34-73, 34-74 34-76 12-7-20 et seq. 34-76 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. VII 90-405 12-8-61 et seq. Ch. 90, Art. VII 14-13-7 46-98 16-2-13 14-167 16-5-20 et seq. 62-112 16-6-8 62-112 16-6-9 et seq. 62-150 16-7-4 Ch. 90, Art. VII 16-7-20 et seq. 38-1 16-7-22 et seq. 18-9 62-21-62-25 16-7-25 62-28 16-7-40 90-367 16-8-5 90-161 90-342 16-10-23 62-206 16-10-24 62-204 16-10-26 et seq. 62-208, 62-209 16-10-27 30-1 16-10-30 62-205 16-10-52 62-207 16-10-71 46-281 16-11-34 2-49 16-11-41 62-116 16-11-44 62-113 16-11-61 62-151 16-11-100 62-59 16-12-4 Ch. 10 10-3 16-12-20 et seq. 62-241 16-12-20(2) 62-245 16-12-20(3) 62-246 16-12-35 62-254 16-12-35(a)-(i) 62-245 16-12-35(b)-(d) 62-247 16-12-35(c) 62-252, 62-253 16-12-35(d)(1), (2) 62-252, 62-253 16-12-35(d)(1)(B)       62-247 16-12-35(d)(1)(C)       62-247 16-12-80 74-4 16-13-1 et seq. 62-152 16-13-20 et seq. 14-166 16-17-22 et seq. 66-1, 66-2 16-20-30 62-204 17-7-21(a)(3) 62-27 20-2-690 62-175 62-251 20-2-698 62-175 20-2-1180 62-115 21-2-1 et seq. Char. § 5-101 Char. § 5-104 Char. § 5-109 Ch. 26 21-2-310 et seq. 26-4 22-1-1 et seq. Char. § 1-103 tit. 25, ch. 2 14-167 25-10-1 et seq. 38-6 31-2-13 14-177 31-3-5.2 90-194 31-12A-1 Ch. 42, Art. II 31-12A-12 Ch. 42, Art. II 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 10 32-4-92 Ch. 78 32-6-20 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. VI 33-3-5 46-1 33-3-5(2) 46-1 33-8-4 46-1 33-8-8 et seq. 46-1 46-110 33-8-8.1 46-1 33-8-8.2 46-1 33-34-5.1 46-379 tit. 36, ch. 36, 
art. 2 90-166 90-291 tit. 36, ch.61 14-301 36-18-1 34-71 36-30-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-30-8 1-8 36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 54 36-32-2(2) Ch. 2, Art. III 36-32-4 54-1 36-32-10(a) 6-138 36-33-5, 36-33-6 2-142 36-34-2 Ch. 2 36-35-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-35-6(a)(2) 1-8 36-36-20 et seq. 90-166 90-291 36-42-1 et seq. 22-24 36-43-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II 22-19 36-43-4 22-20, 22-21 36-60-4 Ch. 58, Art. III 36-64-1 et seq. Ch. 66 36-66-1 et seq. Ch. 94, Art. II, 
Div. 2 36-71-2(8) 46-89 36-76-6 90-456 36-76-6(b) 90-456 36-80-19 1-1 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 36-81-4 2-183 36-81-5, 36-81-6 2-179 36-82-62 90-502 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 30, Art. II tit. 40 46-374 40-1-1 86-1 40-1-1 et seq. 46-374 Ch. 86 40-6-1-40-6-397       86-1 40-6-9 86-78 40-6-122 86-82 40-6-123- 
40-6-125 86-82 40-6-181 86-76 40-6-183 86-78 40-6-200 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. IV 40-6-206 86-176 40-6-207 86-47, 86-48 40-6-252 86-90 40-6-371 Ch. 86 40-6-371(a)(1) Ch. 86, Art. IV 86-91, 86-92 40-6-371(a)(4) 86-88 40-6-372 Ch. 86 40-6-372-40-6-376       86-1 40-11-1 86-172 40-11-3 86-176 41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 58 41-2-7 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. IV 41-2-8- 
41-2-17 14-230 14-232 14-236 41-2-12 14-304 41-2-14 14-178 42-8-60 6-1 43-8-1(3) 62-247 43-14-12 14-107 tit. 43, ch. 34 46-101 43-34-1 et seq. 46-101 tit. 43, ch. 39A 14-175 44-1-14 62-58 44-3-71 94-1 44-10-1 et seq. 14-270 44-10-20 et seq. Ch. 14, Art. VII 44-10-21 14-269 44-10-22 14-268 44-10-24 14-270 44-10-26 14-270, 14-271 44-10-27 et seq. 14-273 44-10-29 14-274 44-12-130 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. VII 45-1-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. III tit. 46, ch. 3 46-110 46-3-1 et seq. 46-110 46-5-1 et seq. 46-452 46-5-1(b)(8) 46-451 46-5-1(b)(9) 46-451 46-7-15 46-110 47-37-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. IX tit. 48 46-107 tit. 48, ch. 4 14-174 48-1-1 et seq. 46-107 48-2-41 46-59 48-2-43 46-59 48-3-9 14-166 48-4-5 14-175 48-4-78 14-175 48-4-80 14-175 48-4-81 14-175 46-25 48-5-1 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. II 48-5-7.4 34-135 34-161 48-5-354 46-101 48-5-355, 48-5-356 46-110 48-5-359.1 14-175 48-5-380 46-60 48-5-512 46-23 48-6-93 46-110 46-155 48-6-93(c), (d) 46-157 48-13-5 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. IV 48-13-5- 
48-13-26 46-103 48-13-6 46-94-46-96 48-13-7 46-94-46-96 46-98 48-13-9 46-97 48-13-9(b) 46-97 48-13-9(c) 46-101 48-13-9(c)(1)- 
(c)(18) 46-101 48-13-10(f)(2) 46-127 48-13-10(g) 46-101 48-13-13 46-102 48-13-28 46-124 48-13-50 et seq. Ch. 46, Art. III 46-54 48-13-51 46-55 48-13-51 et seq. 46-57 48-13-51(a) 46-54 48-13-51(a)(4.2) 46-65 48-13-55 46-110 48-17-1 46-101 48-17-1(2)(A), (B) 62-247 48-17-2 62-255 48-17-2(a.1) 62-255 48-17-2(b) 62-255 48-17-9 46-101 62-255 49-6-47 86-88 tit. 50, ch. 14 2-179 50-14-1 et seq. 2-179 51-2-6 Ch. 10  
