CODE OF THE CITY OF BRUNSWICK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1991 by Order of the City Commission 
Republished in 2009 
____________ 

CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BRUNSWICK, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Cornell L. Harvey 
Mayor 
____________ 
Felicia M. Harris 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
Julie T. Martin 
Vincent T. Williams 
John A. Cason III 
City Commission 
____________ 
Naomi D. Atkinson 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BRUNSWICK, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THIS REPUBLICATION 
____________ 
Bryan Thompson 
Mayor 
____________ 
Mark Spaulding 
Mayor Pro-Tem 
____________ 
James H. Brooks 
Cornell Harvey 
Jonathan Williams 
City Commission 
____________ 
Roosevelt Harris, Jr. 
City Manager 
____________ 
M. Lynn Frey, III 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Naomi Atkinson 
City Clerk 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
BRUNSWICK, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Homer L. Wilson 
Mayor 
____________ 
James A. Stephens 
Thomas P. Williams 
Otis Herrington 
Roosevelt Lawrence 
City Commission 
____________ 
S. Mark Mitchell 
City Manager 
____________ 
Eugene Highsmith 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Georgia Marion 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete republication of the general and permanent ordinances the City of Brunswick, Georgia. This republication of the Code contains all ordinances deemed advisable to be included at this time through Ordinance No. 1011, adopted May 6, 2009. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the 1991 recodification of the Code were the 1953 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the city commission. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1953 Code and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of Chapter 1 is numbered 1-2 and the first section of Chapter 4 is 4-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter and at the same time new sections or even whole chapters can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 3-1 and 3-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 3-1.5. New chapters may be included in the same manner. If the new material is to be included between Chapters 12 and 13, it will be designated as Chapter 12.5. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 CHARTER INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1  
Indices 
    The indices have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited and the appropriate page or pages affected will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised sheets are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication of the Code was under the direct supervision of Eric Grant, Vice President, and Kelly Cribbs, Supplement Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the projects. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Naomi Atkinson, City Clerk, and M. Lynn Frey, City Attorney, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this republication. The publisher also expresses its gratitude to Rusi Patel, Assistant City Attorney, Naomi Atkinson, City Clerk and Gail Mobley, Administrative Assistant to the City Manager, for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on the 1991 recodification of the Code. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Brunswick, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Brunswick, Georgia. 
(c)  Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Brunswick, Georgia. 2009. 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the code's historical evolution. 
Ord. No. Date Adopted Included/Omitted Supp. No. 1022  3- 2-2011 Included 2 1023  5- 2-2012 Included 2 1024  7-18-2012 Included 2 1025  9-19-2012 Included 2 1026  9-19-2012 Included 2 1027 12-19-2012 Omitted 2 1028  3-20-2013 Included 2 1029  4- 3-2013 Included 2 1030  4-17-2013 Included 2 1031  6-19-2013 Omitted 2 1032  8-21-2013 Included 2 1033 12-18-2013 Included 2 1034  1-22-2014 Included 3 1035  2-19-2014 Included 3 1036  4-16-2014 Included 3 1037  9-17-2014 Included 3 1038  1- 7-2015 Included 3 1039  2-18-2015 Included 3 1040  4- 1-2015 Included 3 1041  5- 6-2015 Omitted 3 1042 10-21-2015 Included 3 1043 10-21-2015 Omitted 3 1044 11- 4-2015 Included 3 1041  5- 6-2015 Included 4 1045  9-21-2016 Included 4 1046 12- 7-2016 Included 4 1047  4- 5-2017 Included 4 1048  4- 5-2017 Included 4 1049  5-17-2017 Included 4 1050  6- 7-2017 Included 4 1051 10-18-2017 Included 4 1052 12-20-2017 Included 4 1053  1- 5-2018 Included 4 1054  3- 7-2018 Included 4 1055  3-21-2018 Included 4 1056  3-21-2018 Included 4  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 894 
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND AND CODIFY PROVISIONS OF THE MUNICIPAL CHARTER OF THE CITY OF BRUNSWICK; TO CONTINUE IN EFFECT CURRENT PROVISIONS OF SAID CHARTER, AS AMENDED FROM TIME TO TIME, AFFECTING THE COMPOSITION AND FORM OF THE MUNICIPAL GOVERNING AUTHORITY, THE PROCEDURE FOR ELECTION OF THE MEMBERS THEREOF, AND THE CONTINUANCE IN OFFICE AND LIMITATION THEREON FOR SUCH MEMBERS; TO AMEND SAID CHARTER SO AS TO PROVIDE FOR A CITY MANAGER AND OTHER OFFICERS, TO PROVIDE FOR BOUNDARIES AND POWERS OF THE CITY, AND TO PROVIDE FOR FISCAL MANAGEMENT, ADMINISTRATION OF MUNICIPAL BUSINESS AND RELATED MATTERS; TO CONTINUE IN EFFECT THE PROVISIONS OF SAID CHARTER, AS AMENDED, PARTICULARLY AS AMENDED BY AN ACT APPROVED FEBRUARY 17, 1950, AUTHORIZING THE LEVY AND COLLECTION OF TAXES; TO REPEAL PROVISIONS OF SAID CHARTER WHICH HAVE BEEN SUPERSEDED BY GENERAL LAW, WHICH HAVE BECOME OBSOLETE OR WHICH ARE IN CONFLICT WITH THIS ORDINANCE; TO PROVIDE AN EFFECTIVE DATE; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
    THE COMMISSION OF THE CITY OF BRUNSWICK HEREBY ORDAINS AS FOLLOWS: 
    SECTION 1. It is the intent of this ordinance to continue in effect fundamental provisions of the municipal charter of the City of Brunswick concerning the governing authority and taxation, in conformity with Official Code of Georgia Annotated Sec. 36-35-6 [O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6], limiting the home rule powers of municipal corporations; to modernize the charter by amending it in other respects pursuant to the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, particularly Official Code of Georgia Annotated Sec. 36-35-3 [O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3]; to repeal charter provisions which have been superseded by general law, which have become obsolete or which are in conflict with this ordinance; and to codify the resulting charter. 
    SECTION 2. Those fundamental provisions of the current charter which shall continue in effect are identified hereinafter by parenthetical references following such provisions. 
    SECTION 3. Those provisions of the current charter which are not identified hereinafter as provisions which shall continue in effect are hereby stricken in their entirety, provided, however, that this repealer shall not operate to affect vested rights, title to real property, the closure of streets or the names of streets as heretofore designated by the commission. 
    SECTION 4. Reference is hereby made to Section 2 of an Act approved August 11, 1920 (1920 Ga. Laws, pp. 757, 760) which provides: "The offices of Mayor and Aldermen and all other officers of said city created by legislative enactment, except as hereinafter provided for, are hereby abolished, and all laws creating such offices and defining the duties and authority pertaining thereto are hereby repealed, except as hereinafter provided for." The commission hereby finds that the foregoing effectively repealed that provision of an Act approved November 12, 1889 (1889 Ga. Laws, pp. 1010, 1015) subsequently codified as Section 15 of the charter as set forth in the Brunswick City Code, 1952. The 1889 provision, therefore, is not carried forward as a limitation of office in the charter as hereinafter set forth. 
    SECTION 5. If any provision of this ordinance or of the charter as hereinafter set forth is held invalid or unconstitutional for any reason by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the remaining provisions of the ordinance or charter. 
    SECTION 6. This ordinance and the charter set forth hereinafter shall become effective on January 1, 1991. 
    SECTION 7. As of said effective date the municipal charter of the City of Brunswick shall be as set forth in the pages appended hereto. 
Notice of intent published: September 15, 22, 29, 1990. 
Read and adopted first time: September 19, 1990. 
Read and adopted second time: October 3, 1990. 
/s/ Homer Wilson Mayor  
Attest: 
/s/ Georgia E. Marion Secretary of the Commission of the City of Brunswick  
CHARTER OF THE CITY OF BRUNSWICK 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is Ordinance No. 894 and the Charter of the City of Brunswick both adopted on October 3, 1990, both effective January 1, 1991. Amendments to the original charter are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision derives from the original charter. Obviously misspelled words have been corrected without notation, and words added for clarity have been enclosed in brackets [ ]. A uniform system of capitalization has also been used. 

ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION, POWERS, FORM OF GOVERNMENT 

Section 1.10. - Name. 
    The City of Brunswick, heretofore incorporated by an Act of the General Assembly approved February 22, 1856, shall have perpetual succession as a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia. 
Section 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
    The boundaries of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of this charter, with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of the city shall be shown or described at all times on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the clerk of the city. 
Section 1.12. - Powers. 
    The city shall have all the powers of self-government which it is possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of the State of Georgia as fully as though they were specifically enumerated in this charter, and the same shall be carried into execution as provided by pertinent general law, by this charter or by ordinance, resolution or regulation adopted as provided by Official Code of Georgia Annotated Sec. 36-35-3(a) [O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3(a)]. 
Section 1.13. - Form of government. 
    The City of Brunswick shall be governed by a commission and a manager. (Enacted by 1920 Ga. Laws, pp. 757, 760.) 
Section 1.14. - Parks and squares. 
(a)  Except as authorized pursuant to the powers set forth in subsections (b), (c), and (d) hereinafter or by a previous amendment of the municipal charter of the City of Brunswick, said city shall not have the power or authority to convey, lease, sell, or alienate any of the parks or squares of said city for any use, public or private, and said parks and squares shall forever exist and be used for the benefit of the people for park purposes and for no other purposes; provided, however, that the City of Brunswick, acting by and through the commission of said city shall have the powers and authority set forth in subsections (b), (c), (d) hereinafter, notwithstanding any provision of this subsection or any other law, ordinance or principle of common law to the contrary. 
(b)  The City of Brunswick, acting through the commission of said city, is hereby authorized to vacate, abandon, alienate, and sell or exchange for other real property all that portion of Blythe Square, or any part thereof, lying on the west side of Norwich Street, pursuant to Official Code of Georgia Annotated § 36-37-6. 
(c)  The City of Brunswick, acting through the commission of said city, is hereby authorized to vacate and close such portion of Orange Park as the commission may deem appropriate, for use as right-of-way for "L" Street, and to dedicate such portion of Orange Park for use for street purposes. 
(d)  The City of Brunswick, acting through the commission of said city, is hereby authorized to use such portion of the Mary L. Ross Waterfront Park as the commission shall deem appropriate as a public market and to permit therein the sale of agricultural produce and other goods and products for corporate or individual gain. 
(Ord. No. 912, § 1, 7-21-1993) 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION 

Section 2.10. - Commission; election at large. 
    Subject to the residence requirement set forth hereinafter, the members of the commission shall be elected at large, by all the electors voting in a municipal election, in the manner provided by this charter. (Construction of 1920 Ga. Laws, pp. 757, 761, as amended by 1927 Ga. Laws, pp. 929, 937.) 
Section 2.11. - Division of city into wards. 
    For the purpose of elections to the commission the city is divided into two wards which shall be known as the "north ward" and "south ward," lying north and south, respectively, of a line running from the westerly terminus of "L" Street easterly to Stadium Street, thence along Stadium Street to "K" Street, thence along "K" Street to Glynn Avenue, thence southerly along Glynn Avenue to the Brunswick-St. Simons Causeway, thence easterly along the Causeway to the corporate limits of the city. 
Section 2.12. - Commission; number; residence requirement. 
    The commission shall consist of five persons who shall have been citizens of said city for at least one year next preceding their election, two to be residents of the south ward, two from the north ward, and one from the city at large. Each commissioner must be at least twenty-five years of age. In the event the office of a commissioner shall become vacant, either by recall or for any other reason, then his successor for the unexpired term shall be a resident of the ward represented at the time of the election of the commissioner creating the vacancy. The term "resident" shall be held to mean a bona fide and continuous residence for a period of six months immediately preceding any election herein referred to. However, in the event of the removal of the residence of a member of the commission from one ward to another, the same shall not create a vacancy. (Enacted by 1920 Ga. Laws, pp. 757, 761, as amended by 1927 Ga. Laws, pp. 929, 937, and 1949 Ga. Laws, pp. 339, 345.) 
Section 2.13. - Elections; date of regular elections. 
    All regular and special elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with general law. The date of all regular elections occurring before January 1, 1993, shall be as heretofore provided, and thereafter the date of such elections shall be as provided by general law. 
Section 2.14. - Nomination of candidates. 
    Candidates for election to the commission shall be nominated by petition. No political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates. (Authorized by O.C.G.A. § 21-3-95.) 
Section 2.15. - Terms of office. 
    Except as otherwise provided by general law, the members of the commission shall serve for terms of four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. (In accord with O.C.G.A. §§ 21-3-61(a) and 21-3-63.) 
Section 2.16. - Oath of office. 
    The oath of office shall be administered to newly elected members of the commission as follows: "I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of commissioner (or mayor) of the City of Brunswick, and that I will support and defend the city charter as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America." 
Section 2.17. - Filling of vacancies. 
    In the case of the death, resignation, removal from office, or vacation from office by removal from said city (and removal shall operate to create a vacancy just as if there should be a formal resignation) of any commissioner, the commission shall proceed to call an election to fill such vacancy. (Enacted by 1920 Ga. Laws, pp. 757, 777, as amended by O.C.G.A. §§ 21-3-14, 21-3-53.) 
Section 2.18. - Mayor. 
    The commissioner elected from the city at large shall be the chairman of the commission and shall be designated as mayor, and shall have only such powers as are prescribed by the charter. The commissioner at large may succeed himself for one term but shall not be eligible to run for the office of commissioner at large until there has been a lapse of three (3) years from the end of the second term in office. However, nothing herein shall be construed to keep the said commissioner at large from running for the office of commissioner from the ward in which he is a resident immediately after serving as commissioner at large. (Enacted by 1963 Ga. Laws, p. 3249.) 
Section 2.19. - Mayor; powers and duties. 
    The mayor shall have no more authority than any of the other commissioners, except that he shall act as chairman at all meetings of the commission, shall approve the minutes of such meetings, shall act as mayor of said city on all ceremonial occasions, and shall have such other authority and duties as hereinafter provided. He shall be ex officio a member of all boards of which the mayor of said city is now ex officio a member. (Enacted by 1920 Ga. Laws, pp. 757, 765.) 
Section 2.20. - Mayor pro tem. 
    The commission shall elect a mayor pro tem at the first meeting in January of each year. During the absence or disability of the mayor for any cause, the mayor pro tem, or in his absence or disability any one of the commissioners designated by a majority of the commission, shall perform the duties of the office of mayor so long as such absence or disability shall continue. 
Section 2.21. - Quorum, vacancies. 
    A majority of the commission shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. (Construction of 1920 Ga. Laws, p. 757; cf., 1989 Ga. Laws, pp. 1010, 1015.) In the event that for any cause there shall be a vacancy in the office of one or more commissioners, the commissioner or commissioners remaining in office shall perform all the duties and shall possess all the power and authority of the commission until the vacancy or vacancies shall be filled. (Enacted by 1920 Ga. Laws, pp. 757, 768.) 
Section 2.22. - Compensation and expenses. 
    City commissioners shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY MANAGER AND OTHER OFFICERS 

Section 3.10. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
    The commission shall appoint a city manager to serve at will for an indefinite term and shall fix his compensation. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his executive and administrative qualifications, and he shall be the city's chief administrative officer. 
Section 3.11. - Acting city manager. 
    By letter filed with the city clerk, the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the commission, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during his temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the commission may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or his disability shall cease. 
Section 3.12. - City attorney. 
    The commission shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be deemed necessary, who shall serve at will for an indefinite term. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, shall attend the meetings of the commission as directed and shall advise the commission and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs. 
Section 3.13. - City clerk. 
    The commission shall appoint a city clerk who shall not be a member of the commission. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, shall maintain city commission records required by this charter and shall perform such other duties as may be required by the commission. 
Section 3.14. - Municipal court. 
    The commission shall establish a municipal court by ordinance pursuant to Official Code of Georgia Annotated Sec. 36-32-1 [O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1], which shall be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Brunswick, and shall provide for the appointment of the judge or judges thereof. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMMISSION MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE 

Section 4.10. - Regular and special meetings. 
    The commission shall hold regular meetings at such times as prescribed by ordinance. Special meetings of the commission may be held on call of the mayor or two members of the commission. 
Section 4.11. - Rules of procedure. 
    The commission shall adopt rules governing procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this charter and shall provide for keeping minutes of all its proceedings. 
Section 4.12. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
    Acts of the commission which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance. 
Section 4.13. - Ordinance form; procedure. 
(a)  No ordinance shall be effective unless a notice of intent to enact or adopt the ordinance has been published once during the calendar week preceding enactment or adoption thereof in the newspaper in which the city's legal advertising is published, and no ordinance shall be enacted or adopted except at a regular or recessed regular meeting of the city commission. 
(b)  Every ordinance shall be in writing at the time of its adoption and shall be filed with the city clerk immediately upon adoption. No ordinance shall contain subject matter which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be, "The commission of the City of Brunswick hereby ordains...." 
Section 4.14. - Codes of technical regulations. 
    The commission may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally, provided that a copy of each adopted code of technical regulations as well as the adopting ordinance shall be filed with the city clerk pursuant to Section 4.13. 
Section 4.15. - Authentication; recording; codification. 
(a)  The city clerk shall authenticate by his signature all ordinances adopted by the commission and shall record them in a properly indexed book. 
(b)  The commission shall provide for the codification of all the ordinances of a general and permanent nature, including only such codes of technical regulations as the commission may specify, together with this charter and such related laws as the commission may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code of the City of Brunswick, Georgia," and it shall be maintained continuously up to date. 
ARTICLE V. - ADMINISTRATION 

Section 5.10. - Authority of city manager. 
    The city manager shall have the following authority and duties: 
(1)  He shall direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law. 
(2)  He shall appoint and, when he deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers he appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or by personnel regulations adopted pursuant to this charter. He may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency. 
(3)  He shall see that all laws, provisions of this charter and acts of the city commission subject to enforcement by him or by officers subject to his direction and supervision are faithfully executed. 
(4)  He shall attend all commission meetings and shall have the right to take part in discussion, but he may not vote. 
(5)  He shall prepare and submit the annual budget to the commission. 
(6)  He shall submit to the commission and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  He shall make such other reports as the commission may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to his direction and supervision. 
(8)  He shall keep the commission fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and make such recommendations to the commission concerning the affairs of the city as he deems desirable. 
(9)  He shall prepare and promulgate a position classification and pay plan, subject to approval of the commission. The plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions or authorities. When a pay plan has been adopted, the salary range applicable to any position shall not be increased or decreased except by amendment of the pay plan. For purposes of this subsection, the elected and some appointed city officials may not be deemed to be city employees. 
(10)  He shall prepare and promulgate rules and regulations concerning (1) the method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment, (2) the administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto and transfer of employees within the classification plan, (3) hours of work, vacation, sick leave and other leaves of absence, overtime pay and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected, (4) such personnel hearings as due process may require and (5) any other personnel matters, as may be necessary or appropriate to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs. 
    In addition to the foregoing, the city manager shall have such additional authority and duties as the commission may lawfully assign to him. 
Section 5.11. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this charter, the commission shall establish by ordinance the departments and agencies needed for the proper administration of the affairs and government of the city. 
(b)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of his department or agency subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager. 
(c)  Except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their qualifications. 
(d)  All directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the commission. The city manager may suspend or remove any director under his supervision for cause, provided that the director may appeal to the commission. 
Section 5.12. - Boards, committees and authorities. 
(a)  The commission shall create such boards, committees and authorities to fulfill any investigative, advisory or administrative function which the commission deems necessary and shall establish the composition, duties and powers thereof by ordinance or resolution as may be appropriate. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 

Section 6.10. - Taxation. 
    The commission of the City of Brunswick is hereby vested with full authority and power to levy and collect such taxes on the inhabitants of said city, and those who hold taxable property within the same, and those who transact or offer to transact business therein, as said city commission may deem expedient for the safety, benefit, convenience and advantage of said city. Besides real and personal property, the said city commission may tax capital invested in said city, stocks in money corporations, choses in action, incomes and commissions derived from the pursuit of any profession, faculty, trade or calling, dividends, banks, insurance, express and other like companies or their agencies, and upon all other property or sources of profit not expressly prohibited or exempted by the laws of the State or of the United States, thus to raise such sum of money as may be necessary for the safety, convenience, benefit and interest of said city, the maintaining [of] the municipal government and the payment of the debts thereof. (Enacted by 1950 Ga. Laws, pp. 2770, 2772.) 
Section 6.11. - Construction; other taxes. 
    The commission shall be authorized to levy any other tax now or hereafter allowed by law, and the specific mention of any right, power or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of the city to govern its local affairs. 
Section 6.12. - Fiscal year; budget procedure. 
    The commission shall adopt an ordinance or ordinances to establish a fiscal year for the operations of municipal government, to establish a procedure for the preparation, review and adoption of an annual budget, and to provide for an annual audit of the financial affairs and transactions of all funds and activities of the city for each fiscal year, in accordance with general state law. 
Section 6.13. - Tax levies. 
    After adoption of the budget, the commission shall adopt an ordinance to levy such ad valorem taxes as are necessary to operate the city under a balanced budget; that is, the sum of estimated net revenues and appropriated fund balances shall be equal to appropriations. 
Section 6.14. - Millage rate; due date; payment methods. 
    The commission shall establish a millage rate for ad valorem taxes, the due date and the date of delinquency. The commission may provide for the payment of such taxes by installments or in one lump sum and may authorize voluntary payment prior to the due date. 
Section 6.15. - Changes in appropriations. 
    The commission shall be authorized to make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operations budget, provided that any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. 
Section 6.16. - Centralized purchasing; procurement and contract procedure. 
    The commission shall establish by ordinance a system of centralized purchasing for the city and a procedure for procurement and for the solicitation and consummation of contracts with the city. 
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Section 7.10. - Bonds of officials. 
    City officers and employees, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the commission shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by general law. 
Section 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this charter are hereby declared valid and of full force and effect until amended or repealed by the commission. 
Section 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
    Except as specifically provided otherwise by this charter or by appropriate action of the commission, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges and powers shall continue beyond the time this charter takes effect. 
Section 7.13. - Pending matters. 
    Pending actions, orders, contracts and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue, and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel or offices as may be provided by the city commission. 
Section 7.14. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this charter is held invalid or unconstitutional for any reason by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision, and such holding shall not affect the remaining provisions of this charter. 
Section 7.15. - Effective date. 
    This charter shall become effective on January 1, 1991. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
 This table shows the location of the sections of the basic Charter and any amendments thereto. 
Ordinance 
Number Adoption 
 Date Section Disposition 894 10- 3-1990 1-7 1.10-7.15 912  7-21-1993 1 1.14  
PART II - CODE 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - How Code designated and cited. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of the City of Brunswick, Georgia" or "the Brunswick Code" and may be so cited. 
(Code 1953, § 1.1) 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the interpretation and construction of this Code and of all ordinances of the city, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless they are inconsistent with the manifest intent of the city commission: 
    Charter. The words "Charter" or "the Charter" shall mean and refer to the Charter of the City of Brunswick, Georgia, as printed in Part I of this volume. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall be construed as if the words "of Brunswick" followed. 
    Code. Whenever the words "Code" or "this Code" are used they shall mean and refer to the Code of Ordinances of Brunswick, Georgia as designated in section 1-1. 
    Commission. Wherever the term "commission" is used, the same shall be held to mean the commission of the City of Brunswick, Georgia. 
    Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided in O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6, when a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, only the first or last day shall be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty; however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the party shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. 
State Law reference- Similar construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1(d)(3). 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean Glynn County, Georgia. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Health officer. Wherever the words "health officer" or "city health officer" are used in this Code they shall mean the health officer of Glynn County. 
    Joint authority. All words giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers. 
    Keeper, proprietor. The words "keeper" and "proprietor" shall mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, clubs and copartnerships, whether acting by themselves or as a servant, agent or employee. 
    Land, real estate. "Land" and "real estate" include rights and easements of an incorporeal nature. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. A word importing the singular number only may extend and be applied to several persons and things as well as to one person and thing. 
    Oath. The word "oath" includes affirmation. When an oath is required or authorized by law, an affirmation in lieu thereof may be taken. An affirmation has the same force and effect as an oath. 
    O.C.G.A.. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." shall mean the latest edition of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner," applied to a building or land, shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership or joint tenant of the whole or of a part of such building or land. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to associations, firms, partnerships and bodies politic and corporate as well as to individuals. 
    Personal property. "Personal property" includes every species of property except real property, as herein defined. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Property. "Property" includes real, personal and mixed estates and interests. 
    Public place. The term "public place" shall include any park, cemetery, school yard or open space adjacent thereto, any lake or stream, or any place which from its public character, members of the general public frequent, or where they may be expected to congregate at any time as a matter of common right; also, any place at which, even though it is privately owned or controlled, a number of persons have assembled through common usage or by general or indiscriminate invitation, expressed or implied. 
    Real property. "Real property" shall include lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
    Sidewalk. The word "sidewalk" shall mean any portion of a street between the curb line and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, excluding parkways. 
    Signature, subscription. "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the State of Georgia. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public highways in the city. 
    Tenant, occupant. The words "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, shall include any person holding a written or oral lease of, or who occupies, the whole or a part of such building or land, either alone or with others. 
    Written, in writing. "Written" or "in writing" shall be construed to include any representation of words, letters or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1953, § 1.2) 
State Law reference- Construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3. 
Sec. 1-3. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinance in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Code 1953, § 1.4) 
Sec. 1-4. - Notes and catchlines of sections not part of law. 
    Unless otherwise provided in this Code, the descriptive headings or catchlines immediately preceding or within the text of the individual sections of this Code, except the section numbers included in the headings or catchlines immediately preceding the text of such sections, and title and chapter analyses do not constitute part of the law and shall in no manner limit or expand the construction of any section of this Code. All historical citations, title and chapter analyses, and notes set out in this Code are given for the purpose of convenient reference and do not constitute part of the law. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-5. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city commission that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the city commission without the incorporation in this Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section. 
(Code 1953, § 1.6) 
Sec. 1-6. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such Code or ordinance the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a sentence of confinement up to six months, a fine up to $1,000.00 or both or such alternative punishment as permitted by law. 
(b)  Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
Sec. 1-7. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  Effect. Any and all additions and amendments to this Code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city commission to make the same a part hereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated in this Code so that reference to "The Code of the City of Brunswick, Georgia," shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
(b)  Manner. All ordinances passed subsequent to the adoption of this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein, or in the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby, and the subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the city commission. 
(c)  Cite. All sections, articles, chapters or other provisions of this Code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section number, article number, chapter or other number, as the case may be. 
(d)  Language. Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this Code in substantially the following language: "That section ____________ of The Code of the City of Brunswick, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(e)  New sections. If a new section not heretofore existing in this Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances of the City of Brunswick, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, article, chapter or other designation as the case may be, to be numbered ____________ , which reads as follows: ...." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(f)  New material. In lieu of subsection (e), when the city commission desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature embracing a subject not previously existing in this Code, which the council desires to incorporate into the Code, a provision in substantially the following language may be made part of such ordinance: "It is the intention of the city commission, and it is hereby ordained, that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made part of the Code of the City of Brunswick, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be renumbered to accomplish such intention." 
Sec. 1-8. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared and printed whenever authorized or directed by the city commission. A supplement to the Code shall include substantive permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city commission or adopted by initiative and referendum during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code, and shall also include all amendments to the Charter during the period. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions; 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles; 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers; 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections ____________ to ____________ ," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code; 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but, in no case, shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-9. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinances adopting this Code shall affect any of the following when not inconsistent with this Code: 
(1)  Any ordinance which is temporary, although general in effect, or special, although permanent in effect; 
(2)  Any ordinance adopted for purposes which have been consummated; 
(3)  Any ordinance assessing a fee; 
(4)  Any right or franchise granted by the city commission to any person, firm or corporation; 
(5)  Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code; 
(6)  Any ordinance fixing salaries of officers or employees of the city; 
(7)  Any ordinance, resolution, policy or procedure pertaining to the regulation, retirement or pensioning of city personnel; 
(8)  Any appropriation ordinance; 
(9)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; 
(10)  Any ordinance making any act or failure to do any act an offense against the city, when such ordinance is authorized under the state law; 
(11)  Establishing any one-way street, traffic device, signal or marking, any parking regulation, or any limitation placed upon the use of any specific street for vehicles or pedestrians; 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; 
(13)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the grades of any street in the city; 
(14)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same; 
(15)  Any ordinance fixing ad valorem taxes, or providing for the levying or collecting thereof; 
(16)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor; 
(17)  Any ordinance annexing real property to the city; 
(18)  Any ordinance adopted after March 6, 1991; 
and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. These ordinances are on file in the city clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 905, § 1, 11-6-1991) 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Elections, Ch. 9; administration of flood regulations, § 11-41 et seq.; administration of housing regulations, § 12-36 et seq.; licenses and business regulations, Ch. 13; municipal court, Ch. 15. 
State Law reference- Counties and municipal corporations, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX; local government generally, O.C.G.A. tit. 36. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 2-1. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city for accounting and reporting systems is hereby changed from a calendar year to a fiscal year beginning July 1, in one year and ending June 30, the following year. 
(Ord. No. 665, § 1, 6-5-1974) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to establish fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Secs. 2-2-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-26. - Compensation. 
    Each member of the city commission shall receive compensation for their official duties. The amount of compensation shall be set from time to time by ordinance and shall be effective in accordance with state law. 
(Ord. No. 879, 8-21-1989) 
State Law reference- Authority to fix compensation for members of the governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Sec. 2-27. - Employment of city commissioners and mayor. 
    A commissioner or mayor shall not be eligible to apply for an open position of employment with the city. However, nothing herein shall prevent a mayor or commissioner from running for the office of commissioner or mayor pursuant to the City Charter. 
(Ord. No. 1030, § 1, 4-17-2013) 
Sec. 2-28. - Vacancy in office. 
    In the event the office of any commissioner or mayor shall become temporarily vacant the office shall be filled as follows: 
(a)  A vacancy in the board shall be filled for the unexpired term by a member appointed by the remaining members of the board by a majority vote. 
    Upon the vacation from office, the city clerk shall post in the official organ of the county and on the city's website an advertisement, approved by the board, seeking applications for nominations to fill the unexpired term of the vacating member. The advertisement shall run once a week for two weeks following the vacation from office. The advertisement shall state a deadline for submitting applications. Each remaining member of the board shall nominate a person from the applications received for consideration by the board as a whole. The board as a whole shall appoint a person to fill the vacancy from those nominations. 
(b)  If the vacancy becomes permanent, it shall be filled as provided for in the Charter of the City of Brunswick, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 1032, § 1, 8-21-2013) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1032, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 2013, set out provisions intended for use as § 2-27. For purposes of classification, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as § 2-28. 
Secs. 2-29-2-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-51. - Personnel rules, regulations. 
    The city manager is hereby authorized to promulgate and establish rules and regulations for the administration of the municipal personnel system, subject to approval of such rules and regulations by the city commission. All such rules and regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the personnel director of the city. 
(Ord. No. 786, § 1, 9-1-1982) 
Sec. 2-52. - Federal old age and survivors insurance. 
(a)  It is hereby declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal government, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this section, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors insurance as authorized by the federal social security act, the state enabling act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of such policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(b)  The mayor of the city is hereby authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia and officials as provided for in subsection (a) to include any employees that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner by law. 
(c)  Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in subsection (a) are hereby authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations, and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(d)  There shall be appropriated from general funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and a guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in subsection (b). Such funds shall be paid over to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia in accordance with regulations established by that agency. 
(e)  The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(f)  There is hereby excluded from this section any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 396, 3-27-1957; Ord. No. 403, 9-4-1957; Ord. No. 436, 7-15-1959; Ord. No. 448, § 6, 11-2-1960) 
State Law reference- Social security coverage for employees of political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. 47-18-1 et seq. 
Sec. 2-53. - Personnel background checks. 
(a)  Effective January 1, 2009, all applicants for employment with the government of the City of Brunswick shall consent in writing to a state and national records background check and shall provide fingerprints in such form and of such quality as shall be acceptable for submission to the Georgia Crime Information Center and the National Crime Information Center. 
(b)  Effective January 1, 2009, current employees of the government of the City of Brunswick whose job duties bring them into regular contact with children under the age of 18, including employees involved in after school care as well as those who staff recreational facilities attended by children under the age of 18, shall consent in writing to a state and national criminal records background check and shall provide fingerprints in such form and of such quality as shall be acceptable for submission to the Georgia Crime Information Center and the National Crime Information Center. 
(c)  Effective January 1, 2009, current employees of the government of the City of Brunswick whose job duties bring them into regular contact with persons over the age of 65, including, but not limited to, those who staff recreational facilities attended by persons over the age of 65, shall consent in writing to a state and national criminal records background check and shall provide fingerprints in such form and of such quality as shall be acceptable for submission to the Georgia Crime Information Center and the National Crime Information Center. 
(d)  Effective January 1, 2009, current employees of the government of the City of Brunswick whose job duties bring them into regular contact with persons who are considered disabled or handicapped according to State of Georgia law, shall consent in writing to a state and national criminal records background check and shall provide fingerprints in such form and of such quality as shall be acceptable for submission to the Georgia Crime Information Center and the National Crime Information Center. 
(e)  Effective January 1, 2009, current employees of the government of the City of Brunswick whose job duties involve them entering and/or performing work on the residences, businesses, and other real property of the citizens of the City of Brunswick, shall consent in writing to a state and national criminal records background check and shall provide fingerprints in such form and of such quality as shall be acceptable for submission to the Georgia Crime Information Center and the National Crime Information Center. 
(Ord. No. 1008, § 1, 12-17-2008) 
Secs. 2-54-2-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 

Secs. 2-71-2-95. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK 

Sec. 2-96. - Duties generally. 
    The city clerk shall issue all executions, summonses, notices, subpoenas and processes that may be necessary in the enforcement of the rules, regulations and ordinances of the commission. 
(Code 1953, § 2.8; Ord. No. 413, 12-4-1957) 
Sec. 2-97. - Attend commission meetings, record and publish proceedings. 
    The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the city commission, shall record regularly and accurately all proceedings of the commission, and shall prepare for publication in the official newspaper or for posting in some conspicuous place, a correct report of the proceedings of each such meeting. 
(Code 1953, § 2.10) 
Sec. 2-98. - Attest deeds, etc.; keep public records, books, etc. 
    All deeds, leases and other written contracts made by the city to and with others, and by others to and with the city, shall be attested by the city clerk officially. He shall be the keeper of the public seal of the city, and the custodian of all the records and other books and papers belonging to the city; he shall be responsible for the safekeeping and shall turn over all books, papers and other property of the city in his hands, to his successor in office. 
(Code 1953, § 2.11) 
Secs. 2-99-2-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY 

Secs. 2-116-2-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - DIRECTOR OF FINANCE 

Sec. 2-136. - Department created, head designated. 
    There is hereby created the department of finance, the head of which shall be designated director of finance. He shall be appointed by the city manager, subject to confirmation by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 412, § 2, 12-4-1957) 
Sec. 2-137. - Bond. 
    The director of finance shall give good and sufficient bond in such sum as fixed and approved by the city commission, conditioned for the faithful discharge of his duties. 
(Ord. No. 412, § 3, 12-4-1957) 
Sec. 2-138. - Powers and duties. 
    The director of finance shall have charge of the administration of the financial affairs of the city, and to that end shall have authority, and shall be required to: 
(1)  Maintain and supervise a general accounting system for the city government and each of its offices, departments and agencies; keep books for, and exercise financial budgetary control over, each office, department and agency; keep separate accounts for each item of appropriation contained in the city budget. 
(2)  Submit to the city commission through the city manager a monthly statement of all receipts and disbursements in such detail as will show the exact financial condition of the city. 
(3)  Supervise and be responsible for the assessment of all property within the corporate limits of the city for taxation; make all special assessments for the city government; prepare tax maps; and give such notice of taxes and special assessments as may be required by law. 
(4)  Collect all taxes, special assessments, license fees, service charges, utility fees, and other fees and revenues of the city for which collection the city is responsible. Receive all moneys receivable by the city from the county, state and federal government, or from any court, or from any office, department or agency of the city, or from any other source not otherwise provided for. 
(5)  Have custody of all public funds belonging to or under the control of the city or any office, department or agency of the city government, and deposit all funds coming into his hands in such depositories as may be designated by resolution of the city commission. 
(6)  Have custody of all investments and invested funds of the city government, or in possession of such government in a fiduciary capacity and have the safe-keeping of all bonds and notes of the city, and of the receipt and delivery of city bonds and notes for transfer, registration, exchange or payment. 
(7)  Keep the city manager advised on the financial condition of the city. 
(8)  Upon approval of the city manager, make expenditures within the appropriations approved by the city commission. 
(9)  Make interim and annual financial reports. 
(10)  Inspect and audit any accounts or records of financial transactions which may be maintained by any office, department or agency of the city government, apart from or subsidiary to the accounts kept in his office. 
(Ord. No. 412, § 4, 12-4-1957) 
Sec. 2-139. - Vest with authority of treasurer. 
    The director of finance is hereby vested with all of the powers, duties, responsibilities and authority of the former city treasurer, as provided by the charter, laws and ordinances of or applicable to the city. 
(Ord. No. 412, § 5, 12-4-1957) 
Secs. 2-140-2-160. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-161-2-185. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, Ch. 10. 
State Law reference- Local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-186. - Composition. 
    The fire department shall consist of one chief and such subordinate officers and firefighters as the city commission may from time to time prescribe. 
(Code 1953, § 16.1) 
Sec. 2-187. - Order of command at fires. 
    At all fires the chief shall be supreme in command of the department and the entire apparatus that may be employed for the extinguishment of fires. In his absence the command shall devolve on the assistant chief. In the absence of both, the oldest fireman in commission present shall take command. 
(Code 1953, § 16.2) 
Sec. 2-188. - Examination of equipment, etc.; recommendations to city manager. 
    The chief of the fire department shall examine, or cause to be examined, twice a year or oftener, if he deems it necessary, the condition of the engine houses, engines, hose and all other apparatus of the department, and make a report of the same to the city manager, making such recommendations as to an enlargement of his department and the increase of its efficiency as he may deem proper. 
(Code 1953, § 16.3) 
Sec. 2-189. - Exclusive use of streets during fires. 
    The fire department shall have the free and exclusive use of the streets during a fire. 
(Code 1953, § 16.4) 
Sec. 2-190. - Unlawful to go near equipment in operation. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person not connected with the fire department of the city to go within 450 feet of any engine or other machine of the fire department while the same is engaged in fighting a fire in the city, unless such person shall have express permission so to do from the chief or other person in command of the fire department. 
(Code 1953, § 16.5) 
Sec. 2-191. - Interference with work or practice. 
    No person shall in any manner obstruct or interfere with the work or practice of the fire department. 
(Code 1953, § 16.6) 
Sec. 2-192. - Injuring, etc., department property. 
    No person shall handle, tamper with or in any manner interfere with or injure any property of the fire department. 
(Code 1953, § 16.7) 
Sec. 2-193. - Obstructing engine house, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct with rubbish or in any other way an entrance to any engine house, or other place where any apparatus of the fire department shall be stored or kept. 
(Code 1953, § 16.8) 
Sec. 2-194. - Bringing intoxicating liquor into engine house, etc. 
    Any member of the fire department who shall bring any intoxicating liquor into the engine house or yard, or outhouses to the same, shall be suspended ten days for the first offense and for the second offense, shall be discharged. 
(Code 1953, § 16.9) 
Sec. 2-195. - Discharge of intoxicated members. 
    Any member of the fire department who shall be under the influence of intoxicating liquor, either on or off duty, shall be discharged. 
(Code 1953, § 16.10) 
Sec. 2-196. - Disobedience of members. 
    Any member of the fire department guilty of disobedience either about the engine house or at a fire shall be suspended or discharged at the discretion of the chief. 
(Code 1953, § 16.11) 
Sec. 2-197. - Use of profane or indecent language. 
    Any member of the fire department using profane or indecent language around the engine houses or yards, or outhouses, or at a fire shall be suspended one day. 
(Code 1953, § 16.12) 
Sec. 2-198. - Leaving post of duty without permission. 
    Any member of the fire department leaving his post of duty without permission shall be suspended or discharged at the discretion of the chief. 
(Code 1953, § 16.13) 
Sec. 2-199. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this division shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1953, § 16.14) 
Secs. 2-200-2-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC WORKS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Cemeteries and burials, ch. 7; streets and sidewalks, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 22. 

Sec. 2-216. - Created. 
    The department of public works, as separate from the department of engineering, is hereby created. 
(Ord. No. 511, art. II, § 1, 12-15-1965) 
Sec. 2-217. - Director-Qualifications. 
    The head of the department of public works shall be its director who shall have the following qualifications at the time of his appointment: 
(1)  Be a person of at least 21 years of age. 
(2)  Have knowledge, experience and practice in the working of skilled and nonskilled laborers. 
(3)  A general knowledge of material, methods and techniques commonly used in semi-skilled and laboring activities. 
(4)  Ability and experience in supervising the work of a crew performing maintenance or minor construction functions and to obtain effective results. 
(5)  Ability to understand and carry out written and oral instructions. 
(6)  Ability to read and interpret blueprints and working drawings. 
(7)  Skilled in the use of various hand and machine tools related to construction work. 
(8)  Experience in supervising and planning construction and maintenance work. 
(9)  Practice, experience and knowledge in the maintenance of automotive and mechanical machines and devices. 
(10)  Experience, knowledge and practice in horticultural work and planning. 
(11)  Knowledge and experience in setting up and carrying out safety programs in all work undertaken. 
(12)  Setting up and maintaining work schedules and giving special instructions as required. 
(13)  Have knowledge of and experience in water treatment and sewage collection and distribution systems and operation thereof. 
(Ord. No. 511, art. II, § 2, 12-15-1965) 
Sec. 2-218. - Same-Powers and duties. 
    The director of public works shall have charge of the supervision, maintenance and direction of work crews performing construction, maintenance and repair of all city property, city streets, sidewalks, parks, lanes, alleys within the city; and shall be required to: 
(1)  Prepare, grade and pave and repair streets, sidewalks; make excavations, ditches, drains, bridges and similar projects and repair the same. 
(2)  Inspect all work from day to day as the same progresses on any project coming within his jurisdiction. 
(3)  Construct, maintain, repair and improve all water lines and sewer lines within the city. 
(4)  Inspect, repair and improve all sidewalks in the city. 
(5)  Install, maintain and repair traffic signs, mark traffic lines in streets and install and maintain signs naming streets. 
(6)  Report to the city manager promptly any unsanitary condition existing in the city. 
(7)  Have charge of city cemeteries and supervise the creation and maintenance of same. 
(8)  Supervise the cutting of grass, removing of trees and stumps, digging and filling holes and trenches and relating ground streets and sidewalk maintenance. 
(9)  Instruct subordinates in safety methods of work and maintenance of equipment. 
(10)  Supervise the collection and disposal of all garbage and trash within the city. 
(11)  Supervise and have charge of the operation of water and sewage systems and distributions plants. 
(12)  Do all acts and things and to perform all work and service as from time to time shall be required by the city manager relating to public works. 
(Ord. No. 511, art. II, § 3, 12-15-1965) 
Secs. 2-219-2-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - DEPARTMENT OF RECREATION[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- Establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-236. - Established. 
    There is hereby created and established a department of the city to be known as and called the department of recreation. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 1, 8-5-1970) 
Sec. 2-237. - Powers and duties. 
    The department of recreation of the city is empowered to provide, maintain and conduct playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers and other recreational activities and facilities, and to maintain and equip playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers and buildings thereon, employ play leaders, playground directors, supervisors, recreation superintendents or such other officers and employees as it deems proper. The department of recreation shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of the people in a constructive and wholesome manner, and for such purposes is empowered to carry on such facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the city, with the consent of the city commission, or on other properties with the consent of the city commission and owners thereof and shall have the power to join in and cooperate with other governments in connection with recreational activities. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 2, 8-5-1970) 
Sec. 2-238. - Fiscal authority. 
    The department of recreation shall submit a budget to the city for its approval. Upon the approval of such budget, the department of recreation shall be responsible for the administration of the provisions of the same. The department of recreation may receive fees and revenue from the operation of recreation facilities and programs, and may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 3, 8-5-1970) 
Sec. 2-239. - Reports. 
    The department of recreation shall make full and complete monthly and annual reports to the city commission, and such other reports as, from time to time, may be requested by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 4, 8-5-1970) 
Sec. 2-240. - Expenditures restricted. 
    All expenditure of funds shall be within the budget of the department of recreation for any calendar year and with the consent of the city manager and director of finance, except that gifts and donations made to the recreation advisory board may be expended by such board in its discretion and for recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 599, § 5, 8-5-1970) 
Secs. 2-241-2-255. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - POLICE DEPARTMENT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide police protection, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(1); law enforcement officers and agencies, O.C.G.A. Title 35. 

Sec. 2-256. - Composition. 
    The police department of the city shall consist of the marshal, deputy marshals and such police officers as the city manager may appoint, together with such extra police officers as may, from time to time, be appointed for special duty. 
(Code 1953, § 30.1) 
Secs. 2-257-2-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND GOVERNMENT AGENCIES[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Cross reference- Housing standards appeals board, § 12-39. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-301-2-325. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - BOARD OF TRUSTEES FOR THE PUBLIC LIBRARY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
State Law reference- Establishment of library board of trustees, O.C.G.A. § 20-5-41. 

Sec. 2-326. - Duties, powers, etc. 
    The board of trustees for public library for the city shall have and possess the following duties, powers, authorizations and authorities: 
(1)  To adopt a constitution and such by-laws and regulations as may be needful and necessary. 
(2)  To join in, cooperate and participate in conjunction with other counties in the establishment and operation of the Brunswick Regional Library under the state law. 
(3)  To contract with duly authorized representatives as appointed by any contracting agencies in Camden, Charlton, Brantley, Long, McIntosh, Wayne and Glynn Counties. 
(4)  To ratify and confirm any and all existing contracts with the several representatives from the aforesaid counties. 
(5)  To have full power and authority to contract with other counties and governmental agencies should the same deem to be beneficial and necessary in the operation of the regional library. 
(6)  To do any and all things and requirements in the establishing and operating of a regional library as authorized by existing state law or hereinafter authorized. 
(Ord. No. 633, § 1, 6-21-1972) 
DIVISION 3. - PLANNING AND APPEALS COMMISSION 

Sec. 2-327. - Establishment and continuation. 
    The Brunswick Planning and Appeals Commission (PAC), shall be formed for the purpose of advising the governing body and making recommendations to the mayor and city council as well as hearing requests for variances with strict adherence to specific factors outlined in article V of this Code. The planning and appeals commission shall consist of five members and two alternates, who shall be residents of the City of Brunswick. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-328. - Appointments, terms of office and vacancies. 
    The planning and appeals commission shall be appointed and composed in the following manner: 
(1)  Members, including the chairperson, shall be appointed by the city commission to serve three-year terms, beginning on December 1 of the calendar year or as otherwise appointed. Members may serve for a maximum of two consecutive three-year terms. No member shall be reappointed to the commission for a one-year period following the completion of the two consecutive term limit. 
(2)  The initial members of the commission shall be appointed for staggered terms as follows: One member shall serve an initial one-year term; Two members shall serve an initial term of two years; and the remaining two members shall serve an initial term of three years. The initial one- and two-year terms shall not count against the term limit set forth in paragraph (1) above. When a position becomes vacant before the end of a term, the city commission shall appoint a new member for the duration of the term remaining. A member of the commission may be appointed to successive terms and shall continue to serve if their time expires until a successor is appointed. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-329. - Removal. 
    A member may be removed from the commission by a majority vote of the city commission for cause, for absenteeism at three successive called or regular meetings or absenteeism at six such meetings in a calendar year, or for other reasons the city commission may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-330. - Qualifications of members. 
    In addition to being residents of the city, the city commission in its appointment of members to the commission shall be bound by the following: 
(1)  Members of the commission shall have experience or knowledge in the fields of planning, land development, historic preservation, architectural design, landscape architecture, building construction, real estate or a similar profession; 
(2)  The chairperson shall be a community leader who has demonstrated the ability to conduct meetings, organize debate and to act in the public interest of the city as a whole; 
(3)  Within one year of initial appointment to the commission, the new member shall attend the community planning institute or comparable training as determined by the director of planning, development and codes; 
    The city commission shall make the sole determination as to the qualifications of any person in meeting the requirements for membership on the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-331. - Officers. 
    The chairperson, as appointed by the city commission, shall preside over meetings when present. The commission shall elect a vice chairperson from among its members, who shall serve for one year or until re-elected or until his or her successor is elected. The vice chairperson shall preside at meetings in the absence of the chairperson. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-332. - Bylaws and rules of procedure. 
    The commission may adopt such by-laws, rules or procedures as appropriate and not in conflict with this Code, the Zoning Procedures Act, or policies adopted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-333. - Meetings. 
    The commission shall meet each month in accordance with the schedule of meeting dates and times approved by the city commission. Other meetings of the commission shall be held at the call of the director if there is business to be brought before it, or at such other times as the commission may determine. All meetings of the commission shall be open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-334. - Quorum. 
    A total of three commission members present shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the quorum shall be necessary to approve any decision or recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-335. - Voting. 
    All commission members attending a meeting shall vote on each matter placed before it. A member may abstain from voting only in the instance of a conflict of interest, the nature of which must be stated for the record. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-336. - Secretary and record of proceedings. 
    The director of planning, development and codes or his or her designee shall serve as secretary to the commission. The secretary shall cause summary minutes of its proceedings to be kept, showing the vote of each member on each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall cause records of its examinations and other official actions to be kept in the form of tape recordings if possible, all of which shall be of public record. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-337. - Dissemination and posting of actions. 
    The results of each commission meeting as to the actions and recommendations shall be forwarded by the director of planning, development and codes, or his or her designee to the City of Brunswick Board of Commissioners. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 2-338. - Powers and duties. 
    The commission shall have without limitation the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Recommendations on comprehensive plan. Review the provisions of the city's Comprehensive Plan from time to time, and to make such recommendations to the governing body as it deems appropriate concerning its adoption or amendment. 
(2)  Recommendations on annexation, rezoning and special use applications. Conduct a public hearing on each application for annexation, rezoning or special use approval, review the application in accordance with the standards and procedures set forth in this Code and the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. 36-66-1 et seq.), and make such recommendations to the governing body as it deems appropriate on each application. 
(3)  Recommendations on text amendments. Conduct a public hearing on proposals to amend any portion of chapter 23 of this Code and the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. 36-66-1 et seq.). The board may review any such proposed text review and make such recommendation to the governing body on such text amendments as it deems appropriate. The commission shall also consider text amendments to any other articles of this Code, if assigned such role or responsibility by the governing body. 
(4)  Initiation of rezoning applications and text amendments. Initiate on its own motion a zoning change or an amendment to the text of any article of this Code when, in its determination, such changes are appropriate for consideration. Any initiation by the commission must go through the normal public notification and application requirements according to the provisions of this Code. 
(5)  Decisions on variances. Conduct a public hearing and make a final decision in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this Code on each application for a zoning variance or flood protection variance. 
(6)  Decisions on administrative appeals. Conduct a public hearing and make a final decision in accordance with the procedures and provisions of this Code on each appeal of an administrative decision pursuant to this Code or an interpretation of the provisions of this Code by an administrative officer. In exercising these powers regarding an appeal of an administrative decision, the board may reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirements, decisions or determinations of the administrative official, and to that end shall have the power to direct issuance of a permit. 
(7)  Other powers. The commission shall also have such other powers, duties or responsibilities assigned to it by the governing body, explicitly assigned by this Code, or reasonably implied by this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Secs. 2-339-2-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - TREE BOARD[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1050, § 1, adopted June 7, 2017, repealed the former Div. 3, §§ 2-346-2-350, and enacted a new Div. 3 as set out herein. Subsequently, Ord. No. 1055, § 1, adopted March 21, 2018, renumbered Div. 3 as Div. 4. The former article pertained to park and tree board. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

Sec. 2-346. - Created; composition; terms. 
    There is hereby created and established for the city a tree board to supersede the park and tree commission established by an Act of 1931 (1931 Ga. Laws, page 696). The board shall consist of five adult citizens of the city who shall be appointed by the city commission for terms of three years each; except that of the five members first appointed, one shall serve a term of one year, two shall serve a term of two years, and two shall serve a term of three years. In the event that a vacancy shall occur during the term of any member, a successor shall be appointed by the city commission for the remainder of the term. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 6-7-2017) 
Sec. 2-347. - Officers; rules and regulations; journal; quorum. 
    The tree board shall choose a chair from among its members in the first meeting of every calendar year. The chair shall proceed over meetings and appoints subcommittees. 
    The vice-chair shall be selected from among its members in the first meeting of every calendar year. The vice-chair shall conduct the duties of the chair during his or her absence. The vice-chair shall conduct the duties of the chair during a vacancy in that position; however, the vice-chair does not automatically assume the position of the chair. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 6-7-2017) 
Sec. 2-348. - Meetings; records. 
    The tree board shall hold at least one regular meeting in each quarter and at such additional times as may be necessary to conduct the business of the board. The city manager shall assign a staff liaison to coordinate and advise the board. Public record of such meetings shall be kept by the office of the city clerk. All meetings shall be open and accessible to the public. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 6-7-2017) 
Sec. 2-349. - Absences from meetings. 
    Absence from two consecutive regular meetings of the tree board shall operate to vacate the seat of a member, unless such absence is excused by the board by majority vote with such excuse duly entered upon its minutes. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 6-7-2017) 
Sec. 2-350. - Duties and responsibilities. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the tree board to study, investigate, council, and assist annually in the creation or revision of a written plan for the care, preservation, pruning, planting, replanting, removal or disposition of trees and shrubs in parks, along streets and in other public areas. Such plan will be presented annually to the city commission and, upon acceptance and approval, shall constitute the official comprehensive tree plan for the city. 
(b)  The board shall advise the city commission and city officials in the development of standards of tree maintenance and other specifications to foster and protect the city's tree population, to protect persons and property against injury, and to provide for safe and efficient passage of persons, vehicles, and utilities through established rights-of-way. 
(c)  The board, in the event of disputes or disagreements concerning the maintenance of trees by the city or its agent, shall provide arbitration and make a recommendation concerning the dispute. 
(d)  The board will assist other city officials in identifying hazards caused by the deterioration of trees upon or overhanging public property. 
(e)  The board may propose such legislation as may be needed and practicable to pursue the purposes for which the board was created. 
(f)  When requested by the city commission, the tree board shall make a study and report its findings and recommendations on any special question coming within the scope of its work. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 6-7-2017) 
Sec. 2-350.1. - Review by city commission. 
    The city tree board shall serve as an advisory board to the City Commission of the City of Brunswick, all the reports and recommendations are subject to the approval of the City Commission of the City of Brunswick. Any person may appeal to the City Commission of the City of Brunswick on any report or recommendation from the city tree board, the commission's decision is final. 
(Ord. No. 1050, § 1, 6-7-2017) 
ARTICLE VI. - PROCUREMENT[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 944, § 2, adopted Sept. 20, 2000, repealed art. VI of this chapter in its entirety and enacted new provisions as art. VI as herein set out. Former art. VI, §§ 2-351-2-359, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 918, § 1, adopted Dec. 21, 1994. 

Sec. 2-351. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following terms shall have the meaning provided for by O.C.G.A. § 36-91-1: change order, competitive sealed bidding, competitive sealed proposals, emergency, public works construction, responsible bidder or responsible offeror, responsive bidder or offeror, scope of project, scope of work, and sole source. 
(b)  "Other covered contracts" shall mean all contracts other than public works construction, emergency, employment, professional/consulting, intergovernmental, month-to-month, real property acquisition, or surplus/abandoned/forfeited property sales. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-352. - Competitive solicitation of public works construction contracts. 
    Public works construction contracts shall be solicited and executed as provided for by O.C.G.A. §§ 36-91-20, 36-91-21, and 36-91-22 as said provisions might apply at the time of contracting. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-353. - Federal and state contracting requirements. 
    The city shall follow the requirements of any mandatory state or mandatory federal statutes, rules, or regulations as may be applicable to solicitation and execution of its contracts. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-354. - Other covered contracts. 
    Other covered contracts shall be solicited and executed in accordance with the provisions of sections 2-355 through 2-361 below. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-355. - Contracts involving expenditures below $25,000.00. 
    Contracts involving expenditures of less than $25,000.00 of city funds may be negotiated and executed by the city manager under such terms as the city manager may determine to be in the best interest of the city, subject to the city manager's obligation to inform the city commission of such contractual arrangements. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-356. - Negotiation and competitive solicitation procedures for other cover contracts. 
    The city commission may solicit and enter other covered contracts by such means and by such procedures as it may determine reasonable and appropriate under the circumstances and in the best interest of the city, utilizing some form of competitive solicitation (i.e., some means similar to the competitive sealed bid or proposal processes described in regard to the competitive sealed bid or proposal processes described in regard to public works constriction contracting, above), or by direct negotiation. All contracts involving expenditure of city funds in excess of $25,000.00 shall require approval or ratification by vote of the city commission in a regular or called meeting of the commission. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-357. - Intergovernmental contracts. 
    Contracts with other governmental entities, including but not limited to the State of Georgia, and its political subdivisions, agencies, departments, authorities, and boards, the County of Glynn, the United States or any of its agencies or departments, or any municipal corporation, may be approved by vote of the city commission at any regular or called meeting of the commission or any joint meeting of the commission and the governing body of such other contracting entity. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-358. - Ongoing/continuing contracts. 
    Open-ended contracts for as-needed construction, demolition, repairs, maintenance, or provision of services, material, equipment, or supplies may be entered into by the city commission or city manager in accordance with the terms of this article. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-359. - Advertisements. 
    Advertisements, where mandated by state or federal law or rule, shall be done in accordance with the requirements of the applicable law or rule; in contract solicitation not involving mandatory advertisement, any advertisement shall be made in such general circulation newspaper as the city uses for its general legal advertisements, in such manner and at such times as the city commission may determine to be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-360. - Negotiation of competitively solicited bids or proposals. 
    The city may engage in direct negotiation of any contract for which bids or proposals have been competitively solicited if the city commission determines that its chosen method of competitive solicitation has not provided a contract bid or proposal with a price or other contract term in the best interest of the city. The commission may seek clarification of bid or proposal terms, may correct or clarify mistakes or ambiguities in bid or proposal specifications, or amend the scope of project or scope of work in its discretion, before or after opening bids or proposals and all without the necessity of rejecting bids or proposals or re-bidding the project. The city reserves the right to waive any technicalities or informalities in the contracting process, and shall have the authority to reject any or all bids or proposals when deemed to be in the best interest of the city. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Sec. 2-361. - Substantial compliance. 
    Any contract entered on behalf of the city without substantial compliance with this article VI of chapter 2 of the City Code shall be voidable by the city commission, which may declare void or ratify the contract. 
(Ord. No. 944, § 2, 9-20-2000) 
Chapter 3 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1001, § 1, adopted July 2, 2008, repealed ch. 3 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 3 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 3 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 901, §§ 1-24, adopted Feb. 2, 1991; Ord. No. 921, § 2, 3-15-1995; Ord. No. 940, § 1, adopted Sept. 1, 1999; Ord. No. 946, § 1, adopted Mar. 7, 2001; Ord. No. 951, § 1, adopted June 5, 2002; Ord. No. 953, § 1, adopted Feb. 5, 2003. 
State Law reference- Alcoholic beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 3-1. - Definitions. 
    Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. §§ 3-1-1 through 3-10-15, provided that the following terms used in this chapter shall have the following meanings: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
    Alcoholic beverage code means the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code presently found at O.C.G.A. title 3, and including future amendments thereto. 
    Beer or malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more then six percent alcohol by volume, and including ale, porter, brown stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Brewpub shall mean any eating establishment in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. As used in this chapter, the term "eating establishment" means an establishment which is licensed to sell distilled spirits, malt beverages, or wines and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross food and beverage sales from the sale of prepared meals or food. 
    Church means any permanent place where religious worship services are regularly conducted. 
    Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
    Growler means a reusable glass jug used to transport draft beer for off-premises consumption. 
    Keg means any container of malt beverage sold at retail and having a capacity in excess of two gallons. 
    Licensee means the individual to whom an alcoholic beverage license is issued or, in the case of partnership or corporation, all partners, officers, and directors for the partnership or corporation. 
    Limited pouring license means a license for retail sale, for on-premises consumption, of beer ("limited pouring license - beer") or beer and wine ("limited pouring license - beer and wine"). 
    Liquor store means that class of retail package dealer licensed to sell distilled spirits for off-premises consumption; also includes package stores licensed for sale of malt beverages or wine, or both, in addition to distilled spirits. 
    Lounge or bar means an establishment licensed for retail sale of beer, wine, or distilled spirits, or any combination thereof, for on-premises consumption, and having seating accommodations for not fewer than 12 persons. 
    Manager means any person who supervises the regular operations of a business licensed under this chapter. 
    Minor means any person under 21 years of age. 
    Non-restaurant bar means a lounge or bar which is not part of a "restaurant" as defined below. 
    Package means a bottle, can, keg barrel, growler, or other original consumer container. 
    Pouring license means a license for retail sale for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages including beer, wine, and distilled spirits. 
    Premises means the building and real property described in the application as approved by the city commission where the licensed operations are to be conducted, and shall include all parts of the address at which the license is located according to the application as approved by the commission, including all floors of any building or structure unless the approved application reflects otherwise. This meaning shall apply even though some parts of the licensed premises may not be used for customer service. 
    Private club means private clubs or bona fide associations within the meaning of the definition of "bona fide private club" as set forth in the Alcoholic Beverage Code; provided however, that this definition shall not apply to private clubs operating under a city alcoholic beverage license on March 7, 2001; as to such licensees in operation on March 7, 2001, the term shall have its ordinary signification as meaning "private clubs or bona fide associations of individuals organized for fraternal purposes conducted solely for the use and benefit of its members and beneficiaries" and shall not be restricted to the meaning set forth in the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
    Restaurant means an eating establishment, serving prepared food which is offered to the general public, and which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared foods. Restaurant does not include bars which may be licensed for food service but which do not meet the above requirements. 
    Retail consumption dealer means a holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages at retail for consumption on-premises; holder of a pouring license. 
    Retail package dealer means a holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages in their original package at retail for off-premises consumption only. Sometimes referred to loosely as a "package store." License may include sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits, or some combination of same. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 1016, § 1, 7-7-2010; Ord. No. 1023, § 1, 5-2-2012; Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 10-21-2015) 
Sec. 3-2. - Sale for consumption on the premises. 
    Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold at retail for consumption on the premises, except in the following types of businesses: 
(1)  Restaurants, other than fast food restaurants, serving prepared food which is offered to the general public. As used in this subsection, "fast food restaurant" means a restaurant that transacts more than 15 percent of its sales through a carry out window; 
(2)  Hotels or motels kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the general public as places where sleeping accommodations are offered to guests, whether transient or permanent, and having a public dining room where at least two meals a day are served; 
(3)  Lounges where seating accommodations are provided for not fewer than 12 persons; 
(4)  Private clubs or bona fide associations of individuals organized for fraternal purposes, conducted solely for the use and benefit of their members and their beneficiaries. As used in this subsection, the term "private club" shall have its ordinary signification and shall not be limited to the definition of "bona fide private club" as set forth in the Alcoholic Beverage Code. 
(5)  Restaurants with a pouring license may sell wine or beer for consumption on certain city-owned premises in accordance with the provisions of article III of this chapter. 
(6)  Brewpubs may be licensed for the sale for consumption on the premises by applying and obtaining a brewpub license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Brew pub license holders are subject to state law limitations set forth in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 and any other corresponding state or local regulations or requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 10-21-2015) 
Sec. 3-3. - Retail package sale of distilled spirits for consumption off premises. 
    Distilled spirits shall be sold at retail only in stores which are duly licensed by the state to sell distilled spirits by the package and which are devoted exclusively to the sale of alcoholic beverages in the original container. A retail package licensee shall not permit the breaking of a package containing any alcoholic beverage or the drinking of any alcoholic beverage on the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-4. - Retail package sale of malt beverages and wine for consumption off premises. 
(a)  Malt beverages and wines shall not be sold at retail except in the following types of businesses: 
(1)  Package stores; 
(2)  Retail stores in which at least 60 percent of the retail floor space is devoted exclusively to the sale of food, related grocery items or articles commonly sold in drugstores, excluding any alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  Boat marinas providing fuel, fishing needs, refreshments or other accommodations. 
(b)  No malt beverages or wine shall be displayed for sale on the licensed premises except in the original package at room temperature or in an electric cooler or in a "growler" for premises licensed to provide "growler" services. 
(c)  Any retail package dealer selling beer by the keg shall require the purchaser to provide a drivers license or other form of photo identification and shall record the identification or serial number of the keg along with the full name, address, date of birth and Social Security number of the purchaser. Such record shall be maintained for a period of no less than one year following the date of purchase. Such records shall be provided for inspection to any officer of the city police department upon oral or written request. 
(d)  A brewpub license holder shall not be authorized to sell alcoholic beverages at retail by package for consumption off the premise. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 1023, § 2, 5-2-2012; Ord. No. 1042, § 1, 10-21-2015) 
Sec. 3-5. - Retailer to purchase from licensed wholesaler only. 
    No retailer shall purchase for use at a licensed place of business any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages, or wine from any person other than a wholesaler licensed by the state. No wholesaler shall sell any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine to anyone other than a retailer licensed under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-6. - Excise tax on wholesale alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  There is hereby levied an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by licensed wholesalers in the amount of $0.22 per liter or a proportionate tax at like rates on any fractional part of a liter on distilled spirits, excluding fortified wine. 
(b)  There is hereby levied an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, which is sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, at a rate equal to $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 151/2 gallons or a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 151/2 gallons. 
(c)  There is hereby levied an excise tax on the sale of malt beverages sold in bottles, cans and other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, at a rate equal to $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(d)  There is hereby levied on the first sale or use of wine by the package an excise tax in the amount of $0.22 per liter or a proportionate tax at like rates on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(e)  The excise taxes provided in this section shall be imposed upon and shall be paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. The taxes shall be paid on or before the tenth day of the month following the calendar month in which the beverages are sold or disposed of within the city by the wholesale dealer. Each licensee responsible for the payment of the excise tax shall file a report with the finance department itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of alcoholic beverages, by size and type of containers, sold during the month within the city. 
(f)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any licensee to fail to file in a timely manner any report required pursuant to this chapter or to fail to remit in a timely manner all taxes due with any such report. Such licensee may be required to appear before the city commission to show cause why such licensee's license should not be revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-7. - Hours of sale. 
    The following hours of sale are hereby established for the sale of alcoholic beverages and wine: 
(1)  Retail package licensees shall not sell distilled spirits at any time on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. or on any other day between the hours of 11:45 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(2)  Retail package licensees shall not sell wine or malt beverages on Sundays before 12:30 p.m. or after 11:30 p.m. or on any other day between the hours of 11:45 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. 
(3)  Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold on Sundays for consumption on the premises except as set forth in subsection (4) of this section. Alcoholic beverages shall not be sold for consumption on the premises on any other day of the week between the hours of 1:45 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. All customers shall be required to vacate the licensed premises by 2:00 a.m. on that day of operation and no drink order shall be placed or filled subsequent to 1:45 a.m. 
(4)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on the premises from midnight Saturday until 1:45 a.m. Sunday. All customers shall be required to vacate the licensed premises by 2:00 a.m. on Sunday and no drink order shall be placed or filled subsequent to 1:45 a.m. Alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on premises on Sunday from 12:30 p.m. until midnight in any restaurant licensed for Sunday sales and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. No alcoholic beverages may be sold for consumption on premises in any licensed establishment between midnight Sunday and 8:00 a.m. Monday. 
(5)  Alcoholic beverages may be sold on a primary or election day either by the package or for consumption on the premises; provided, however, that no sale shall take place within 250 feet of any polling place or of the outer edge of any building within which such polling place is established on primary or election days. 
(6)  Effective January 1, 2014, retailers of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits shall be permitted to sell malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits by the package for consumption off the premises on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. Sunday package sales by retailers of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits hereunder may be made only by retailers that are licensed to sell by the package. Retailers may sell only those alcoholic beverages that are authorized by the retailer's alcoholic beverage license and only in the manner authorized by such license. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 1029, § 1, 4-3-2013) 
Sec. 3-8. - Outdoor advertising. 
    No outdoor advertising with respect to the promotion of the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine shall be permitted on the exterior of any wholesale or retail outlet or elsewhere within the city except as may be authorized by the laws of the state and regulations implemented by an agency having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-9. - Minors. 
    No holder of a pouring license other than a restaurant shall permit any minor (other than the child of an employee of the licensee in the company of the parent/employee) to enter the licensed premises. All holders of retail licenses for on-premises consumption other than restaurants shall conspicuously post outside each entrance a written notice, with letters of not less than two inches high, containing the following words: "Persons under 21 years of age are not allowed in these premises." All personnel employed by licensee shall be advised by the licensee or the manager of the provisions of this subsection. Provided, however, that this section shall not prohibit such licensees from employing persons between the ages of 18 and 21 to work in the licensed establishment as servers or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-10. - Licensed premises only to be used for licensed purposes. 
    The licensed premises shall not be used, in whole or in part, for any purpose other than the purpose for which it is licensed during the term of the license. This prohibition shall remain in effect during any period of suspension of the license, as well as after normally authorized hours of operation. Use of the premises for any unauthorized purpose during the term of the license shall be deemed an abandonment of the license. For purposes of this provision, "unauthorized purpose" shall include, but shall not be limited to, private parties, teen clubs, or any other alcohol or non-alcohol use or event. Any use of the licensed premises of a non-restaurant lounge or bar after 2:00 a.m. on any day of the week is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-11. - "Brown bag" and "bring your own bottle" practices prohibited in unlicensed business premises. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to permit persons to bring their own alcoholic beverages into any business premises within the city in return for a "cover charge," an "admission fee" or a "set-up charge" for mixers or for any other services unless the premises are currently licensed and in good standing (i.e., not under suspension) for on-premises consumption sales of such category of alcoholic beverages. In other words, the license requirements and other rules set forth in this chapter apply even though there is no "sale" as such of the alcoholic beverage on the premises. No such "brown bag" or "bring your own bottle" practices may be carried out at any unlicensed location in the city. No such "brown bag" or "bring your own bottle" practices may be allowed in any licensed premises during any period of closure, suspension, any other period of poor standing, or any other time apart from authorized hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-12. - Consumption of alcohol on city streets prohibited; limited in certain area. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) below, it shall be unlawful for any licensed establishment to dispense any alcoholic beverage in an open container for removal from the premises, and it shall be unlawful for any person to remove from an alcoholic beverage establishment any open container of alcoholic beverage or to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from any open container or to possess in any open container any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private, within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  In connection with an event sponsored or cosponsored by the city or the downtown development authority, or an event obtaining the specific approval of the city commission, open containers of alcoholic beverages shall be permitted on Newcastle Street or its sidewalks within the area of the city bounded on the north by "G" Street, and on the south by Mansfield Street, and to include the entirety of East and West Jekyll Park, East and West Machen Park and the northern half of Queen Square; the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense an alcoholic beverage in a paper or plastic cup, or other container other than a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than one such alcoholic beverage at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than one such alcoholic beverage from the licensed premises. 
(2)  No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any alcoholic beverages while in the confines of a motor vehicle when the vehicle is parked on any city street, alley, way or parking lot. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to possess an open container of an alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle in the city or while a passenger in or on a vehicle being operated in the city. 
(1)  As used in this article, "open container" means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from, or the seal of which has been broken. 
(2)  An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of a vehicle if the container is not in the possession of a passenger and is not located in a locked glove compartment, locked trunk, or other locked non-passenger area of the vehicle. 
(3)  An open container shall be considered to be in the possession of a passenger of a vehicle if the container is in the physical control of the passenger. 
(4)  Exceptions: 
a.  A passenger of a vehicle in which the driver is operating the vehicle pursuant to a contract to provide transportation for passengers and such driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; 
b.  A passenger of a bus in which the driver holds a valid chauffeur's license pursuant to Georgia law or any other state; or 
c.  A passenger of a self-contained motor home which is in excess of 21 feet in length. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-13. - Outside delivery of drinks prohibited. 
    Retail consumption dealers under this chapter shall not sell or permit the sale of alcoholic beverages except within the physical confines of the licensed premises. The sale or delivery of alcoholic beverages through any window, door, or other opening in the license premises to person outside the physical confines of the structure, and any sale or delivery of beverage alcohol upon the street, sidewalk, or grounds outside the license premises is prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-14. - Home brew malt beverages. 
(a)  Home brew special events: An event held pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4(e) in which malt beverages brewed pursuant to the provisions found in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 may be consumed. 
(1)  Home-brew special events shall not be held at any location licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(2)  Consumption of malt beverages at home-brew special events shall be limited solely to malt beverages produced pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 and such malt beverages shall only be consumed by the participants in and judged of the home-brew special event. 
(b)  Home brew special event permits: Upon receiving an application from a qualified applicant including the fee, the city manager or his assignee may issue a home-brew special event permit for the holding of home-brew special events, including contests, tastings, and judging. A home-brew special event permit shall cost $50.00 and shall be valid for not more than six events per calendar year. 
(c)  Transportation of malt beverages to home-brew special event: Malt beverages may be removed from the residence where produced and transported by the producer for use at home brew special events in a quantity not to exceed 25 gallons, provided that such malt are securely sealed in one or more containers and clearly labeled with the following information: 
(1)  The name of the producer; 
(2)  The address of the residence at which it was produced; 
(3)  The name and address of the home-brew special event to which it is being transported; and 
(4)  The permit number under which the home-brew special event is being held. 
If transported by motor vehicle, the sealed containers shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(d)  Transportation of home-brew malt beverages, generally: Malt beverages produced under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 3-5-4 may be removed from the residence where produced for transportation and delivery by the producer to a location not licensed under this title and for which a permit has not been issued pursuant to subsection (e) of this Code section; provided that not more than 128 ounces of such malt beverages produced in the same residence shall be transported at one time; and provided, further, that such malt beverages shall be securely sealed in one or more containers and clearly labeled with the following information: 
(1)  The name of the producer; and 
(2)  The address of the residence at which it was produced. 
    If transported in a motor vehicle, the securely sealed containers shall be placed in a locked glove compartment, a locked trunk, or the area behind the last upright seat of a motor vehicle that is not equipped with a trunk. 
(Ord. No. 1037, § 1, 9-17-2014) 
Secs. 3-15-3-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES 

Sec. 3-36. - Required for manufacture, distribution, sale or possession for sale. 
    It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to manufacture, distribute, sell or possess for the purpose of sale any alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine when such person does not hold valid licenses to do so issued by the city and the state. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-37. - Application. 
(a)  Application for a license to manufacture or sell alcoholic beverages or renewal of such a license shall be made on a form to be furnished by the city and shall be made under oath. The complete address of each applicant and applicant's Social Security number shall be furnished together with such further information as the city may require on the form. Any knowingly untrue, misleading or omitted statement or information shall be cause for denial or non-renewal and, if a license has been granted, shall be cause for revocation. Each application shall be filed together with a certified or cashier's check in payment of the application fee required by subsection 3-39(b) and the license fee required by section 3-41. 
(b)  An application shall be made in the name of all the owners of the business, if the owners are natural persons, and in the name of all managerial employees. If the owner is a corporation, application shall be made in the name of all corporate officers who will be directly concerned in the operation of the business and in the name of all managerial employees. All such persons must meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(c)  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction of each applicant for any violation of federal, state, or local law involving alcoholic beverages, gambling, taxes or moral turpitude. 
(d)  A sketch or diagram drawn to rough scale shall be prepared by the city marshal or his designee for consideration of the city commission with regard to each initial application, showing all churches, colleges, residences, schools, and alcoholic treatment centers within 750 feet of any portion of the proposed licensed premises and the distance between property lines of the proposed place of business and the property lines of schools, colleges, churches, alcoholic treatment centers and residences within 750 feet of the proposed place of business. Said diagram shall illustrate the application of minimum distances in accordance with the manner of measurement provided for by state law. The applicant may, at applicant's expense, submit his or her own diagram for consideration by the city marshal. 
(e)  The license application shall contain a statement as to whether an applicant holds any other license for the sale of alcoholic beverages and the location thereof. 
(f)  If the proposed licensed premises requires construction or substantial renovation, the applicant shall submit a detailed set of plans and specifications showing the exact location of the proposed licensed premises, the construction proposed to be carried out by the applicant and the anticipated time for completion of construction. 
(g)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, each applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints; provided, however, this requirement may be waived upon recommendation of the police chief. 
(h)  The city commission may require such additional information as it may deem necessary. 
(i)  Any applicant for a new or renewal license, who desires to engage in Sunday sales pursuant to subsection 3-7(4) shall complete a separate application form to be furnished, along with the basic application form, by the city, such Sunday sales application form to include the following statement made by the applicant under oath: "By applying for a license to sell alcoholic beverages at retail for consumption on premises on Sundays, I am representing to the city commission of Brunswick that the licensed premises is either (1) an eating establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served, or (2) an establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. (If applicant seeks Sunday sales licensure for a new establishment, I represent that the anticipated annual revenue will be as required above.) I further certify that, if a restaurant, the licensed premises will not be used for Sunday sales unless there is a currently valid permit for restaurant operation issued by the county health department. I further certify that I will furnish my bookkeeping/financial records for inspection within seven days of my receipt of a written request for production of same from the chief of the city police department or the city manager so that eligibility of the licensed establishment may be monitored." 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-38. - Persons prohibited from holding licenses. 
    Alcoholic beverage licenses shall not be issued to the following: 
(1)  Any person who has been convicted of driving under the influence of intoxicants or drugs or who has pleaded nolo contendere or forfeited bond in connection with any such charge within the preceding two years; 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted of a felony or who has pleaded nolo contendere or forfeited bond in connection with any such charge within the preceding five years; 
(3)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of law pertaining to the sale of alcoholic beverages or the sale or possession of a controlled substance or who has pleaded nolo contendere or forfeited bond in connection with any such charge within the preceding five years; 
(4)  Any partnership, unless all partners qualify; 
(5)  Any corporation, unless all officers qualify who will be directly concerned in the management of the business; 
(6)  Any person whose business will be managed or operated by a person who could not acquire a license under the terms of this chapter, except as to the citizenship requirement provided in this article; 
(7)  Any person whose license to manufacture or sell alcoholic beverages has been revoked by any licensing authority during the preceding five years. 
    For purposes of this section, the period of time relating to a prior conviction, plea of nolo contendere, or forfeited bond shall be calculated from the date the offense occurred, not from the date of disposition. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 1028, § 1, 3-20-2013) 
Sec. 3-39. - Processing application. 
(a)  After investigation by the police department of the fitness of the applicant and the proposed location, all alcoholic beverage license applications shall be approved or disapproved by the city commission at a public meeting. In cases where applications are disapproved, the finance department shall return the amount of the license fee submitted with the application, excluding the amount of the processing fee provided for herein, which shall be retained. In cases where such applications are approved by the city commission, the commission shall issue a proper license to the applicant authorizing the applicant to engage in the particular business and at the particular location applied for. 
(b)  Every application shall include a non-refundable investigative and processing fee in an amount to be established by the city commission by resolution from time to time. 
(c)  The city commission shall have full power to determine whether the applicant for a license is a fit and proper person to operate the type of business involved and whether the location of such business is proper and in the best interest of the general public, and the decision of the commission shall be final. 
(d)  All decisions approving, denying, suspending or revoking such license shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant personally. 
(e)  Public notice of all proposed new alcoholic beverage licenses shall be given by publication, at least once during each of the two seven-day periods immediately preceding the city commission meeting at which the application of a new license is first to be considered, of a notice containing the name of the proposed business, the name of the applicant, the location (address) of the proposed place of business and the nature of the alcoholic beverages license sought. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-40. - Consideration for issuance. 
    In determining whether or not any alcoholic beverage license application should be granted, the following shall be considered in addition to other provisions of this chapter: 
(1)  An applicant's character and mental capacity to conduct the business, his personal associations, record of arrest and reputation in any community in which he has resided and whether or not he appears likely to operate the business in conformity with federal, state and local laws; 
(2)  If the applicant previously held a license to manufacture or sell alcoholic beverages, whether or not he has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business and the circumstances of any violation; 
(3)  If the applicant previously held a license to sell alcoholic beverages, the manner in which he conducted such business so as to reduce or increase the necessity for police observation or intervention; 
(4)  Whether the applicant previously had a similar license suspended or revoked and the reason therefor; 
(5)  Other factors that may affect the general public health and welfare, including, without limitation, the type of license applied for, the effect the license would have on schools, churches and public facilities in the area, the effect the license would have on existing land uses in the area, the character of the area and its suitability for the particular use sought, and the congestion of roads and streets. 
(6)  No new license shall issue, or new location be approved, for retail sale of any alcoholic beverage for consumption on premises without consideration by the city commission of the proximity of the location proposed for the establishment to any nearby school, college, church or residences. If any school, college, church or residence is located within 600 feet of the main entrance to the proposed licensed premises, then any motion to approve the location must be accompanied by a statement substantially to the effect that such proximity has been considered and it is the commission's finding that the proximity does not cause the establishment of the licensed premises as proposed to be harmful to the welfare of the community or otherwise unsuitable for the location. 
(7)  The city commission may consider the history of operations of bars and other establishments at the site specifically applying for a license among other factors the commission deems fit in its discretion to determine whether a license should be granted. 
(8)  The city commission may require as a condition of issuance of a liquor license or a renewal of a particular license, or as a condition of probation that security guards be present on the premises in non-restaurant bars. If the city commission requires the use of security guards, terms of use shall be as set by the city commission (regarding, e.g., hours of security presence, location, level of training, and other terms as the city commission deems appropriate). Such officer could be retired or off-duty from the Brunswick Police Department, the Glynn County Police Department, or any other Georgia or Federal law enforcement department. 
(9)  No new license shall be issued for retail sale of distilled spirits for off-premises consumption where the applicant's proposed place of business is located within 500 yards (1,500 feet) of any property zoned for or used for residential purposes, or which is owned by the city or other government agency and planned for residential use. For purposes of this subsection, the distance shall be measured from the main entrance of the proposed new licensed business to the nearest boundary of the residential parcel in question using the most direct method of travel using public sidewalks, streets, and other public rights-of-way. No new such license shall be issued for retail sale of distilled spirits for off-premise consumption where the parcel upon which the proposed new licensed business abuts or adjoins any part of any residentially zoned, used or planned property as described above. A license shall not be considered a new license for purposes of this subsection distance limitation, and thus the distance limit shall not apply, if it is a renewal of an existing license at an existing licensed location, or a change of owner at an existing licensed location, or the licensing of a business at a location where there has been a validly licensed retail package sale liquor business in operation at any time during the 12-month period immediately preceding the date of filing of the completed application. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 1016, § 2, 7-7-2010; Ord. No. 1019, § 1, 11-3-2010) 
Sec. 3-41. - Fee scale. 
    Before an alcoholic beverage license shall be granted or renewed, the applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with a fee scale which shall be established by the city commission by resolution from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-42. - Proration of fees. 
    The fee for a new alcoholic beverage license for a portion of the year shall be prorated from the first day of the month in which the license is granted. Any holder of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article who discontinues the operation of his business because of a documented hardship may apply for a refund of a portion of the unearned license fee previously paid, and the license fee shall be prorated on a monthly basis as of the last day of the month in which the business discontinued operations. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-43. - Provisional license. 
(a)  A person making an application for an alcoholic beverage license to operate an existing licensed premises may be issued a provisional license for a period not to exceed 90 days by the city commission. Before a provisional license is issued, the applicant must have filed a complete application, and the following documents and material must be furnished to the commission: 
(1)  A valid state application with all questions answered which indicates that applicant is eligible to hold the license sought; 
(2)  Information showing that a preliminary record check indicates the applicant is eligible to hold such license. 
(b)  Every person making an application for an initial license shall be required to appear before the city commission to answer such questions and provide such information as the city commission deems necessary and proper. If the applicant fails to appear at such hearing, the application shall be deferred to the next meeting. If the applicant fails to appear at the next meeting, the application may be treated as having been withdrawn. 
(c)  The issuance of any provisional license pursuant to the conditions in this section is within the discretion of the city commission, and such provisional license may be withdrawn at any time without further notice or hearing if the complete investigation, including the response to the fingerprint search, shows that the applicant was not entitled to the license issued. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-44. - Certificate of occupancy for licensed premises required prior to granting license. 
    No license other than a provisional license shall be granted under this chapter until the business establishment referred to in the license application has been granted a certificate of occupancy by the building inspector's office. A provisional license may be issued by the commission to the applicant for a location not previously licensed, provided reasonable assurance are given to the commission that when all work is completed the premises will fully comply with this chapter, the zoning ordinance and all applicable building regulations. A provisional license for a new location shall not entitle the applicant to sell alcoholic beverages until such time as the necessary work has been inspected and approved by the building inspector and a certificate of occupancy has been issued. When all necessary approvals have been obtained, the finance department shall issue the license previously applied for and approved by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-45. - Consumption on premises and package license. 
    An alcoholic beverage license holder may apply for an obtain both of the licenses for sales in the original package and for consumption on the premises, but the sale of such items must be in separate establishments having independent entrances. This section shall not apply to hotel in-room service. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-46. - Expiration and renewal. 
(a)  All licenses granted under this article shall expire at midnight on December 31st of each license year. A licensee who desires to renew the license shall file application, together with the requisite fee, on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Application for renewal shall be filed on or before November 1st each year. 
(b)  Filing after November 1st (November 2nd through November 30th) but before December 1st shall increase the fees payable for renewal by 20 percent. Filing in December (from December 1st through December 31st) shall increase the fees by 25 percent rather than by 20 percent. Filings during the period November 2nd through November 30th shall be considered late and renewals may only be considered by the city commission if the finance and police departments' staff are able to complete the necessary work-up on the renewal in time to get the item placed on the agenda for a city commission meeting to be held prior to the end of December. If the work-up is not complete in time for consideration on a December agenda, the license will expire at midnight on December 31st, and will not be considered for renewal until at least the first city commission meeting in January of the ensuing year. 
(c)  Any license renewal application filed in December of the license year shall be considered late and will be considered as a late renewal; the license will expire at midnight on December 31st and it will only be considered after December 31st. Any license for which renewal application has not been filed by the close of business of City of Brunswick offices on the final business day of December will be deemed to have expired at midnight on December 31st and will be treated as a new license application, subject to publication of notice of the application as for new applicants, and a fee as for a new license with a work-up including background checks, location approval and all items and regulations as prescribed in this article for new applicants. 
(d)  The licensee's obligation to apply timely for renewal is not contingent upon any notice from the City of Brunswick, which shall not be required to send renewal notices to any licensee. 
(e)  Existing licensees may not transfer the license to any other person or entity without the prior application, transfer fee payment and approval of the proposed new licensee by the city commission. This shall not be considered a new license application and notice need not be published prior to approval. 
(f)  Existing licensees may not change the location of the licensed premises without the prior application, transfer fee payment, and approval of the proposed new location by the city commission. This shall not be considered a new license application, but notice of consideration of the new location shall be published by the city clerk in the manner prescribed in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 1022, § 1, 3-2-2011) 
Sec. 3-47. - Display. 
    The alcoholic beverage license shall at all times be displayed in plain view at the licensed premises. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-48. - Transferability. 
    No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferred from one location to another. No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be transferable from one party to another. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-49. - Supervision, revocation, non-renewal or probation. 
(a)  The city commission may suspend, revoke, refuse to renew, or impose conditions of probation upon any license required under this chapter if: 
(1)  The license application is not filed in good faith or is filed by some person as subterfuge for any other person; 
(2)  Any applicant for a license or any licensee under this chapter willfully fails to comply with any provision of this chapter or with rules and regulations adopted by the city commission, or the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code; 
(3)  Any person to whom a license has been issued is no longer engaged in the sale of alcoholic beverages, malt beverages or wine or no longer qualifies as a licensee under this chapter; 
(4)  A licensee permits the licensed premises to be operated in a disorderly manner so as to constitute a public nuisance after: 
a.  The licensee has been advised in writing by the chief of police of the unsatisfactory manner in which business is being operated; and 
b.  The licensee has been given a reasonable opportunity to cure such deficiencies. 
(b)  Conditions of probation may include such conditions of operation as the city commission determines to be in the best interest of the public including, but not limited to, any of the following: 
(1)  Limitation on days or hours of operation; 
(2)  Limitation on number of persons allowed in licensed premises; 
(3)  Limitation on manner of service, e.g., use of glass containers; 
(4)  Requirements as to security personnel or other personnel; 
(5)  Requirements as to lighting, parking, means of egress and similar matters; or 
(6)  Requirements as to litter or trash pickup, reduction of noise levels and similar matters. 
(c)  If a firearm is discharged, or any other weapon, such as, but not limited to, a knife, brass knuckles, a blade etc., are used around a bar, on its grounds or approaches, including parking areas, or by any customer or employee upon leaving the bar while within 300 feet of the entrance to the bar, the police chief or his/her designee may place on suspension the liquor license of any establishment for a period of three days; provided however, that if a firearm is discharged, or any person attempts to discharge a firearm, or any other weapon, such as, but not limited to, a knife, brass knuckles, a blade etc., is used within a bar's building premises the liquor license of such establishment shall be automatically placed on suspension for a three-day period and such period may be extended by the city commission as it sees fit for the process of a thorough investigation. Any such suspension of a liquor license for the discharge of a firearm, or other use or attempted use of a weapon, shall be accomplished by written notice to the licensee from the chief of police or his/her designee of such suspension and the length of such suspension. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-50. - Notice and hearing. 
    All decisions approving, denying, suspending, revoking, refusing renewal of, or imposing conditions of probation upon alcoholic beverage licenses shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally. Within 30 days of any such decision, any applicant or license holder aggrieved by the decision of the city commission regarding a license shall be afforded a public hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-51. - Sanctions hearing. 
(a)  Each license issued pursuant to this article is granted as a mere privilege and not a right. Upon violation of any provision of this chapter or of any law or regulation of the state relating to alcoholic beverages, malt beverages and wine, the commission, at a regular or special called meeting, after reasonable written notice of the pending violations to the licensee and after the licensee has been afforded an opportunity to be heard as to the proposed grounds for revocation, may revoke or suspend the license, or in lieu of revocation or suspension may impose conditions or probation upon continued operations under the license. When a license is revoked or suspended, no portion of the license fee shall be refundable. 
(b)  Upon the recommendation of the chief of police, the city commission may temporarily suspend any license involving the sale of alcoholic beverages, if the manner of operation poses a serious safety or health hazard, for a person not to exceed 30 days pending a hearing and final action by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008) 
Sec. 3-52. - Employee regulations. 
(a)  Mandatory training. All on-premise consumption alcoholic beverage license holders, all persons designated as operators or managers of an on-premise consumption alcoholic beverage licensee open to the public, and persons employed by such businesses as employees agents or subcontractors that dispense, sell, serve, take orders, or mix alcoholic beverages, shall participate in a server training program and obtain a certificate of satisfactory completion of a such server training program. All server training programs must be approved by the city chief of police. This provision applies to all establishments holding a license to dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises except bona fide private clubs. 
(b)  Manager's permit. Every person licensed under this chapter for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises shall employ and designate one or more persons as manager/operators for the licensed establishment. At least one such designated manager shall be at the licensee's establishment and present on the premises during all times that alcoholic beverages are being consumed thereon, and such manager shall be in charge of the premises and responsible for the actions of the employees and customers of the licensed establishment. In lieu of being present on the premises, the manager shall be authorized to certify that the manager shall have the ability to be, and will be, present on the premises within 45 minutes of being notified of the need for his or her presence on the premises. Under demonstrable hardship conditions, the licensee may designate an employee who has had server training and holds a server permit to serve as a designated manager-on-duty. 
(1)  Each person designated as a manager/operator must obtain a manager's permit by making application on a form provided by the chief of police or the chief's designee within three days of the date of employment. Upon receiving the completed application and payment of the required permit fee of $100.00, or other fee as may be designated by the city commission by ordinance or resolution from time to time, the chief of police or the chief's designee will refer the applicant to the police department to be photographed and fingerprinted and the police department will perform a criminal background check and report findings to the chief of police or the chief's designee as to eligibility of the applicant for a manager's permit. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of any law or ordinance governing the sale of alcoholic beverages, crimes of moral turpitude, violent crimes, or possession of illegal drugs in the 24 months immediately preceding the date of application shall be ineligible to receive a manager's permit. 
(3)  Upon receipt of the police background report indicating eligibility for the permit and proof of completion of the mandatory server training program the chief of police or the chief's designee will issue the manager's permit. This permit should be issued within two weeks of the date of employment by the manager. Manager's permits shall expire two years from the date of issue and must be renewed prior to expiration. 
(c)  Server permits. Every licensee for an establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises classified for licensing as a bar, lounge, nightclub, or restaurant licensed to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premise consumption shall require all persons employed as servers, bartenders or any other employee, agent, or subcontractor with the responsibility for handling, serving, mixing, or dispensing of alcoholic beverages to register and file an application for a server permit from the chief of police or the chief's designee no later than three days after the date of employment. The applicant for the permit shall pay a permit fee of $50.00 or as provided for in the most current revenue/fee resolution. 
(1)  Upon receiving the completed application and payment of the required permit fee, the chief of police or the chief's designee will refer the applicant to the police department to be photographed and fingerprinted and the police department will perform a criminal background check and report findings to the chief of police or the chief's designee as to eligibility for a server permit. 
(2)  Any person who has been convicted of a violation of any law or ordinance governing the sale of alcoholic beverages, crimes of moral turpitude, violent crimes, or possession of illegal drugs in the 36 months immediately preceding the date of application shall be ineligible to receive an unrestricted server permit. So long as the violation did not occur within the preceding six months, the person shall be eligible for a probationary server permit. The probationary status shall continue one year, during which any conviction or adjudication of guilt or entry of a nolo contendere plea to any of the foregoing classes of offenses shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the permit and ineligibility for re-application for a period of one year from the date of revocation. Once the probationary period expires the server/permit holder may apply for an unrestricted permit. During probation, the server shall not be allowed to act as a designated temporary manager or to otherwise supervise any other server at any licensed establishment. 
(3)  Upon receipt of a criminal background report indicating eligibility for a permit and proof of completion of the mandatory server training, the chief of police or the chief's designee will issue the appropriate class of server permit, either unrestricted or probationary. The permit will be issued no later than two weeks after the date of employment. The server permit shall expire five years from the date of issue and it must be renewed prior to expiration. 
(d)  Licensee to maintain records. The licensee shall maintain on the licensed premises a register of all employees required to attend mandatory server training and required to obtain a manager or server permit along with a copy of the training certificate, copy of government issued photo identification, and copy of manager or server permit required for each employee. Upon request of a city police officer or code enforcement officers, the licensee or manager on duty must present a manifest indicating employees on duty required to hold a permit. 
(e)  Chief of police or the chief's designee to maintain registry. The chief of police or the chief's designee will maintain a registry and track the status of all permitted managers and server employees required to obtain permits herein described. 
(f)  Licensee and permit holders required to report violations. All licensees and all individuals holding manager or employee permits shall report to the city chief of police or the chief's designee any citation, convictions, or administrative sanctions imposed upon them by any governmental agency within ten days of the occurrence of the incident or event that results in the citation, conviction, or hearing decision. 
(g)  Permits to be carried on person and presented on demand. The holder of an alcoholic beverage employee permit shall keep the same on their person at all times while working in any licensed premises and shall display the same upon the request of any police officer or code enforcement official of the city. Expired, suspended, or revoked permits will be collected by any police officer or code enforcement officer. 
(h)  Sanctions for violations for permit holders. Any holder of an alcoholic beverage manager or unrestricted server permit who is cited for a violation of this chapter or a state law governing dispensing of alcohol or who is adjudicated guilty of, or pleads guilty or nolo contendere to, or forfeits any bond for any act described in this section as a disqualifying offense shall be subject to sanctions to include revocation or suspension of his or her permit. 
(1)  Permit holders cited for violations of this chapter, including violation of provisions of this section, shall be subject to the penalties as described in this Code. 
(2)  Cause for suspension or revocation of permit shall be as follows: 
a.  Violations of any city ordinance or state law governing the dispensing of beverage alcohol. 
b.  Criminal offenses, arrests or convictions, as previously described in this section. 
c.  Any material false statement or omission relating to any alcoholic beverage manager or employee permit issued, including but not limited to any material false statement, omission, or misrepresentation on any permit application. 
(3)  Determination of cause for suspension or revocation of manager or server permits shall be made by the chief of police or his or her designee, which designation shall be in writing. The permit holder shall be advised of the determination by a writing delivered by U.S. Postal service to the last known address. The chief's (or designee's) determination shall be final. Any permit holder whose permit is revoked, suspended, or expired shall return the permit to the city chief of police or the chief's designee. 
(i)  All businesses subject to this section and required to comply with the provisions of this section must be in compliance no later than 90 days from the adoption date of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1016, § 3, 7-7-2010; Ord. No. 1022, § 2, 3-2-2011) 
Secs. 3-53-3-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - CITY-OWNED FACILITIES 

Sec. 3-61. - Requirements for consumption of beer, wine or champagne at certain city-owned facilities. 
    Consumption of beer, wine or champagne may be done by lessees upon the premises of city-owned facilities located at Mary Ross Waterfront Park, Sidney Lanier Park, Old City Hall, or the Ritz Theatre where approved in advance upon proper written explanation to the facility manager designated for such purpose by the city commission, and subject to such terms and conditions as the said facility manager may from time to time promulgate in writing, which may include terms as to insurance, clean-up fees, deposits, security personnel, limits on the number of guests and other matters as the facility manager may require. Such beverages may be provided at no charge by the approved lessee to its guests, or they may be sold to such guests by a beverage caterer who must be approved by the facility manager and must be the holder of a pouring license in good standing issued by the city, State of Georgia or the County of Glynn, State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 1001, § 1, 7-2-2008; Ord. No. 1040, § 1, 4-1-2015) 
Chapter 4 - ANIMAL CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 965, § 1, adopted Aug. 18, 2004, deleted ch. 4 in its entirety and enacted a new ch. 4 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 4 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 900, §§ 1-15, adopted Feb. 20, 1991. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide for animal control, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(3); animals generally, O.C.G.A. § 4-1-1 et seq. 

Sec. 4-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be referred to as the "Animal Control Ordinance" of the city. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-2. - Animal control unit. 
    There is hereby created an animal control unit for the city under the general supervision of the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-3. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of the chapter, the following terms, phrases and words and their derivatives shall have the meaning given herein. 
    Animal enforcement agent means an employee of the animal control unit or Brunswick Police Department authorized by the city manager to enforce the provisions of this article. 
    Dangerous dog means any dog, according to records of the animal control unit (i) that inflicts severe injury on human beings without provocation on public or private property; or (ii) aggressively bites, attacks or endangers the safety of human beings without provocation after the dog has been classified as a potentially dangerous dog and after the owner has been notified of such classification. 
    Dogs or cats running at large means any pubic nuisance dog or cat, or any dog or cat causing a disturbance while not on a leash or in the vicinity of the owner and obedient to that person's commands. A dog or cat is not running at large when he is confined within the limits of his owner's property. 
    Litter means two or more animals with the same mother. 
    Microchip identification means the process of identifying the owner of any animal by information provided on a microchip inserted into the body of the animal so that identification no., etc. can be determined by animal control. 
    Potentially dangerous dog means any dog which without provocation bites a human being on public or private property. 
    Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely confined indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence, or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top, and if the dog is enclosed within a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence shall be constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
    Owner means any natural person or any legal entity, including but not limited to, a corporation, partnership, firm, or trust owning, possessing, harboring, keeping or having custody or control of a dog or cat within the incorporated area of the city. 
    Police officer means any law enforcement officer empowered to make arrest in the city. 
    Public nuisance dog or cat means any dog or cat, which has damaged the property of anyone other than the owner thereof in the amount of $10.00 or more; or any dog or cat causing unsanitary condition in any enclosure or surroundings. 
    Vicious animal means any animal that attacks, bites, or injures pets, companion animals or livestock or which, because of temperament, conditioning, or training, has a known propensity to attack, bite or injure pets, companion animals or livestock. No animal may be declared vicious on the basis of a threat, injury or damage which was sustained by a pet, companion animal or livestock whose presence, at the time, constituted a willful trespass or other tort by its owner upon the premises occupied by the owner or keeper of the animal alleged to be vicious. The term "vicious animals" shall not be construed to include dogs that are part of a governmental organization in performance of its duties. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-4. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of any dog or cat to allow such dog or cat to run at large, as defined in subsection 4-3(c) within the city limits. 
(b)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of any dog or cat to fail to command the obedience of a dog, as provided in subsection 4-3(c), in the incorporated areas of the city. 
(c)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of any dog or cat to allow said dog or cat to act so as to become a public nuisance dog or cat as defined in subsection 4-3(j). 
(d)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner to permit a dog or cat off the premises of that owner's property without a collar and identification tag for each dog. The identification tag shall give the name, current address and telephone number of the owner. 
(e)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to obstruct or prevent any animal enforcement agent or city police officer from enforcing the provision of this chapter, including, without limitation, interfering with the use of traps by such agent or officer. 
(f)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of any dog to fail to immediately remove excrement deposited by the dog upon any sidewalk or fenced athletic playing field or fenced playground owned by the city. 
(g)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for any person to take any animal, whether leashed or otherwise, into any building owned or operated by the city. This subsection shall not apply to any animal operating as a guide dog or performing similar assistance for a disabled person. 
(h)  It shall be a violation of this chapter for the owner of any dog or cat, whether leashed or otherwise, to take or allow such animal in the fenced confines of any athletic field owned by the city. It shall also be illegal for the owner of any dog or cat to allow that animal, leashed or otherwise, to enter an area of any city owned square or park where signs are posted prohibiting the animal's entrance this subsection shall not apply to any animal operating as a guide dog or performing similar assistance for a disabled person. 
(i)  It shall be a violation of this section for the owner of any animal to fail to promptly remove excrement deposited by the animal on private property of another person upon being notified of the waste by the owner of the property or by any law enforcement officer or code enforcement officer employed by the city. This subsection shall not apply to property owned by the animal owner. It shall be the duty of any person having custody of any animal to have in such person's possession a device or equipment for the picking up and removal of animal excrement. An acceptable device shall include any plastic or metal mechanized or non-mechanized device constructed for scooping animal excrement; a hand shovel or trowel; a plastic or paper bag; a styrofoam, plastic or paper cup, or any similar device that can contain and remove the excrement. The provisions of this section shall not apply to a dog aiding the handicapped (i.e., guide dog) or to a dog when in police or rescue activities. Failure of the person having custody of the animal to remove the animal excrement by acceptable device shall constitute a violation of this section. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004; Ord. No. 1005, § 1, 9-17-2008) 
Sec. 4-5. - Dangerous dog control law. 
    The city animal enforcement agents shall be charged with the responsibility of enforcing the "Dangerous Dog Control Law", (Ga. L. 1988, p. 824, as amended). 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-6. - Impoundment provision. 
    Any and all animals found in a condition which constitutes a violation of this chapter or any applicable state law on the part of the animal's owner (if any), may be immediately impounded by agents of the animal control unit or by members of the city police department. Identification of an owner shall be required in order for animal enforcement agents to impound an animal. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-7. - Rabies certificate. 
    The owner of a dog or cat must possess a current certificate of rabies vaccination of each animal owned as provided for by the laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-8. - Enforcement. 
    This chapter may be enforced in the city on a complaint basis. Complaints shall be in writing or by telephonic communication, provided the caller gives his name, his address, the nature of :b0; the complaint, and a description of the animal. This chapter may also be enforced on any other basis deemed reasonable by the animal enforcement agents. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-9. - Disposition of impounded animals. 
    Any dog or cat seized or impounded by the animal control unit shall be detained at the animal control unit or such other suitable place as may be designated by the animal control unit. The agents of such unit shall notify by mail or telephone the owner of such dog or cat, if known or can be reasonably ascertained, that such dog or cat has been impounded. The owner of any dog or cat impounded, within seven days after the mailing, in the case of notification by mail, or seven days after receipt of notification by telephone, may reclaim such dog or cat upon the payment of an impoundment fee of $50.00, plus boarding fee of $12.00 for each day or any portion thereof that the dog or cat was impounded, and the cost of $12.00 for each day or any portion thereof that the dog or cat was impounded, and the cost of $12.00 for rabies vaccination if the dog or cat had not previously been vaccinated. In addition to the above-mentioned fees, the owner of any impounded dog or cat must pay $13.00 for microchip identification installation or pay a fee of $30.00 for the retention and upkeep of files pertaining to the impounded dog or cat. The fee for the pick up of an unwanted litter shall be $50.00 for the first pick up and increase by $25.00 for each subsequent pick up. If a dog has a collar and tag or a definite tattoo marking, and the owner can provide reasonable proof that the dog is a hunting dog that was impound during hunting season, then the impoundment fee will be waived. The impoundment fee shall be increased by the sum of $50.00 for each time a particular dog or cat is impounded during the course of the year. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-10. - Humane disposition. 
    If a dog or cat is not claimed by the owner within seven days of notice to same, or a dog or cat of unknown ownership is not claimed within seven days of impoundment, then it shall be the duty of the animal control unit to dispose of the animal in as a humane and painless manner as is possible. The animal control advisory board shall have the authority to formulate rules and regulations for the disposal of unclaimed dogs and cats. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-11. - Appeal of nuisance classification. 
(a)  The owner of any dog or cat which has been classified as a nuisance dog or cat by the animal control unit shall have a right to appeal such classification, in writing, to the city manager or his designee, who shall have the authority to formulate rules and regulations for administrative hearings to the conducted by it as to nuisance dogs or cats. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall also conduct hearing under O.C.G.A. § 4-8-24 as it pertains to dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-12. - Investigation by animal enforcement agent; notice of classification as dangerous dog. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog within an animal enforcement agent's jurisdiction from a law enforcement agency, animal control agency, rabies control officer, or county board of health, the animal enforcement agent shall make such investigations and inquires with regard to such report as may be necessary to carry out the provisions of this article. 
(b)  When an animal enforcement agent or police officer classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous, the animal enforcement agent or police officer shall notify the dog's owner in writing by certified mail to the owner's last known address of such classification or reclassification. Such notice shall be complete upon its mailing and shall meet the requirements set forth in subsection 4-13(c) below. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-13. - Procedures for classification as dangerous dogs or potentially dangerous dogs; notice; hearing. 
(a)  As applied to the owners of potentially dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this section must be carried out as a necessary condition for the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter against such owners. As applied to the owners of dangerous dogs, the procedures provided for in this ordinance section shall not be an essential element of any crime provided for in this article. 
(b)  When an animal enforcement agent classifies a dog as a dangerous dog or reclassifies a potentially dangerous dog as a dangerous dog, the animal enforcement agent shall notify the dog's owner of such classification. 
(c)  The notice to the owner shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  The notice shall be in writing and mailed by certified mail to the owner's last known address. 
(2)  The notice shall include a summary of the animal enforcement agent's or police officer's findings that formed the basis for the dog's classification as a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog; 
(3)  The notice shall be dated and shall state that the owner, within 15 days after the date shown on the notice, has a right to request a hearing on the animal enforcement agent's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(4)  The notice shall state that the hearing, if requested shall be before the city manager or his designee; 
(5)  The notice shall state that if a hearing is not requested, the animal enforcement agent's determination that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog will become effective for all purposes under this article on a date specified in the notice, which shall be after the last day on which the owner has a right to request a hearing; and 
(6)  The notice shall include a form to request a hearing before the city manager and shall provide specific instructions on mailing or delivering such request to the city manager. 
(d)  When the city manager receives a request for a hearing as provided in subsection (c), it shall schedule such hearing within 30 days after receiving the request. The city manager shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of the date, time, and place of the hearing, and such notice shall be mailed to the address of the dog owner shown on the request for hearing at least ten days prior to the date of the hearing. At the hearing, the owner of the dog shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and in addition thereto the city manager shall receive such other evidence and hear such other testimony as the court may find reasonably necessary to make a determination either to sustain, modify, or overrule the animal enforcement agent's or police officer's classification of the dog. 
(e)  Within ten days after the date of the hearing, the city manager shall notify the dog owner in writing by certified mail of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog or a potentially dangerous dog, the notice shall specify the date upon which that determination is effective provided that said effective date shall be not less than ten days after the date of this order. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-14. - Requirements for possessing a dangerous or potentially dangerous dog. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner to have or possess within the city a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog without a certificate of registration issued in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Subject to the additional requirements of subsection (c) of this section for dangerous dogs, the animal enforcement agent shall issue a certificate of registration to the owner of such dog if the owner presents to the city animal enforcement agent sufficient evidence of: 
(1)  A proper enclosure to confine the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog; and 
(2)  The posting of the premises where the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is located with a clearly visible sign warning that there is a dangerous dog on the property. Such sign shall prominently display the dangerous dog symbol designed by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-25(b)(2)(B). 
(c)  In addition to the requirements of subsection (b) of this Code section, the owner of a dangerous dog shall present to the city animal control office evidence of: 
(1)  A policy of insurance in the amount of at least $15,000.00 issued by an insurer authorized to transact business in this state insuring the owner of the dangerous dog against liability for any personal injuries inflicted by the dangerous dog; or 
(2)  A surety bond in the amount of $15,000.00 or more issued by a surety company authorized to transact business in this state payable to any person or persons injured by the dangerous dog. 
(d)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the city animal control office within 24 hours if the dog is on the loose, is unconfined, has attacked a human, has died, or has been sold, donated or disposed of. If the dog has been sold, donated or disposed of, the owner shall also provided the city animal control office with the name, address, and telephone number of the new owner of the dog. 
(e)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog shall notify the city animal control office if the owner is moving from the city. The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous who is a new resident of the city shall register the dog as required in this section within 30 days after becoming a resident. 
(f)  Issuance of a certificate of registration or the renewal of a certificate of registration by the city does not warrant or guarantee that the requirements specified in subsection (b) and (c) of this section were met or are maintained by the owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog. 
(g)  An animal enforcement agent or police officer is authorized to make whatever inquiry is deemed necessary to ensure compliance with the provisions of this article. Law enforcement agencies of the city shall cooperate with animal enforcement agent in enforcing the provision of this chapter. 
(h)  Any owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog kept within the incorporated limits of the city shall pay the city an annual fee of $100.00 to register a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog as required in this chapter. Certificates of registration shall be renewed on an annual basis. At the time of the annual renewal of a certificate of registration, an animal enforcement agent shall require evidence from the owner or make such investigation as may be necessary to verify that the dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is continuing to be confined in a proper enclosure and that the owner is continuing to comply with other provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-15. - Restrictions on permitting dangerous or potentially dangerous dogs to be outside proper enclosure. 
(a)  It is unlawful for an owner of a dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is muzzled and restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. The muzzle shall be made in a manner that will not cause injury to the dog or interfere with its vision or respiration but will prevent it from biting any person. 
(b)  It is unlawful for the owner of a potentially dangerous dog to permit the dog to be outside a proper enclosure unless the dog is restrained by a substantial chain or leash and is under the physical restraint of a responsible person. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-16. - Confiscation of dogs; grounds; disposition. 
(a)  A dangerous dog shall be immediately confiscated by the animal enforcement agent or police officer or by any law enforcement officer or by another person authorized by the animal enforcement agent or police officer if the: 
(1)  Owner of the dog does not secure or maintain the liability insurance or bond required by subsection 4-14(c); 
(2)  Dog is not validly registered as required by section 4-14; 
(3)  Dog is not maintained in a proper enclosure; 
(4)  Dog is outside a proper enclosure in violation of subsection 4-14(a). 
(b)  A potentially dangerous dog shall be confiscated in the same manner as a dangerous dog if the dog is: 
(1)  Not validly registered as required by the section 4-14; 
(2)  Not maintained in a proper enclosure; or 
(3)  Outside a proper enclosure in violation of subsection 4-14(b). 
(c)  Any dog that has been confiscated under the provisions of section 4-16 shall be returned to its owner upon the owner's compliance with the provisions of this article and upon the payment of reasonable confiscation costs including boarding at the rate of $12.00 per day plus a pickup fee of $50.00 and a $12.00 fee if the animal's owner does not produce proof of a current rabies vaccination. In the event the owner has not complied with the provisions of this article within 20 days of the date the dog was confiscated, said dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-17. - Violations; penalties. 
(a)  The owner of a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who violates the applicable provisions of subsection 4-4(a) or section 4-14 or 4-15, or whose dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog is subject to confiscation under the section 4-16 shall be guilty of an ordinance violation punishable by a fine of up to $1,000.00 or imprisonment or such alternative punishment or combination or punishment as provided for under section 15-8. 
(b)  In addition to the penalties for violation under subsection (a), the dangerous dog involved shall be immediately confiscated by the animal enforcement agent or another person authorized by the animal control officer and placed in quarantine for the proper length of time as determined by the county board of health, and thereafter, the dangerous dog shall be destroyed in an expeditious and humane manner. 
(c)  No owner of a dangerous dog shall be held liable for a violation of this chapter for injuries, inflicted by said owner's dog to any human being while the dog is on the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-18. - Liability for damages. 
    Under no circumstances shall the city or any employee or official thereof which enforces or fails to enforce the provisions of this article be held liable for any damages to any person who suffers an injury inflicted by a dog that has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog that has been reported to the proper authorities as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog that the city and its officials and employees have failed to identify as a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog or by a dog which has been identified as being a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog but has not been kept or restrained in the manner described in subsection 4-14(b). 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-19. - Vicious animals. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner or custodian of any vicious animal to ensure that it is kept under restraint and that the reasonable care and precautions are taken to prevent it from leaving the real property limits of its owner, possessor, or custodian, and ensure that: 
(1)  It is securely and humanely enclosed within a house, building, fence, pen or other enclosure out of which it cannot climb, dig, jump, or otherwise escape on its own volition; and that such enclosure is securely locked at any time the animal is left unattended; or 
(2)  It is securely and humanely restrained by chain, cable or trolley, or other tether of sufficient strength to prevent escape; or 
(3)  It is on a leash and under the control of a competent person; or it is off leash and obedient to that person's command and that person is present with the animal any time it is not restrained as provided for in subsection (1) or (2) above while on the owner's property. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for the presence of any vicious dog or cat on the streets or public places of the county or allow the animal to run on the premises of another, at any time; unless and in addition to the other requirements of this chapter such dog or cat shall be securely muzzled to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. Upon impounding a vicious animal for any reasons, the animal control unit may for reasons of public safety, retain said animal at the impoundment facility until disposition by the appropriate court. 
(5)  The following additional precautions shall be taken by the owners, possessors, or custodians of vicious animals: 
a.  Whenever the animal is outside of its enclosure as provided for above, but on the owner's property, it must be attended by the owner and restrained by a secure collar and leash of sufficient strength to prevent escape. The leash shall be no longer than ten feet, and the animal must be kept at least 15 feet within perimeter boundaries of the property unless said perimeter boundary is securely fenced. 
b.  No vicious animal shall be chained, tethered, or otherwise tied to any inanimate object such as a tree, post, or building, outside of its own enclosure as provided for above. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-20. - Cruelty to animals. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, either by act or omission, to: 
(1)  Overdraw, overload, torture, torment, or deprive any animal of necessary sustenance or to beat, mutilate, intentionally poison, or kill any animal or cause same to be done, or to carry or confine any animal in or upon a vehicle in a inhumane manner, or to otherwise treat any animal in a cruel or inhumane manner; or 
(2)  Keep or confine any animal where the water shelter, ventilation, and food are not sufficient and wholesome for the preservation of an animal of its size, species, and breed; or 
(3)  Keep any animal in unsanitary conditions or in such a place or condition as to become a nuisance because of odor or contagion of disease; or 
(4)  Promote any fight between animals or to allow or permit any fight in or upon any premises in that person's possession or under that person's control; or 
(5)  Abandon any animal on any public street, road, alley, or property, or to abandon any animal on private property when not in the care of another person. 
(b)  This section shall not apply to conduct which is otherwise permitted under the laws of this state or of the United States, including, but not limited to, raising animals for agricultural or food purposes, hunting wild animals in compliance with the laws of the State of Georgia, killing or injuring animals for humane purposes or in the furtherance of medical or scientific research, defending or protecting one's person or property from injury or damage, pest control practices, or the authorized practice of veterinary medicine, which authorized practice shall include, but shall not be limited to, ear cropping, tail docking, and claw removal. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-21. - Animal noise. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to keep within the corporate limits any animal which makes such loud, raucous and continual noise as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. Any animal which makes such loud, raucous and continual noise as to disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood shall be impounded. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-22. - Livestock or poultry prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to bring, keep, maintain or have within the corporate limits any livestock, cattle, or poultry, including all domesticated animals normally kept or raised on a farm, such as cows, bulls, steers, sheep animals normally kept or raised on a farm, such as cows, bulls, steers, sheep, goats, llamas, horses, mules, donkeys, swine, chickens, turkeys, ducks, geese, guinea fowl, peacocks, and pheasants. This section shall not prohibit the temporary keeping of such animals in a traveling circus or agricultural fair for definite periods of short definite periods of short duration, nor shall it prohibit the temporary housing of such animals for veterinary care in a location zoned for veterinary use provided that the animals do not create such noise, odor, sanitary condition as would constitute a violation of section 4-21 above or otherwise unreasonably interfere with the quiet enjoyment of other properties in the neighborhood. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Sec. 4-23. - Venomous species. 
    It shall be unlawful to release any poisonous or venomous biting or injecting species of amphibian, arachnid, or retile, including snakes, or to release any species of snake not indigenous to this state, at any place within the city limits. It shall be unlawful to keep or maintain any poisonous or venomous biting or injecting species of amphibian, arachnid or reptile at any place within the city limits unless such animal is kept in an enclosed space secured in a manner reasonable calculated to prevent the escape or accidental release of such animal. 
(Ord. No. 965, § 1, 8-18-2004) 
Chapter 5 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Fire prevention and protection, ch. 10; flood damage prevention, ch. 11; housing, ch. 12; public dance halls, § 13-456 et seq.; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 17; utilities, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23; subdivision regulations, app. B. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. 1983, Art. IX, Sec. II, Para. III(a)(12); buildings and housing, O.C.G.A. tit. 8. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 916, § 1, adopted Feb. 16, 1994, repealed former Art. I, of this chapter in its entirety, and added a new Art. I to read as herein set out. Former Art. I, §§ 5-1-5-4, pertained to buildings and building regulations in general and derived from Ord. No. 880, app. § 2-5-1, §§ 2-4, adopted Sept. 20, 1989; and Ord. No. 882, § 1, adopted Oct. 19, 1989. 

Sec. 5-1. - State minimum standard codes. 
    The city shall enforce the state minimum standard codes now or hereafter identified in O.C.G.A. tit. 8 as having statewide application. 
(Ord. No. 916, § 1, 2-16-1994) 
Sec. 5-2. - Building official. 
    There is hereby created the position of building official, who shall be designated by the city manager. It shall be the responsibility of the building official to enforce the state minimum standard codes, to approve plans for buildings to be erected or improved for conformity to the zoning ordinance and the standard codes, to have charge of the issuance of permits for building, electrical wiring, plumbing, and gas fitting, to inspect the construction of buildings to assure that the same comply with legal requirements, and to carry out such further duties as may be assigned by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 916, § 1, 2-16-1994) 
Sec. 5-3. - Permit fees. 
(a)  Building permit fees (includes the cost of electrical, plumbing, gas, and mechanical permits) shall be as follows: 
ITEM FEE Building Permit: * 
Residential & Commercial (including remodel, re-roofing, addition, etc.) Based on Valuation 

See Attached Schedule** Plumbing Permit: 
Residential & Commercial $35 base fee plus $2 per fixture Electrical Permit: 
Residential & Commercial Up to 400 amps $35 base plus $0.50 per outlet 400 amps and over $70 base plus $1 per circuit Mechanical Permit: 
Residential $35 base plus $2 per supply outlet Mechanical Permit: 
Commercial $50 base plus $3 a ton Signs * $35 minimum then same as building permits Demolition $10 per 1,000 square feet up to 5,000 sq. ft. then $2.50 per 1,000 sq. ft. Fire Suppression $35 base plus $1 per sprinkler head Moving of Buildings $200 for any structure Certificate of Occupancy Inspection Residential: $35 Commercial: $75 Plan Review: 
Residential $50 Plan Review: 
Commercial $100 up to 10,000 sq. ft. plus $0.25 per 100 sq. ft. over 10,000 sq. ft. Reinspection 1st: $25 
2nd and all others: $40 Unpermitted Work Equal to required permit fee (in addition to any fine imposed) Post-Vacancy "Power On" Inspection $25 After Hours Inspections $40 per hour (minimum 1 hour)  
* Value of project is to include cost of all materials, labor, overhead, and profit. 
    The following shall constitute the attached schedule for the chart that is to be included in subsection 5-3(a): 
** To estimate the building permit fee, follow the following procedure and schedule. 
1.  Determine the valuation of the building using the type of construction for the type of occupancy being permitted. For instance, if the project includes a single-family house and a carport and a deck, the square footage of each element multiplied by the value based on the type of construction would be added together. The type of construction is defined using the construction classifications established in Section 602 of the International Building Code, which section is herein incorporated. 
2.  Once the value of the project is determined using the building valuation data sheet, the building permit fees are based upon valuations. The following rates apply to the valuations of the project: 
Minimum Fee: 
Value of Project Fee Up to $5,000 $35 $5,001-$250,000 $6 per $1,000 $250,001 and over $1500 plus $2 per $1,000 of value over the first $250,000  
3.  Building permit fees are not all-inclusive. In addition to the building permit fee, there may be other permits with associated fees required for the project. Each contractor is responsible for their own permit. 
For example: New construction of a single-family residence will require separate permits for the building, plumbing, electrical, and mechanical systems. 
SCHEDULE 1 
BUILDING VALUATION DATA 
OCCUPANCY Type of Construction IA IB IV IIA-IIB IIIA-IIIB VA-VB I-HR UNP I- 
HR UNP I- 
HR UNP ASSEMBLY Auditorium 87 83 66 40 38 65 62 62 58 Church 84 82 67 58 57 66 63 63 58 Gymnasium 69 69 55 47 46 54 50 51 47 Restaurant 77 77 67 59 57 66 63 63 59 Theater 84 82 56 49 47 55 51 53 48 BUSINESS Office 76 73 57 48 46 56 53 54 49 Research - Engineering 47 45 41 35 33 40 36 37 34 Service Station 88 84 66 63 61 65 61 58 54 EDUCATIONAL School 30 29 33 27 25 32 28 24 26 FACTORY-INDUSTRIAL Factory (lt. MFG) 78 27 31 25 24 30 20 28 24 HAZARDOUS - SPRINKLER SYSTEM INCLUDED Hazardous 30 29 33 27 25 32 28 24 26 INSTITUTIONAL Convalescent Hospital 101 99 77 65 63 71 N/P1 68 N/P1 Hospital 118 115 94 65 65 94 N/P1 93 N/P1 MERCANTILE Department Stores 66 64 60 41 39 59 55 44 40 Mall Stores 79 79 58 51 49 57 54 54 49 Mall - Concourse 61 61 44 41 39 43 39 43 39 Retail Store 54 53 46 41 39 45 42 44 40 RESIDENTIAL Apartments 
Duplexes-Condos 63 61 51 46 44 51 47 48 44 Dormitories 74 72 67 56 54 61 58 58 54 Homes for Elderly 75 73 65 59 57 64 60 62 58 Hotel 77 75 71 48 46 70 67 67 63 Motel 77 75 53 48 46 51 48 50 46 Single-Family Residence 65 63 55 48 46 54 49 49 45 STORAGE Auto Parking Structure 27 27 N/P2 22 20 N/P2 N/P2 N/P2 N/P2 Private Garage 27 27 33 27 25 32 28 30 26 Repair Garage 34 34 33 27 25 32 29 29 25 Warehouse 34 29.87 27 22 20 26 23 24 20 Shell Only Steel Structures 11 Storage Building 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 Deck 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 7.06 Carport 5.89 5.89 5.89 5.89 5.89 5.89 5.89 5.89 5.89 Porch 11.78 11.78 11.78 11.78 11.78 11.78 11.78 11.78 11.78 Basement 18.80 18.80 18.80 18.80 18.80 18.80 18.80 18.80 18.80 Apartment 
(Basement) 25.44 25.44 25.44 25.44 25.44 25.44 25.44 25.44 25.44  
N/P1 - This type of construction is not allowed for this type of occupancy. 
N/P2 - Insufficient data to determine the cost. Use the contract price. 
(b)  Value shall be determined from the bill of sale of mobile home or manufactured home if available, otherwise from the Procedure Manual, Mobile Homes Ad Valorem, Uniform Evaluation, published by the state department of revenue. 
(c)  The schedule of fees, types and amounts charged, as set forth in above subsection (a) may be revised from time to time by resolution of the city commission without the necessity of adoption of an amending ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 916, § 1, 2-16-1994; Ord. No. 996, §§ 1, 2, 12-12-2007) 
Sec. 5-4. - Appeals. 
    Any person who shall disagree with a decision of the building official shall have the right to appeal such decision, in writing, to the city manager, who is authorized to carry out the function of the building official in the event of dispute or incapacity of the building official. 
(Ord. No. 916, § 1, 2-16-1994) 
Sec. 5-5. - Offenses. 
    No person shall engage in the construction, alteration or repair of any structure without having first obtained a permit in accordance with the fee schedule provided hereinabove or fail or refuse to comply with any requirement of the state minimum standard codes. 
(Ord. No. 916, § 1, 2-16-1994) 
Secs. 5-6-5-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 916, § 2, adopted Feb. 16, 1994, repealed former art. II of this chapter in its entirety. Former art. II, §§ 5-21-5-28, pertained to the building code and derived from Ord. No. 880, app. §§ 2-5-20, 2-5-21, 2-5-23, 2-5-25-2-5-28, adopted Sept. 20, 1989; and Ord. No. 882, § 1, adopted Oct. 1, 1989. Ord. No. 939, adopted Apr. 7, 2002, added new provisions to ch. 5 as art. II, §§ 5-6-5-15. Sections 5-13 and 5-14 of the ordinance, which pertained to severability and repealer, respectively, have not been included in this article, at the discretion of the editor, as similar provisions are set out in chapter 1 of this Code. Furthermore, §§ 5-6-5-12, 5-15 of the ordinance have been redesignated by the editor as div. 1, §§ 5-21-5-28, of art. II in order to provide for the future expansion of art. I of this chapter. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1034, adopted January 22, 2014, amended division 1 in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former division 1, §§ 5-21-5-28, pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from Ord. No. 939, § 5-6-5-12, adopted April 7, 1999; Ord. No. 990, § 1, adopted June 20, 2007. 

Sec. 5-21. - Purpose. 
    In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that historic, cultural, and aesthetic resources of the city are among its most valued and important assets and that preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; 
    In order to provide a uniform process for providing guidance to owners of historic property in making material changes through the approval of certificates of appropriateness; 
    In order to stimulate revitalization and reinvestment in the central business district and residential areas of the city and to protect and enhance local historical, cultural, and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; 
    In order to enhance the opportunities for federal tax relief of property owners under relevant provisions of the Tax Reform Act of 1986 (Public Law 99-514) allowing tax investment credits for rehabilitation of certified historic structures; 
    The mayor and commission of the city hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this article to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation, and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structure, and works of art having a special historic/aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1034, 1-22-2014) 
Sec. 5-22. - Definitions. 
    Building. A building is a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. Building may refer to a historically related complex such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
    Certificate of appropriateness. A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation board of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    Exterior architectural features. The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the forgoing. 
    Exterior environmental features. All those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
    Historic district. A geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. A historic district shall further mean an area designated by the commission of the City of Brunswick as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 5-24(b) of this division. 
    Historic property. An individual building, structure, site, or object including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the commission of the City of Brunswick as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 5-24(c) of this division. 
    Material change in appearance. A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection (new construction), alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
    Object. An object is a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    Site. A site is the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
    Structure. A structure is a work made up of interdependent and inter-related parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 1034, 1-22-2014) 
Sec. 5-23. - Creation of a historic preservation board. 
(a)  Creation of the board: There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Brunswick Historic Preservation Board" (hereinafter "board"). 
(b)  Board position within the city government: The board shall be part of the planning functions of the city of the City of Brunswick. 
(c)  Board members: Number, appointment, terms and compensation: The board shall consist of seven members appointed by the city commission. All members shall be residents of the City of Brunswick and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience, or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology, or related professions. 
    Members shall serve three-year terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: two members for one year; two members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses approved by the city manager incurred while performing official business. 
(d)  Statement of board's power: 
(1)  The preservation board shall be authorized to: 
a.  Prepare and maintain an inventory, for the purposes of the board's business, of all property within the City of Brunswick having the potential for designation as historic property; 
b.  Recommend to the Brunswick City Commission specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
c.  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this division; 
d.  Recommend to the Brunswick City Commission that the designation of any district, site, building, structure, or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
e.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the City of Brunswick; 
f.  Promote the acquisition by the City of Brunswick of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992 (O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10.1-5); 
g.  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
h.  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the Brunswick City Commission or the board itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
i.  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the Brunswick City Commission concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
j.  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
k.  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the City of Brunswick historic preservation program; 
l.  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the board. The board shall not financially obligate the City of Brunswick without the approval of the commission; 
m.  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties, as allowed by Georgia Law. The preservation board shall not obligate the City of Brunswick without prior consent of the commission. 
n.  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
o.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the Brunswick City Commission, enter into agreements to do the same, as allowed by Georgia law. 
(e)  Board's power to adopt rules and standards: The preservation board shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as by-laws and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation board shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this division. The board shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The board shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Removal of board members: If a member of the board is absent for more than three meetings in one year without written or electronic notice to the chairman or secretary of the board, the member shall be automatically taken off the board and a replacement appointed by the mayor and ratified by the city commission at a regularly scheduled or emergency city commission meeting. 
(g)  Conflict of interest: The board shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in Georgia Statutes and in the City of Brunswick Charter. 
(h)  Board's authority to receive funding from various sources: The board shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. The board shall not financially obligate the City of Brunswick without the approval of the commission. 
(i)  Records of board meetings: A public record shall be kept of the board's resolutions, proceedings, and actions. 
(Ord. No. 1034, 1-22-2014) 
Sec. 5-24. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the board: 
(1)  Board's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources: the board shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the City of Brunswick. 
(2)  Board's power to recommend districts and buildings to the Brunswick City Commission for designation: The board shall present to the Brunswick City Commission recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Board's documentation of proposed designation: Prior to the board's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the Brunswick City Commission for designation, the board shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural, and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e. contributing, non-contributing or historic, non-historic, vacant, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district: 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts: A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district: Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Brunswick, or in the absence of zoning, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts: Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in (b)(1)); 
c.  Non-historic (less than 50 years old, yet possessing architectural character); 
d.  Vacant; 
e.  Intrusion (not possessing any architectural character or historic significance). 
(c)  Designation of a historic property: Criteria for selection of historic properties: A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the City of Brunswick, the region, or the State of Georgia for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the City of Brunswick, State of Georgia, or the region; or 
(4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties: 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts of property: Designations may be proposed by the Brunswick City Commission, the board, or: 
a.  For historic districts-A historical society, neighborhood association, or group of property owners in the proposed historic district may apply to the board for designation; 
b.  For historic properties-A historical society, neighborhood association, or owner of the subject property may apply to the board for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance: Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name(s) of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the City of Brunswick and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings: The board or the Brunswick City Commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the official organ of the county, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the board to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail to the attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division: No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the board must submit the report, required in section 5-24(a)(3), to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations: A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the board within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the Brunswick City Commission. 
(6)  The Brunswick City Commission actions on the board's recommendation: Following receipt of the board recommendation, the Brunswick City Commission may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments they deem necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation: Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the Brunswick City Commission, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the Brunswick City Commission, which notice shall apprise said owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last-known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via United States mail to the occupants shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this division. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation: The board shall notify all necessary agencies within the City of Brunswick of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending: If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 1034, 1-22-2014) 
Sec. 5-25. - Application to preservation board for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties: After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site, new construction or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the board. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. However, if a structure is determined to be in need of repair or demolition by the building official of the City of Brunswick, the city is not required to seek a certificate of appropriateness from the board. Provided, however, that local governments shall notify the commission 45 days prior to beginning an undertaking that would otherwise require a certificate of appropriateness and allow the commission an opportunity to comment. 
(b)  Submission of plans to board: An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the board. The application must be submitted at least 15 days prior to a scheduled meeting of the board. 
(c)  Application fee: The completed application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by an application fee of $10.00. 
(d)  Interior alterations: In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the board shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(e)  Paint color: In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the board shall not consider the applicant's choice of paint color. 
(f)  Technical advice: The board shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. The board shall not financially obligate the City of Brunswick without the approval of the mayor and commission. 
(g)  Staff approval of minor works: The intent of the procedure outlined below is to eliminate time delays for persons who wish to perform minor modifications to a property within a designated historic district when the changes clearly and distinctly comply with the established design guidelines. 
(1)  Applicants must complete an application for a certificate of appropriateness providing suitable information describing the work to be performed. Staff designated by the board will review the application to determine if the proposed work or any portion thereof qualifies for staff approval. 
(2)  Staff may grant approval or approval with conditions for items on the list of minor works which conform to the established guidelines and these rules of procedure. Staff is not required to grant this review and may forward an application to the board for any reason. 
(3)  Monthly reports of staff approved certificates of appropriateness will be presented to the historic preservation board and incorporated into the minutes. 
(4)  List of minor works. 
The following list of minor work items may be approved by staff as outlined above: 
a.  Backyard and sideyard fences -Proposed project involves the construction of backyard or sideyard fences provided that the property is not a corner lot and provided the proposed fence is in accordance with the appropriate design guidelines and with the zoning ordinance. 
b.  Backyard decks -Proposed project involves the construction of backyard decks provided that the decks do not require the alteration of the existing building or structure; provided that the proposed deck is not visible from the street; and provided the proposed deck is in accordance with the appropriate design guidelines and Zoning Ordinance. 
c.  Installation or replacement of handicapped ramps, backyard walks and entry steps -Proposed project involves the construction of backyard walks, sidewalks and entry steps provided the materials conform to the relevant design guidelines. Staff may issue a certificate of appropriateness for any rear yard site work, including construction of pools, except on corner lots. 
d.  Removal of non-historic detached accessory structures -Proposed project involves only the removal of detached accessory structures that are not architecturally or historically significant. 
e.  Minor rehabilitation projects -Proposed project involves the rehabilitation of exterior walls, porch components, doors, windows and trim provided the work is done in accordance with the applicable design guidelines. 
f.  Picket fence -Proposed project involves construction of a wood picket fence in the front yard provided 
1.  The fence is similar in design to others in the historic district, and 
2.  Is no more than 42 inches in height, and 
3.  Does not have any extra features, such as a trellis or arbor. 
g.  Storm windows -Proposed project involves installation of storm windows provided: 
1.  The windows have the same sash and frame configuration as the historic windows, and 
2.  The windows do not obscure muntin bars or other character-defining features of the historic window, and 
3.  The color of the window sash and frame matches the existing trim color, and 
4.  The window frames do not project beyond the plane of the historic window opening, and 
5.  The window panes are clear glass. 
h.  Gutters and downspouts -Proposed project does not require alteration or removal of architectural elements. 
i.  Handrails -Proposed project is considered to be in the same style and material as existing porch railings. In the event of no existing porch railing, handrails on steps may be constructed when the handrails are of the same materials and scale as the porch posts. 
j.  Rear yard accessory buildings -Staff may issue a certificate of appropriateness for construction of rear yard accessory buildings which do not exceed 200 square feet in area nor nine feet in height, provided that the property is not a corner lot, and provided the facade material is masonry, wood, or cementitious composite board, and where the applicant does not otherwise conflict with the appropriate design guidelines or Zoning Ordinance. 
k.  Commercial signage -Staff may issue a certificate of appropriateness for installation of commercial signage in the historic district, provided that the signage meets all of the design guidelines and zoning regulations. 
l.  Non-contributing or non-historic buildings -Staff may issue a certificate of appropriateness for rehabilitation or modification on non-contributing, non-historic buildings if such is done in keeping with the appropriate historic guidelines or if no significant alteration is proposed. 
(5)  Amendments to the list of minor works. Additions, subtractions or changes to the list of minor works may be accomplished by the following procedure: 
a.  At the direction of a majority of the board, staff will prepare a revised list of minor works to be included on the agenda of a regularly scheduled meeting of the Brunswick Historic Preservation Board. 
b.  At the regular meeting, the board will review and vote on the revised list of minor works. Should the list be approved by the board, staff will forward the list to the commission of the City of Brunswick. 
c.  The commission of the City of Brunswick will approve the revised list of minor works or return the list, with edits to the board. 
(h)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard: The board shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be posted on the subject property stating the time and place of the meeting and a brief description of the project. The notice shall be posted no later than one business day after the application is received by the board staff. The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(i)  Acceptable board reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness: Board action: The board may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(1)  The board shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change(s) in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the board shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation: The board shall issue certificates of appropriateness for the above proposed actions if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the secretary of interior's standards for rehabilitation and guidelines for rehabilitating historic buildings. 
b.  Relocation: A decision by the board approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition: A decision by the board approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic, or architectural significance of the building, structure, site or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site or object from collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
8.  The authority of the city commission or a court of competent jurisdiction to order demolition of unfit structures pursuant to chapter 12, article IV of this Code. 
(j)  Undue hardship: When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this division would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the board, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property, shall be conserved and substantial justice done. To consider variances for undue hardship, the board may request additional, reasonable information from the applicant that it deems necessary to determine a case of undue hardship. In granting variances, the board may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this division. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making, but is: 
(1)  A problem unique to a specific property; or 
(2)  In order to comply with this article, the person will be in conflict with another ordinance of the city. 
(k)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  The board shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the board to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(l)  Necessary action to be taken by board upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  In the event the board rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he or she so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the board shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(m)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness: 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the board shall notify the building official to issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The board and the Brunswick City Commission shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this division or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(n)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced: A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and is renewable by the board upon request of the applicant. 
(o)  Recording an application for certificate of appropriateness: The board shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and all the board's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(p)  Acquisition of property: The board may, where such action is authorized by the Brunswick City Commission and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise, to the property or any interest therein, as allowed by Georgia Law. 
(r)  Appeals: Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the board relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the Brunswick City Commission. Any such appeal must be filed with the Brunswick City Commission within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to section 2-25(h)(1) of this division or, in the case of a failure of the board to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45 day period allowed for the board action, section 2-25(h)(2) of this division. Appeals for properties within the City of Brunswick shall be made to the Brunswick City Commission. The Brunswick City Commission may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the board, if the governing body finds that the board abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the Brunswick City Commission may be taken to the Superior Court of Glynn County in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for the City of Brunswick ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 1034, 1-22-2014) 
Sec. 5-26. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural feature in or on an historic property, to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a change in the design, material, texture or the exterior appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide minimum maintenance and repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The board shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect. 
(1)  The board shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the board determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the board will notify the building inspector to initiate actions dictated in chapter 12 of the code of the City of Brunswick. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes: Nothing in this division shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1034, 1-22-2014) 
Sec. 5-27. - Penalty provisions. 
    Violations of any provisions of this division shall be punished in the same manner as provided in chapter 1, section 1-6 of the code. Each day that work is conducted without a certificate of appropriateness, each day that work does not comply with an issued certificate of appropriateness, or each day that work is not initiated to remedy a lack of minimum maintenance and repair constitutes a separate violation and is subject to the penalties set forth for such violations. 
(Ord. No. 1034, 1-22-2014) 
Sec. 5-28. - Severability. 
    In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this division shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this division, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally part thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1034, 1-22-2014) 
Secs. 5-29-5-34. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - DESIGNATED HISTORIC DISTRICTS 

Sec. 5-35. - Old Town Brunswick Historic Preservation District. 
(a)  There is hereby designated pursuant to the provisions of division 1 of this article and the terms of state law a historic district which shall be referred to as the "Old Town Brunswick Historic Preservation District" and which shall be bounded on its northern side by "H" Street, on its east by Martin Luther King Boulevard, on its south side by First Avenue and on its west side by the western bank of the East River. Said historic district shall not, however, include the property, currently known as part of the Brunswick Landing Marina tract, which is located in the northwestern corner of the district area, and which lies west of Bay Street, east of the East River's eastern bank, north of a line following the southern edge of the right-of-way of F Street if said street were extended westward to the East River, and south of a line following the northern edge of the right-of-way of H Street if said street were extended westward to the East River. 
(b)  A list of the names and addresses of the properties located in said district and the owners thereof shall be attached to and incorporated into this subsection (b) as though fully quoted verbatim herein, and shall be maintained along with the original ordinance [Ordinance No. 942] with the public records of this city. 
(c)  The boundaries of the said district shall be designated on the official zoning map of the city. 
(d)  No material change in the appearance of a structure, site, or work or art within such district shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless and until application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation board as provided for in division 1 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 942, § 1, 6-7-2000; Ord. No. 959, § 1, 3-3-2004) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 942, § 1, adopted June 7, 2000, added new provisions to the Code as §§ 5-21-5-24; said provisions have been redesignated as § 5-35(a)-(d), at the discretion of the editor, in order to provide for the future expansion of art. II. 
Sec. 5-36. - Oak Grove Cemetery local landmark site. 
(a)  There is hereby designated pursuant to the provisions of Division 1 of this article and the terms of state law a local landmark site which shall be referred to as "Historic Oak Grove Cemetery" and which shall be located at 1500 Mansfield Street, Brunswick, Georgia. 
(b)  The property "Oak Grove Cemetery", located at 1500 Mansfield Street, is owned by the City of Brunswick. 
(c)  The location of the said landmark shall be designated on the official zoning map of the city. 
(d)  No material change in the appearance of the structure, site, or work of art on the property shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless and until application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the historic preservation board as provided for in division 1 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1039, § 1, 2-18-2015) 
Sec. 5-37. - Historic building demolition procedure. 
(a)  Purpose. This section is adopted for the purpose of protecting the historic and aesthetic qualities of the city by preserving, rehabilitating or restoring, whenever possible, buildings or structures which contribute or reflect distinctive features of the architectural or historic resources of the city, thereby promoting the public welfare and preserving the cultural heritage of the city. A demolition delay ordinance will provide time to explore demolition alternatives, such as developing adaptive reuses for the building or structure, locating purchasers, or moving the building or structure to a new location. 
(b)  Definitions. As used in this chapter, the following terms shall mean: 
    Commission: Mayor and Commission of the City of Brunswick. 
    Demolition permit: The permit issued by the city as required by the Brunswick Building Code for the demolition, partial demolition or removal of a building or structure. 
    Historically significant building or structure: Any building or structure which (1) is listed on the National Register of Historical Places; (2) is listed on the current Historic Inventory of Brunswick; (3) is located within any National Register or local historic district; or (4) was constructed in whole or part prior to 1940. 
    HP Board: The Brunswick Historic Preservation Board. 
    Planner: Planner or Planning Director of the City of Brunswick. 
    Review period: The review period of a complete application by the historic preservation board. The period shall be 120 days from the date a complete demolition application is submitted to the HP board. The period may be extended by written agreement of the applicant and HP board. 
(c)  Procedure. 
(1)  Preamble. No permit for the demolition of a historically significant building or structure shall be granted unless it is first submitted to the planning department for review and comment in accordance with the provisions of this section. Any project in which the city is the project proponent or is required to complete a federal environmental review pursuant to N.E.P.A. shall be exempt from this section, but shall comply with the requirements of subsection (d) below. 
(2)  Prior to submittal of a demolition or relocation permit, all requests which include exterior demolitions or relocations shall first obtain approval of an exterior demolition or relocation review application from the planning department. 
(3)  Complete applications shall include all of the information requested on the application form, including photographs of all affected exterior elevations and information pertaining to the age of the structure if available. 
(4)  Within ten days of receipt of a complete application the planning department staff shall make a determination of eligibility for a review. 
(5)  An exterior demolition or relocation application shall be considered eligible for review if staff determines that the application seeks to demolish or relocate a historically significant building or structure as defined herein. 
(6)  The following applications shall be exempt from the 180-day review period: 
a.  Accessory structures of less than 250 square feet of gross floor area; 
b.  Any structure determined by the chief building official to be an imminent and substantial danger to the health or safety of the public due to deteriorating conditions; 
c.  Any structure deemed un-repairable by the planning department and placed on the city's dilapidated structures list. 
(7)  Upon the determination of the planning department that an application seeks a demolition permit for a historically significant building or structure, the planner shall forward a copy thereof to the commission and the HP board. No demolition permit shall be issued at that time. 
(8)  The HP board shall hold a public hearing within 30 days of receiving a copy of such application, and shall give public notice thereof by publishing notice of the time, place and purpose of the hearing in a local newspaper at least 14 days before said hearing. The HP board shall also send notice at least 14 days prior to said hearing to any person whose property abuts the building or structure and abutters within 300 feet of the property line of the building or structure as determined from the records of the city assessors. All costs related to the public hearing shall be borne by the applicant. 
(9)  The planner shall post a sign or signs on any land upon which an application with respect to relocation or demolition has been made not less than seven days after the completed application is accepted by the planning department. Such sign shall show the date of construction of the existing building and be erected in full view of the public on each street side of such land. Where such land does not have frontage on a public street, the signs shall be erected on the nearest street right-of-way with an attached notation indicating generally the direction and distance to the land concerning a public hearing is scheduled. Such sign shall be posted in full view of the public and shall be maintained by the applicant until final determination has been made by the HP board. 
(10)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the public hearing, the applicant for demolition shall provide the following to the HP board along with the completed demolition application: 
a.  A copy of the assessors map showing the location of the building or structure with reference to lot lines and abutting buildings and structures; 
b.  Photographs of all street façade elevations; 
c.  A written description of the building or structure, or part thereof, to be demolished; 
d.  Reason(s) for the proposed demolition and data supporting said reason, including data sufficient to establish any economic justification for demolition; and 
e.  A description of the proposed reuse of the parcel on which the building or structure is located. 
(11)  At the hearing, the HP board shall determine whether the demolition of the historically significant building or structure would be detrimental to the historical, cultural, or architectural heritage or resources of the city and should be preferably preserved. The HP board shall consider the following in making its decision: 
a.  The building or structure is of such interest or quality that it would meet National Historical Register criteria for designation as a historical or architectural landmark; 
b.  The building or structure is of such unusual or uncommon design, texture, or material that it could not be reproduced without great difficulty or expense; 
c.  The building or structure is of such architectural or historic interest that its removal would be a detriment to the public interest; 
d.  Retention of the building or structure would help preserve and protect a historic place or area of historic interest in the city; 
e.  The reason(s) for the proposed demolition and data supporting said reason, including data sufficient to establish any economic justification for demolition; and 
f.  The proposed reuse of the parcel on which the building or structure is located. 
(12)  The HP board shall make its written determination within 14 days of the close of the public hearing and shall notify the applicant via certified mail. If the HP board determines that the demolition of the historically significant building or structure would not be detrimental to the historical, cultural or architectural heritage or resources of the city, the planner shall issue the demolition permit forthwith. If the HP board determines that the demolition of the historically significant building or structure would be detrimental to the historical, cultural or architectural heritage or resources of the city, a demolition delay shall be imposed and no demolition permit shall be issued for the remainder of the review period. 
If a delay is imposed, the HP board and the planner shall work with the property owner to identify viable alternatives to demolition and to develop a historic preservation plan for the property. 
(13)  Upon receipt of notice that a demolition delay has been imposed, the applicant shall secure the building or site against vandalism, fire or other destruction and shall post a notice of the determination on the building in a place visible from the nearest public way. 
(14)  If the HP board fails to hold a public hearing within the time specified herein, or if the HP Board fails to notify the applicant of its determination following a public hearing within the time specified herein, the demolition of the historically significant building or structure shall be deemed to not be detrimental to the historical, cultural or architectural heritage or resources of the city and the planner shall issue the demolition permit upon the expiration of the applicable time period. 
(15)  The written determination or lack of action of the HP board may be used for the purposes of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended (36 CFR 800). 
(d)  Procedure for city projects. 
(1)  For any demolition project for a historically significant building or structure in which the city is the project proponent or in which the city is required to prepare a federal environmental review pursuant to N.E.P.A., a demolition review shall be conducted by the HP board upon the commencement of a project and concurrent with the other required regulatory reviews. 
(2)  The city manager's office shall issue a notice of intent to demolish a historically significant building or structure to the HP board, by certified mail or hand delivered. The notice shall include a description of the proposed demolition, the funding sources, and the proposed reuse of the property. A copy of the notice shall also be provided to the planner. 
(3)  Within 30 days of receipt of a notice of intent to demolish, the HP board shall hold a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth herein for other projects. 
(4)  Within 14 days of the close of the public hearing, the HP board shall issue its written determination to the commission and the planner by certified mail or hand delivery. If the HP board determines that the demolition of the historically significant building or structure would not be detrimental to the historical, cultural or architectural heritage or resources of the city, the project may move forward and there shall be no further review by HP board when the demolition permit is applied for. If the HP board determines that the demolition of the historically significant building or structure would be detrimental to the historical, cultural or architectural heritage or resources of the city, a demolition delay shall be imposed and no demolition permit shall be issued for the remainder of the review period. 
(5)  If the HP board fails to hold a public hearing within the time specified herein, or if the HP board fails to notify the commission and planner of its determination following a public hearing within the time specified herein, the demolition of the historically significant building or structure shall be deemed to not be detrimental to the historical, cultural or architectural heritage or resources of the city and the commissioner shall issue the demolition permit upon the expiration of the applicable time period. 
(6)  If a demolition delay is imposed pursuant to this section, the HP board and planner shall work to develop a viable historic preservation plan and to identify alternatives to demolition. The HP board shall present the same to the commission. 
(7)  Upon the expiration of the delay period, the project may move forward and there shall be no further review by HP board when the demolition permit is applied for. If no action is taken on the historically significant building or structure within three years of issuance of consent for demolition, the city manager's office must issue another notice of intent to demolish for said property to the HP board. 
(8)  The written determination or lack of action of the board may be used for the purposes of Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966 as amended (36 CFR 800). 
(e)  Emergency demolition. 
(1)  Notwithstanding the above provisions, the planner may issue a demolition permit at any time for a historically significant building or structure in the event of imminent and substantial danger to the health or safety of the public due to deteriorating conditions. 
(2)  Notwithstanding the above provisions, the planner may issue a demolition permit at any time for a historically significant building or structure located outside of a historic district in the event that the structure has been deemed unrepairable by the planner and placed on the city's dilapidated structures list. 
(3)  The planner shall document in writing the findings and reasons requiring an emergency demolition or placement of structures on the dilapidated structures list and shall forward a copy to the commission and HP board. 
(4)  No provision of this section is intended to conflict with or abridge any obligations or rights conferred by Brunswick Code regarding the removal or demolition of dangerous or abandoned structures. In the event of a conflict, the provisions of the more stringent ordinance shall control. 
(Ord. No. 1049, § 1, 5-17-2017) 
Secs. 5-38-5-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 916, § 2, adopted Feb. 16, 1994, repealed former Art. III of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. III, §§ 5-46-5-67, pertained to the electrical code and derived from Ord. No. 880, app. §§ 2-5-30-2-5-48, 2-5-50-2-5-52, adopted Sept. 20, 1989. 

Secs. 5-46-5-85. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 916, § 2, adopted Feb. 16, 1994, repealed former Art. IV of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. IV, §§ 5-86-5-95, pertained to the mechanical code and derived from Ord. No. 880, app. §§ 2-5-60, 2-5-62-2-5-69, adopted Sept. 20, 1989. 

Secs. 5-86-5-110. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 916, § 2, adopted Feb. 16, 1994, repealed former Art. V of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. V, §§ 5-111-5-127, pertained to the plumbing code and derived from Ord. No. 880, app. §§ 2-5-70-2-5-85, adopted Sept. 20, 1989. 

Secs. 5-111-5-145. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - RESERVED[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 916, § 2, adopted Feb. 16, 1994, repealed former Art. VI of this chapter in its entirety. Former Art. VI, §§ 5-146-5-154, pertained to the gas code and derived from Ord. No. 880, app. §§ 2-5-90-2-5-98, adopted Sept. 20, 1989. 

Secs. 5-146-5-175. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - EXISTING STRUCTURES 

Sec. 5-176. - Intent and purpose. 
(a)  The intent of this article is to provide guidelines for the uniform application of fire and building related codes to existing buildings and structures throughout the city; to define certain terms; to provide acceptable alternative safeguards to requirements of various fire and building code provisions where strict compliance is not practical; to specify various hazardous conditions in existing buildings and structures which should not be permitted to exist; to relieve building and fire code enforcement authorities from certain liabilities when applying the provisions of this article; to provide for rules and regulations; to provide construction and fire safety standards for landmark museum buildings and historic buildings; to exempt landmark museum buildings and historic buildings from certain laws and regulations; to provide for other matters relative thereto; to provide an effective date; to repeal conflicting laws; and for other purposes. 
(b)  It is a purpose of this article to encourage the sensitive rehabilitation, restoration, stabilization, or preservation of existing buildings throughout the city and to encourage the preservation of buildings and structures deemed to be historic in total or in part; provided, however, such rehabilitation and preservation efforts should provide for the upgrading of the safety features of the building or structure to provide a practical level of safety to the public and surrounding property. It is the further purpose of this article to provide guidance regarding acceptable alternative solutions and to stimulate enforcement authorities to utilize alternative compliance concepts wherever practical to permit the continued use of existing buildings and structures without overly restrictive financial burdens on owners or occupants. 
(c)  The provisions of this article shall not be applicable to new construction, except as specifically provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 891, § I, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-177. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Building system means any utility, mechanical, electrical, structural, egress, or fire protection/safety system. 
    Enforcement authority means the fire marshal or building official, as appropriate. 
    Existing building or structure means any completed building or structure which has been placed in service for a minimum of five years. 
    Historic building means any building so designated by the state historic preservation officer as individually significant or as contributing to the historic character of a historic district, pursuant to the rules and regulations adopted by the board of natural resources or as so designated pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 
    Landmark museum building means a historic building or structure used as an exhibit of the building or structure itself and which exhibits a high degree of architectural integrity and which is open to the public not less than 12 days per year; however, additional uses, original or ancillary, to the use as a museum shall be permitted within the same building subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 25-2-13(b)(3). Landmark museum buildings shall be so designated by the state historic preservation officer pursuant to rules and regulations adopted by the board of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 891, § II, 7-18-1990) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 5-178. - Jurisdiction. 
    Where an existing building or structure falls within the jurisdiction of both state and local enforcement authorities, the final review of any part of the project which is under the jurisdiction of both such enforcement authorities shall rest with the state authority; provided, however, the local fire and building authorities shall agree in writing with any compliance alternatives before such can be approved by the state authority. 
(Ord. No. 891, § III, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-179. - Conditions for use or occupancy. 
    The provisions of this article authorize the enforcement authority to permit the repair, alteration, addition, or change of use or occupancy of existing buildings without total compliance with any rule, regulation, code, or standard for new construction requirements under the following general conditions: 
(1)  All noted conditions hazardous to life, based on the provisions of applicable state and local standards or codes for existing buildings, and outlined in section 5-180, shall be corrected to a reasonable and realistic degree as set forth in this article; 
(2)  The existing building becomes the minimum performance standard; and 
(3)  The degree of compliance of the building after changes must not be below that existing before the changes. Nothing in this article will require nor prohibit compliance with requirements more stringent than those provided in this article. 
(Ord. No. 891, § IV, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-180. - Hazardous conditions. 
    With reference to existing buildings, authorized enforcement authorities should assure that any of the conditions or defects described in this section are identified and corrected as deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority having jurisdiction and through the utilization of appropriate compliance alternatives: 
(1)  Structural. Any building or structure or portion thereof which is in imminent danger of collapse because of but not limited to the following factors: 
a.  Dilapidation, deterioration, or decay; 
b.  Faulty structural design or construction; 
c.  The removal, movement, or instability of any portion of the ground necessary for the purpose of supporting such building; or 
d.  The deterioration, decay, or inadequacy of the foundation; 
(2)  Number of exits. Less than two approved independent, remote, and properly protected exitways serving every story of a building, except where a single exitway is permitted by the applicable state or local fire or building code or life safety code; 
(3)  Capacity of exits. Any required door, aisle, passageway, stairway, or other required means of egress which is not of sufficient capacity to provide for the population of the portions of the building served and which is not so arranged as to provide safe and adequate means of egress to a place of safety; and 
(4)  Mechanical systems. Utilities and mechanical systems not in conformance with the codes in effect at the time of construction of a building which create a serious threat of fire or threaten the safety of the occupants of the building. 
(Ord. No. 891, § V, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-181. - Additions. 
    Additions to an existing building shall comply with the applicable requirements of state and local laws, rules, regulations, codes, and standards for new construction. Such additions shall not impose loads, either vertically or horizontally, which would cause the existing building to be subjected to stresses exceeding those permitted under new construction. If the existing building does not comply with the standards provided in this article and the authorized enforcement authority finds that the addition adversely affects the performance of the total building, the authorized enforcement authority may require: 
(1)  The new addition to be separated from the existing structure by at least a two-hour fire wall with openings therein properly protected; 
(2)  The installation of an approved automatic fire suppression system; or 
(3)  Other remedies which may be deemed appropriate by the enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. 891, § VI, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-182. - Minor alterations and new mechanical systems. 
    Minor alterations or repairs to an existing building which do not adversely affect the performance or safety of the building may be made with the same or like materials. Existing buildings which, in part or as a whole, exceed the requirements of any applicable construction or fire safety code may, in the course of compliance with this article, have reduced or removed, in part or total, features not required by such code for new construction; provided, however, that such features were not a condition of prior approval. Existing buildings and structures which, in part or as a whole, do not meet the requirements of the applicable code for new construction may be altered or repaired without further compliance to any such code by utilizing the provisions of this article, provided their present degree of compliance to any applicable construction or fire safety code is not reduced. Any new mechanical systems installed in an existing building shall conform to applicable codes for new construction to the fullest extent practical as approved by the authorized enforcement authorities. 
(Ord. No. 891, § VII, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-183. - Continued use. 
    The legal use and occupancy of any building or structure may be continued without change, except as may be provided otherwise by this article or as may be legally provided for by any applicable state or local, ordinance, rule, regulation, code, or standard. 
(Ord. No. 891, § VIII, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-184. - Change in use. 
(a)  A total change in the use or occupancy of an existing building which would cause a greater hazard to the public shall not be made unless such building is made to comply with the requirements of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards for the new use or occupancy; provided, however, the compliance alternative provisions of this article may be utilized by authorized enforcement authorities where total or strict compliance with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes, or standards is not practical. 
(b)  When the proposed use is of equal or lesser hazard as determined by an authorized enforcement authority, further compliance with any code for new construction is not required unless otherwise provided in this article. Alterations or repairs to an existing building or structure which do not adversely affect the performance of the building may be made with like materials. Any proposed change to the existing building or change in type of contents of the existing building shall not increase the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures. If the fire hazard to adjacent buildings or structures is increased, then requirements of applicable construction or fire safety codes for exterior walls shall apply. 
(c)  Sprinkler systems shall be required in accordance with NFPA 13-D or NFPA 13-R standards in one-family, two-family, and multifamily residences, group dwellings and boardinghouses, as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 891, § IX, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-185. - Change in use of a portion of a building. 
(a)  If a portion of a building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is separated from the remainder of the building with vertical or horizontal fire separations complying with applicable state or local rules, regulations, codes, or standards or with compliance alternatives, then the portion changed shall be made to comply to the applicable requirements for the new use or occupancy to the extent noted in section 5-184. 
(b)  If a portion of the building is changed to a new use or occupancy and that portion is not separated from the remainder of the building as noted in subsection (a) of this section, then the provisions of the applicable state and local rules, regulations, codes, and standards applying to each use or occupancy of the building shall apply to the entire building to the extent noted in section 5-184; provided, however, if there are conflicting provisions in requirements for the various uses or occupancies, the authorized enforcement authority shall apply the strictest requirements. 
(c)  Sprinkler systems shall be required in accordance with NFPA 13-D and NFPA 13-R standards in one-family, two-family, and multifamily residences, group dwellings or boardinghouses, as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 891, § X, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-186. - Floor loading. 
    Any proposed change in the use or occupancy of an existing building or portion thereof which could increase the floor loading should be investigated by a state registered professional engineer to determine the adequacy of the existing floor system to support the increased loads. If the existing floor system is found to be inadequate, it should be modified to support the increased loads or the proposed allowable floor loading shall be reduced by and posted by the appropriate enforcement authority. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XI, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-187. - Documentation. 
    Whenever action is taken on any existing building to repair, make alterations, or change the use or occupancy of an existing structure and, when such action proposes the use of compliance alternatives, the authorized enforcement authority shall ensure that at least one copy of the accepted compliance alternatives approved, including applicable plans, test data, or other data submitted for evaluation, be maintained on file in the office of the local enforcement authority. If the structure also falls under the jurisdiction of a state level enforcement authority, at least one copy of such material shall be maintained on file with that authority. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XII, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-188. - Compliance alternatives. 
    Subsections (1) through (5) of this section contain generally acceptable compliance alternatives illustrating principles which shall be applied to the rehabilitation of existing buildings by enforcement authorities in the city. It is recognized for purposes of this article that all building systems interact with each other; therefore, any consideration of compliance alternatives should take into account all existing and proposed conditions to determine their acceptability. The compliance alternatives are not all-inclusive and do not preclude consideration and approval of other alternatives by any enforcement authority. 
(1)  Compliance alternatives for an inadequate number of exits include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Provide connecting fire exit balconies acceptable to the enforcement authority between buildings; 
b.  Provide alternate exit or egress facilities leading to safety outside the building or to a place of safe refuge in the building or an adjoining building as acceptable to the enforcement authority; 
c.  Provide an exterior fire escape as acceptable to the enforcement authority where the providing of enclosed interior or enclosed exterior stairs is not practical; or 
d.  Install early fire warning and fire suppression systems (monitored alarm system, sprinklers or as defined by life safety codes). 
(2)  Compliance alternatives for excessive travel distances to an approved exit include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Install an approved smoke detection system throughout the building; 
b.  Install an approved complete automatic fire suppression system; 
c.  Subdivide the exit travel route with smoke-stop doors acceptable to the enforcement authority; 
d.  Increase the fire resistance rating of corridor walls and doors as defined by the enforcement authority; or 
e.  Provide additional approved means of escape. 
(3)  Compliance alternatives for unenclosed or improperly enclosed exit stairways or vertical shafts include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Improve enclosure of exit stairway; 
b.  Add a partial fire suppression system; 
c.  Add a sprinkler draft curtain; or 
d.  Add a monitored smoke detection system. 
(4)  Compliance alternatives for inadequate or a total lack of fire partitions or fire separation walls shall be as set forth in subsection (3). 
(5)  Compliance alternatives for a lack of required protection of openings in exterior walls where a fire exposure is a risk include but are not limited to the following: 
a.  Improve fire resistance of existing openings and protect them with fire-rated windows or doors as appropriate; 
b.  Seal the openings with fire-rated construction as approved by the enforcement authority; or 
c.  Install an approved fire suppression system. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XIII, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-189. - Appeals. 
    Should a party not agree with a decision of the enforcement authority or should an enforcement authority desire a ruling, an appeal may be made as permitted under article I of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XIV, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-190. - Liability. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the city or any officer or employee thereof in carrying out the provisions of this article. Further, no action shall be maintained against the city or any duly authorized elected or appointive officer or duly authorized employee thereof for damages sustained as a result of any fire or hazard covered by this article by reason of inspection or other action taken or not taken pursuant to this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to relieve any property owner or lessee or person in charge thereof from any legal duty, obligation, or liability incident to the ownership, maintenance, or use of such property. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XV, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-191. - Landmark museum buildings. 
(a)  The provisions of this section relating to landmark museum buildings shall apply only to those portions of such buildings which meet all the requirements of a landmark museum building, except as otherwise provided in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. Subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall, unless otherwise provided in such subsections, preempt all laws, regulations, or rules governing reconstruction, alteration, repair, or maintenance of landmark museum buildings. 
(b)  A landmark museum building shall be subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Repairs, maintenance, and restoration shall be allowed without conformity to any building or fire safety related code, standard, rule, or regulation, provided the building is brought into and remains in full compliance with this section. 
(2)  In the case of fire or other casualty to a landmark museum building, it may be rebuilt, in total or in part, using such techniques and materials as are necessary to restore it to the condition prior to the fire or casualty and use as a totally preserved building. 
(3)  If a historic building or structure, as a result of proposed work or changes in use, would become eligible and would be so certified as a landmark museum building, and the state historic preservation officer so certifies and such is submitted to the local fire and building code official with the construction or building permit application, then the work may proceed under the provisions of this section. 
(c)  All landmark museum buildings shall comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every landmark museum building shall have portable fire extinguishers as deemed appropriate by the local fire authority having jurisdiction based on the applicable state or local fire safety codes or regulations. 
(2)  All landmark museum buildings which contain residential units shall have electrically powered smoke or products of combustion detectors installed within each living unit between living and sleeping areas. Such detectors shall be continuously powered by the building's electrical system. When activated, the detector shall initiate an alarm which is audible in sleeping rooms of that living unit. These unit detectors shall be required in addition to any other protective system that may be installed in the building. 
(3)  For all landmark museum buildings, except those protected by a total automatic fire suppression system and one- and two-family dwellings, approved automatic fire warning protection shall be provided by installing at least one listed smoke or products of combustion detector for every 1,200 square feet of floor area per floor or story. In addition, all lobbies, common corridors, hallways, and ways of exit access shall be provided with listed smoke or products of combustion detectors not more than 30 feet apart. Detectors shall be so connected as to sound an alarm audible throughout the structure or building. With respect to buildings which are totally protected by an automatic fire suppression system, activation of the sprinkler system shall sound an alarm throughout the structure or building. 
(4)  Smoke or products of combustion detectors shall be listed by a nationally recognized testing laboratory. 
(5)  All multistory landmark museum buildings, except one- and two-family dwellings, with occupancy above or below the street or grade level, shall have manual fire alarm pull stations in the natural path of egress. The activation of a manual pull station shall cause the building fire warning system to sound. 
(6)  Approved exit signs shall be located where designated by the authority having jurisdiction in accordance with the applicable code, standard, rule, or regulation. 
(7)  Except for one- and two-family dwellings, every landmark museum building occupied after daylight or which has occupied areas subject to being totally darkened during daylight hours due to a power failure or failure of the electrical system, shall be equipped with approved emergency lighting meeting the provisions of the applicable code, standard, rule, or regulation. 
(8)  Occupant loading of landmark museum buildings or structures shall be limited by either the actual structural floor load capacity or by the limitations of means of egress or by a combination of factors. Actual floor load capacity shall be determined by a state registered professional engineer. The floor load shall be posted at a conspicuous location. The building owner shall submit evidence of this certification and related computations to the enforcement authority having jurisdiction upon request. Where one or more floors of a landmark museum building have only one means of egress, the occupant load shall be computed and occupancy limited as determined by the fire marshal. 
(9)  The electrical, heating, and mechanical systems of landmark museum buildings shall be inspected, and any conditions that create a threat of fire or a threat to life shall be corrected in accordance with applicable standards to the extent deemed necessary by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XVI, 7-18-1990) 
Sec. 5-192. - Historic buildings. 
(a)  Historic buildings not classified as landmark museum buildings shall meet the requirements of applicable building and fire safety laws, ordinances, codes, standards, rules, or regulations as they pertain to existing buildings. If a historic building or structure is damaged from fire or other casualty, it may be restored to the condition prior to the fire or casualty using techniques and methods consistent with its original construction or it shall meet the requirements for new construction of the applicable codes, standards, rules, or regulations, provided these requirements do not significantly compromise the features for which the building was considered historically significant. 
(b)  As to any buildings or structures in the city which have been designated as historic buildings or structures by the state historic preservation officer, the appropriate enforcement authority, in granting or denying a variance, shall consider the intent of this article, with special attention to section 5-191 of this article, the Uniform Act for the Application of Buildings and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings (O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.), the Georgia Historic Preservation Act (O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq.) and the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Preservation Projects. 
(Ord. No. 891, § XVII, 7-18-1990) 
Secs. 5-193-5-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MOVING BUILDINGS 

Sec. 5-221. - Approval required. 
    Any person desiring to move or relocate any house or structure to any location within the city shall be required to receive approval from the building official designated to issue permits pursuant to article I of this chapter. An application and fee shall be filed with the building official at least two weeks prior to the proposed move. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 1, 12-27-1989) 
Sec. 5-222. - Certificate of occupancy; bond. 
    The structure shall be required to meet all current building regulations prior to receiving a certificate of occupancy, and if extensive rehabilitation is necessary to the structure to be moved, a performance bond, letter of credit or cash bond in favor of the city shall be required to insure satisfactory compliance. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 2, 12-27-1989) 
Sec. 5-223. - Notice. 
    A sign shall be posted on the property where the house or structure is to be relocated at least ten days prior to the scheduled move. The sign shall specifically identify the building to be moved, giving its current location, shall list the date of the proposed move and telephone number of the building inspector and shall advise that any citizen has the right to object to or to appeal the proposed relocation. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 3, 12-27-1989) 
Sec. 5-224. - Appeals. 
    Aggrieved citizens or those adversely affected by such an application for the relocation of a house or structure shall have the right to appeal the grant of a house moving permit in writing to the city commission. The applicant may appeal the denial of a permit by the building official to the city commission. For an appeal, a sign shall be posted on the property advising of the time, date and location of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 4, 12-27-1989) 
Sec. 5-225. - City commission action. 
    The building official shall have the option, in the exercise of his discretion at any time prior to relocation of the house or structure, to refer any building moving application to the city commission for action. In such an event, a sign shall be posted on the property advising the time, date and location of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 5, 12-27-1989) 
Sec. 5-226. - Denial of permit. 
    The following shall be grounds for denial of a building moving permit by either the building official or the city commission: 
(1)  Finding that the house or structure when relocated would not comply with the building regulations, the zoning ordinance, any other ordinance of the city, or any rule or regulation promulgated by the building official; 
(2)  Finding that the house or structure when relocated would depreciate the value of adjacent and nearby property; 
(3)  Finding that the house or structure would not be aesthetically compatible with other structures in the neighborhood after relocation and completion of renovation; 
(4)  Finding that the relocation of the house would create a significant risk of damage to public property or the property of others while in transit. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 6, 12-27-1989) 
Sec. 5-227. - Safety. 
    The building official shall be authorized to promulgate reasonable regulations to ensure the safety of public and private property during the relocation of a house or other structure and to specify reasonable conditions for that purpose as a part of any permit issued, including but not limited to conditions as to the route, date, time and supervision of transit. 
(Ord. No. 886, § 7, 12-27-1989) 
Secs. 5-228-5-250. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - SMOKING IN CITY BUILDINGS[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 956, adopted June 4, 2003, added new provisions to ch. 5 of the Code as art. II, §§ 5-21-5-35. As other provisions existed within the Code as art. II of ch. 5, the provisions of Ord. No. 956, §§ 5-21-5-35, have been redesignated as art. IX, §§ 5-251-5-265, at the editor's discretion. 

Sec. 5-251. - Title. 
    This article shall be known as the city smoke-free air ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-21, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-252. - Finding and intent. 
(a)  The city board of commissioners does hereby find that: 
(1)  Numerous studies have found that tobacco smoke is a major contributor to indoor air pollution, and that breathing secondhand smoke (also known as environmental tobacco smoke) is a cause of disease in healthy nonsmokers, including heart disease, stroke, respiratory disease, and lung cancer. The National Cancer Institute determined in 1999 (Monograph #10) that secondhand smoke is responsible for the early deaths of 65,000 Americans annually. 
(2)  The Public Health Service's National Toxicology Program has listed secondhand smoke as a known carcinogen (U.S. DHHS, 2000, Citing Cal. EPA, 1997). 
(3)  Secondhand smoke is particularly hazardous to elderly people, individuals with cardiovascular disease, and individuals with impaired respiratory function, including asthmatics and those with obstructive airway disease. Children exposed to secondhand smoke have an increased risk of asthma, respiratory infections, sudden infant death syndrome, developmental abnormalities and cancer. 
(4)  The Americans With Disabilities Act, which requires that disabled persons have access to public places and workplaces, deems impaired respiratory function to be a disability. 
(5)  The U.S. Surgeon General has determined that the simple separation of smokers and nonsmokers within the same air space may reduce, but does not eliminate, the exposure of nonsmokers to secondhand smoke. The Environmental Protection Agency has determined that secondhand smoke cannot be reduced to safe levels by high rates of ventilation. Air cleaners, which are only capable of filtering the particulate matter and odors in smoke, do not eliminate the known toxins in secondhand smoke. 
(6)  A significant amount of secondhand smoke exposure occurs in the workplace. Employees who work in smoke-filled offices suffer a 25 to 50 percent higher risk of heart attack and higher rates of death from cardiovascular disease and cancer, as well as increased acute respiratory disease and measurable decrease in lung function. 
(7)  Smoke-filled workplaces result in higher worker absenteeism due to respiratory disease, lower productivity, higher cleaning and maintenance costs, increased health insurance rates, and increased liability claims for disease related to exposure to secondhand smoke. 
(b)  Accordingly, the city board of commissioners finds and declares that the purposes of this article are: 
(1)  To protect the public health and welfare by prohibiting smoking in all public facilities in the city; and 
(2)  To guarantee the right of nonsmokers to breathe smoke-free air, and to recognize that the need to breathe smoke-free air shall have priority over the desire to smoke. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-22, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-253. - Definitions. 
    The following words and phases, whenever used in this article, shall be construed as defined in this section: 
    Dining area means an enclosed area containing a counter or tables upon which food or snacks are served. 
    Employee means a person who is employed by an employer in consideration for direct or indirect monetary wages or profit, and a person who volunteers his or her services for a non-profit entity. 
    Employer means a person, business, partnership, association, and corporation, including a municipal corporation, trust, or non-profit entity that employs the services of one or more individual persons. 
    Enclosed means all space between a floor and ceiling that is enclosed on all sides by solid walls, doorways or windows, which collectively or singly extend from the floor to the ceiling. 
    Health care facility means an institution providing care or treatment of disease, whether physical, mental, or emotional, or other medical, physiological, or psychological conditions, including but not limited to, hospitals, rehabilitation hospitals or other clinics, nursing homes, homes for the aging or chronically ill, and laboratories. This definition shall include all waiting rooms, hallways, private rooms, semiprivate rooms, and wards within health care facilities. 
    Place of employment means an area under the control of a public employee that employees normally frequent during the course of employment, including, but not limited to, work areas, employee lounges, restrooms, conference rooms, meeting rooms, classrooms, employee cafeterias, hallways, and vehicles. 
    Public facility means a building, including a part of a building, or vehicle owned, leased, or operated by the city. Buildings owned by the city but leased or licensed to another individual or entity are not included in the term "public facility". 
    Service line means an indoor line in which one or more persons are waiting for or receiving service of any kind, whether or not the services involves the exchange of money. 
    Smoking means inhaling, exhaling, burning, or carrying any lighted cigar, cigarette, pipe, weed, plant, or other combustible substance in any manner or in any form. 
    Sports arena means sports pavilions, stadiums, gymnasiums, health spas, boxing arenas, swimming pools, city recreational facilities, roller and ice rinks, bowling alleys and other similar places where members of the general public assemble either to engage in physical exercise, participate in athletic competition or witness sports or other events. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-23, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-254. - Prohibition on smoking in public facilities. 
    Smoking shall be prohibited in all enclosed public facilities in the city. This prohibition shall apply to all areas in those facilities, whether used as a place of employment or as a place for the conduct of public business, and shall include, without limitation, the following places: 
(1)  Galleries, libraries and museums 
(2)  Childcare and adult day care facilities. 
(3)  Convention facilities. 
(4)  Dining areas. 
(5)  Elevators. 
(6)  Facilities primarily used for exhibiting a motion picture, stage, drama, lecture, musical recital, or other similar performance. 
(7)  Health care facilities. 
(8)  Polling places. 
(9)  Public transportation facilities, including buses and taxicabs, under the authority of the city, and ticket, boarding, and waiting areas of pubic transit depots. 
(10)  Restrooms, lobbies, reception areas, hallways, and other common-use areas. 
(11)  Rooms, chambers, places of meeting or public assembly under the control of an agency, board, commission, committee or council of the city board of commissioner when a public meeting is in progress, to the extent the place is subject to the jurisdiction of the city board of commissioners. 
(12)  Service lines. 
(13)  Sports arenas, including enclosed places in outdoor arenas. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-24, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-255. - Reasonable distance. 
    Smoking is prohibited within a reasonable distance of 25 feet outside an enclosed area where smoking is prohibited, so as to insure that tobacco smoke does not enter the area through entrances, windows, ventilation systems, or other means. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-25, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-256. - Where smoking not regulated. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article to the contrary, the following areas shall be exempt from the provisions of section 5-254. 
(1)  Private residences. 
(2)  Private and semiprivate rooms in nursing homes and long-term care facilities that are occupied by one or more persons, all of whom are smokers and have requested in writing to be placed in a room where smoking is permitted. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-26, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-257. - Posting of signs 
(a)  "No Smoking" signs or the international "No Smoking" symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) shall be clearly and conspicuously posted by the city manager in every public facility where smoking is prohibited by this article. 
(b)  Every public facility where smoking is prohibited by this article including every dining area within such a facility, shall have posted at every entrance a conspicuous sign clearly stating that smoking is prohibited. 
(c)  The city manager shall remove all ashtrays and other smoking paraphernalia from any area where smoking is prohibited by this article. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-27, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-258. - Nonretaliation. 
    The city shall not discharge, refuse to hire, or in any manner retaliate against an employee, applicant for employment, or customer because that employee, applicant, or customer exercised any rights afforded by this article or reports or attempts to prosecute a violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-28, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-259. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the city police department or other agency or agencies as may from time to time be designated by vote of the city board of commissioners. 
(b)  Any citizen who desires to register a complaint under this article may initiate enforcement with the city manager. 
(c)  A manager, operator, or employee of a public facility regulated by this article shall inform persons violating this article of the appropriate provisions thereof. 
(d)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, an employee or private citizen may bring legal action to enforce this article. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-29, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-260. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  A person who smokes in an area where smoking is prohibited by the provisions of this article shall be guilty of an infraction, punishable by a fine not exceeding $50.00. 
(b)  Each separate occasion on which a violation of this article occurs shall be considered a separate and distinct violation whether occurring on the same day or not, and shall be subject to a separate and additional fine. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-30, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-261. - Public education. 
    The city manager shall engage in a continuing program to explain and clarify the purposes and requirements of this article to citizens affected by it, and to guide operators and managers in their compliance with it. The program may include publication of a brochure explaining the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-31, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-262. - Governmental agency cooperation. 
    The city manager shall annually request other governmental and educational agencies having facilities within the city to establish local operating procedures in cooperation and compliance with this article. This includes urging all federal, state, county and school district agencies to update their existing smoking control regulation to be consistent with the current health findings regarding secondhand smoke. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-32, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-263. - Other applicable laws. 
    This article shall not be interpreted or construed to permit smoking where it is otherwise restricted by other applicable laws. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-33, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-264. - Severability. 
    In any provision, clause, sentence, or paragraph of this article or the application thereof to any person or circumstance shall be held invalid, that invalidity shall not affect the other provisions of this article which can be given effect without the invalid provision or application, and to this end the provisions of this article are declared to be severable. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-34, 6-4-2003) 
Sec. 5-265. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be effective 30 days from and after the date of its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 956, § 5-35, 6-4-2003) 
Chapter 6 - CABLE TELEVISION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The provisions of this chapter are subject to the Federal Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984. 
Cross reference- Poles and wires, § 19-61 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to grant franchises, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7). 

Sec. 6-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Cable Television Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 810, § 1, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-2. - Purpose and policy. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To provide for the franchising, construction, installation, operation and regulation of cable television systems within the city; 
(2)  To ensure quality television programming and reception at reasonable cost to local residents; 
(3)  To limit cable television franchisees to a fair return on investment capital, so far as practicable; and 
(4)  To secure thereby to local residents the opportunity for enhanced benefits of television media communications and technological advances in such media. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 2, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-3. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    Basic subscriber service means the transmission to subscribers of those television channel signals which a franchisee provides, including FCC mandated service and any discretionary service as determined by the franchisee, for the minimum charge offered by the franchisee, as limited by regulation by the commission. 
    Basic subscriber service rate means the fixed rate which the commission permits a franchisee to charge for basic subscriber service. 
    Cable television system means a system consisting of coaxial cables and other conductors and associated generation, reception, transmission and control equipment, under common ownership and control, designed to distribute to subscribers the signals of television broadcast stations and programs received via satellite, microwave, video tape, video disc or produced by the cable system. 
    Commission means the elected governing authority of the city. 
    Company and franchisee shall mean any person granted a franchise by the commission to construct, install and operate a cable television system pursuant to this chapter. 
    FCC means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Franchise and franchise agreement mean, respectively, the right or privilege granted to a company pursuant to this chapter to operate a cable television system and the legal document evidencing such grant of franchise. 
    Gross subscriber service revenues means all monthly service revenues received by a company from the operation of its cable television system within the city including, but not limited to, that portion of monthly revenues from pay television service retained by the company. 
    Pay television service means television service provided to subscribers other than basic subscriber service, at the option of the subscriber, for a charge in addition to the basic subscriber service rate. 
    Subscriber means any person whose premises are physically wired to receive transmissions from a cable television system. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 3, 8-17-1984) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 6-4. - Franchise required. 
    No person shall be allowed to occupy or use the public streets, ways, alleys, places or easements within the city for the purpose of construction, installation or operation of a cable television system without first having been granted a franchise in the form of an agreement with the city, by the commission pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 4, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-5. - Franchise rights subject to police powers. 
    A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be subject to the police power of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and the company shall be required to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 5, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-6. - Duration of franchises. 
    The term of a franchise shall be ten years, unless sooner terminated by mutual agreement or pursuant to the forfeiture provisions hereof, and such franchise shall be renewable for successive terms of ten years so long as the commission shall deem such renewal to be in the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 6, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-7. - Subject to provisions of ordinances, other laws. 
    A franchise, and any renewal thereof, shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter and amendments hereof and all laws, rules and regulations of the state and of the United States. All laws, rules and regulations of the state and of the United States shall be deemed to be a part of this chapter and shall be controlling in the event of any conflict, and this chapter and amendments hereof shall be deemed to be part of any franchise granted pursuant hereto and shall be controlling in the event of any conflict. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 7, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-8. - Scope of franchise. 
    A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall be nonexclusive and shall grant to the company the right and privilege to construct, install, operate and maintain in, upon, along, across, above, over and under the public streets, ways, alleys, places and easements now laid out or dedicated and all such additions thereto in the city, such poles, wires, underground cables, conduits, and other television conductors and fixtures necessary for the operation and maintenance of a cable television system. The city expressly reserves the right to grant similar uses of such public streets, ways, alleys, places and easements to any other company at any time during the term of a franchise, and a franchise shall be restricted to the corporate territorial limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 8, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-9. - Use of existing poles. 
    A company shall use existing public utility poles for its distribution system so far as practicable, provided that satisfactory rental agreements can be obtained with the owner thereof. When the use of existing poles is not practicable or a satisfactory rental agreement cannot be obtained, a company may request that the commission authorize the company to erect and maintain its own poles, and if such authority is granted, the location and physical characteristics of such poles shall be subject to approval by the city manager or the commission. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 9, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-10. - Poles and wires not to interfere with public use of streets. 
(a)  A company's poles, cables and appurtenances shall be located, erected and maintained so as not to endanger persons or interfere with the public use of city streets, ways, alleys and places or with existing or new improvements the city may deem proper to make. At the request of the city a company shall move and relocate any of its installation including poles, at the company's expense, in order to avoid such interference. The city shall be the sole judge of what constitutes interference. Construction and maintenance of the cable television system, including house connections, shall be done in accordance with provisions of the National Electric Safety Code, the National Electrical Code and applicable ordinances of the city. 
(b)  Upon the request of any private party holding an appropriate permit issued by the city, a company shall temporarily raise or lower its lines to permit the moving of any building or other structure, and the actual expense of the same shall be paid by the party requesting the same. 
(c)  Installation and house connection hardware shall be uniform throughout the city, except that a company shall change its hardware and its installation procedure to implement improvements in the industry. This provision will not require a company to modify installations already made unless such existing installations provide inferior television reception. 
(d)  In those areas where telephone and electric service lines are underground, a company shall place its cables and service lines underground unless approval to place the cable and service lines on poles is secured from the commission. The commission may authorize a company to place cables and service lines underground in areas where poles are located. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 10, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-11. - Use of poles by city. 
    The city shall have joint use of any and all poles owned by a company, free of any expense therefor, for any lawful public purpose, provided that such use will not interfere with the free use and enjoyment of the company's own wires and fixtures, and the city shall hold the company harmless from any and all actions, causes of action, or damage directly or indirectly caused by the placing of the city's wires or appurtenances upon such poles. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 11, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-12. - Repair of damage to public property. 
(a)  In the maintenance and operation of its cable television system in the public streets, ways, alleys, places and easements, and in the course of any new construction or addition to its facilities, a company shall proceed so as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the general public; any opening or obstruction in the streets or other public places made by a company in the course of its operations shall be made only after having obtained written permission to do so from the city manager, and from the proper state official if a state-controlled right-of-way is involved. All such work shall be guarded and protected at all times by the placement of adequate signs and barriers, fences, or boardings, the bounds of which shall be clearly designated by appropriate warning lights during periods of dusk and darkness. 
(b)  All work in any way necessitated by the business of a company which may involve the opening, breaking up or tearing up of a portion of a street, sidewalk or other part of any public property, shall be done and repaired in a manner approved by the city manager. Such repairs may be performed by the city at the expense of the company if mutually agreed upon by the city and the company or if the company refuses to repair the streets, sidewalks or other public property promptly or fails to repair the public property in a satisfactory manner. 
(c)  Nothing in this chapter shall grant to a company any right of property in public property, and the city shall not be required to maintain any public property any longer than, or in any manner other than, the city's public business or needs may require. 
(d)  In the event any public street, way, alley, place or easement or any portion thereof used by a company shall be vacated by the city or the use thereof discontinued by the city during the term of a franchise, the company shall immediately remove all of its facilities therefrom, except for buried cables unless the city specifically requires such buried cables to be removed; and upon the removal of such facilities, the company shall restore, repair or reconstruct the area where such removal has occurred to such condition as the city may require. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 12, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-13. - Technical standards generally. 
    Installations shall be made and maintained so as not to interfere with television reception already in existence. Installation and maintenance of equipment shall be such that standard color signals transmitted to any subscriber receiver shall be essentially of the same quality as received at the antenna site. A company shall make all reasonable and practicable improvements in its services as advances in technology shall warrant, and shall make every reasonable effort to eliminate interferences in signals distributed to subscribers. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 13, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-14. - Local office required. 
    A company shall maintain an office in the city which shall have an adequate staff of personnel and be open at least five days per week except holidays, and shall maintain a 24-hour telephone-answering service in the city. Such office shall have and maintain at all times adequate equipment and a sufficient supply of materials to assure prompt repairs to the system as needed. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 14, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-15. - Insurance required. 
    A company shall indemnify, protect and save harmless the city at all times during the franchise term and any renewal thereof from and against losses and physical damages to property and bodily injury or death to persons, including payments made under any workmen's compensation law, which may arise out of or be caused by the erection, maintenance, presence, use or removal of attachments on poles within the city, or by any act of the company, its agents or employees arising out of the operations of the company. A company shall carry insurance with an insurer authorized to do business in this state to protect itself and the city from and against all claims, demands, actions, judgments, costs, expenses, and liabilities which may arise or result, directly or indirectly from or by reason of such loss, injury or damage. The minimum amounts of such general liability insurance shall be $50,000.00 for property damage per occurrence, $300,000.00 for personal injury per person and $500,000.00 for personal injury per occurrence. A company shall also carry liability insurance on its vehicles in minimum amounts of $25,000.00 for property damage per occurrence, $100,000.00 for personal injury per person, and $300,000.00 for personal injury per occurrence. Worker's compensation insurance shall be maintained as required by the laws of the state. All insurance required by this chapter shall be kept in full force and effect for the entire term of a franchise. Such policy or policies of insurance or a certified copy or copies thereof shall be filed with and subject to approval of the city manager. Each policy of insurance shall state therein that the city shall be indemnified and saved harmless from and against all losses, damages, actions, court costs and attorneys fees arising out of actions of the company, its officials, employees, agents and contractors in the construction, installation or maintenance of the cable television system, and that the insurance carrier shall give the city 30 days' advance notice of termination of any policy furnished hereunder. Further, a company shall indemnify, save harmless and defend the city against all copyright and patent infringement matters which may arise out of operation of the cable television system. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 15, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-16. - Assignment or transfer of franchise. 
    A franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall not be assigned or transferred without prior approval of the commission, which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 16, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-17. - Annual report and audit. 
(a)  At the end of each calendar year during the franchise term, a company shall have prepared by an engineer or an engineering firm qualified in cable communications and approved by the city an annual performance report, which shall be sufficient to ascertain the company's compliance with FCC technical standards and the quality of the company's overall performance. Such report shall summarize all subscriber complaints and their resolutions and shall be submitted to the commission on or before April 1 of each year. In the event that such report indicates that the franchisee is not providing a quality service consistent with FCC rules or that subscriber complaints are so numerous or unresolved as to indicate a poor quality service, the commission may declare a forfeiture of the franchise after reasonable notice and hearing. 
(b)  At the end of each calendar year during the franchise term, a company shall have prepared by a certified public accountant an annual financial audit which shall be sufficient to ascertain the financial condition of the company and its profits and return on investment capital. Such audit report shall be submitted to the commission on or before April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 17, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-18. - Regulation of basic service tier rates and charges. 
(a)  The city will follow the Federal Communications Commission rate regulations in the city's regulation of the basic service tier rates and the charges for related equipment, installation and services of any cable television system operating in the city, notwithstanding any different or inconsistent provisions in the franchise agreement between the city and the franchisee. 
(b)  In connection with regulation by the city pursuant to subsection (a) of this section, the city will ensure a reasonable opportunity for consideration of the views of interested parties. 
(Ord. No. 914, § 1, 9-1-1993) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 914, § 1, adopted Sept. 1, 1993, repealed former § 6-18 and added a new § 6-18 to read as herein set out. Former § 6-18 pertained to basic subscriber service rates and derived from Ord. No. 810, § 18, adopted Aug. 17, 1984. 
Sec. 6-19. - Complaints and disputes. 
    A company shall adopt procedures for the investigation and resolution of complaints and disputes concerning the company's cable television operations, and such procedures shall be subject to approval by the commission. Upon approval, the company shall promptly furnish to each subscriber notice of such procedures. The company shall maintain a local office and agent for the purpose of investigating and resolving all complaints or disputes regarding bills, the quality of service, equipment malfunction and similar matters concerning the operation of the cable television system. A record will be made of all complaints received showing the name of the complaining party, the complaint, and the action taken to resolve the complaint. The resolution of such complaints shall be fair and equitable and shall be subject to review by the city manager. In the event that a complaint or dispute cannot be resolved between the company and the subscriber, the company or the subscriber shall have the right to refer the same to the city manager for decision, and the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 19, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-20. - Franchise fee. 
    A company shall pay to the city a franchise fee equal to the maximum percentage now or hereafter permitted by the FCC, including any increases in such maximum fee as may be hereafter permitted by the FCC, of gross subscriber service revenues as defined hereinabove. Such fee shall be paid on a semi-annual basis, on or before July 31 for the period of January through June, and on or before January 31 for the period of July through December. In the event that such fee is not paid when due, the amount thereof shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum until paid. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 20, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-21. - Forfeiture of franchise. 
    The city shall have authority after reasonable notice and hearing, to terminate and cancel any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter, and declare a forfeiture of the same, in the event that a company: 
(1)  Violates any provision of this chapter, as it may be amended from time to time or any rule, order, or determination of the commission made pursuant to this chapter except where such violation is committed without fault, or through excusable neglect; 
(2)  Becomes insolvent or unable or unwilling to pay its debts or is adjudged bankrupt; 
(3)  Attempts to evade any of the provisions of this chapter or the franchise or practices any fraud or deceit upon the city; 
(4)  Fails to secure a certificate of compliance from the FCC or any other necessary license or permit within four months of the acceptance of a franchise; 
(5)  Fails to exhibit substantial progress toward the completion of the construction of the system for a period of three consecutive calendar months; or 
(6)  Fails to pay to the city the franchise fee provided hereinabove after written notice that a payment is overdue. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 21, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-22. - Miscellaneous provisions. 
(a)  The city shall have access at all reasonable hours to all of a company's plans, contracts, and engineering records, records showing the company's charges for pay television and basic subscriber service, statistical, customer and service records relating to the property and the operation of the company and to all other records which it may keep in the course of its business. 
(b)  A copy of any and all rules, regulations, terms and conditions adopted by a company for the conduct of its business shall be filed with the city manager, and a copy shall also be available for public inspection at the company's local office. 
(c)  A franchise shall not in any way be construed as a license or permit to a company to engage in the sale or service of radio or television sets or equipment. A franchisee shall be expressly prohibited from engaging in the sale or service of television sets, appliances or parts within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 22, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-23. - Vested rights. 
    This chapter shall not be construed or applied so as to impair the vested rights of any person or entity, including vested rights held pursuant to any franchise heretofore granted for the operation of a cable television system prior to the adoption hereof, provided, however, that this chapter shall become fully binding upon such franchisee having vested rights upon the expiration or renewal of the franchise. 
(Ord. No. 810, § 23, 8-17-1984) 
Sec. 6-24. - Conflicting provisions. 
    In the event of any conflict between any provision of this chapter and any federal statute or any regulation of the Federal Communications Commission, the federal statute or regulation shall be controlling. 
(Ord. No. 914, § 2, 9-1-1993) 
Chapter 7 - CEMETERIES AND BURIALS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 933, adopted Apr. 15, 1998, repealed ch. 7 of the Code in its entirety and enacted new provisions as ch. 7 as herein set out. Former ch. 7, § 7-1, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from the 1953 Code, § 11.2. 
Cross reference- Public works department, § 2-216 et seq. 
State Law reference- Cemeteries generally, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-130 et seq. 

Sec. 7-1. - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term: 
    Cemetery means any land or structure in this city dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for interment of human remains by way of earth interment, i.e., burial, or by mausoleum or crypt interment, or some combination thereof. It does not include fraternal cemeteries, church and synagogue cemeteries or private family burial plots. 
    Grave means a space in the ground in a cemetery designated for use as a place used or to be used for burial of human remains in the earth. 
    Mausoleum means a structure or building located within a cemetery and which is substantially exposed above the ground and which is used or intended to be used for interment of human remains in crypts or niches located above ground. 
    Pauper means a person, identified or unknown, as to whom the city manager or city manager's designee has been furnished evidence that such person died in a state of indigence leaving no estate to pay for funerary services and burial, and for whom there does not appear any charitable or other available source of financial or other assistance for meeting the cost of funerary and burial costs. 
(Ord. No. 933, 4-15-1998) 
Sec. 7-2. - Portion of each cemetery to be set apart for the burial of strangers and of transient or resident paupers. 
    There shall be set apart in every cemetery, under the direction of the city commission, a portion of such cemetery for the burial of strangers and of transient or resident paupers. 
(Ord. No. 933, 4-15-1998) 
Sec. 7-3. - Burial requirements; when effective. 
(a)  All burials in any cemetery grave within the corporate limits of the city shall be carried out by way of an excavation of sufficient depth that the uppermost portion of the casket, or in the event a vault is used, the uppermost portion of the vault, is buried and covered by earth to a level at least 12 inches below the finish grade of the burial plot. This is not intended to prohibit or preclude interment of human remains in an above-ground mausoleum located within a cemetery in this city. This does not preclude the owner of a cemetery from establishing a different rule as to minimum depth for burials by way of rules or regulations adopted, maintained and posted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 44-3-141. 
(b)  The provisions of subsection (b) of this section shall take effect, and apply to all burials occurring on or after June 1, 1998. 
(Ord. No. 933, 4-15-1998) 
Chapter 8 - DOCKS, HARBORS AND WATERCRAFT 
ARTICLE I. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 8-1. - Title. 
(a)  This article shall be know and may be cited as the Brunswick Boat Safety Ordinance. This article is enacted pursuant to and in compliance with the Georgia Boat Safety Act, O.C.G.A § 52-7-21. 
(b)  It is not the intent of the city in enacting this article to abrogate or in any way impair or interfere with the existing provisions of the Georgia Boat Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 52-7-1 et seq. This article shall be interpreted to always be in compliance with the Georgia Boat Safety Act and all department of natural resources rules and regulations passed pursuant to the Act. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the term: 
    Blind point means that portion of any of the waters of this state in which there is a natural or manmade obstruction which prevents the operator of a vessel from seeing vessels approaching from the opposite side of the obstruction, thus creating a safety hazard which could result in a boating accident. 
    Board means the board of natural resources. 
    Boat livery means a business which holds any vessel for renting, leasing, or chartering. 
    Commissioner means the commissioner of natural resources. 
    Dealer means any person engaged in the business of manufacturing vessels or selling new or used vessels at an established place of business. 
    Department means the department of natural resources. 
    Discharged means, and shall include, spilled, leaked, pumped, poured, emitted, or dumped. 
    Hazardous area means any area which the commissioner has designated as such because of conditions which create a threat to the safety and welfare of boaters who may operate in such area. 
    Holding tank means any container which is designed to receive and hold sewage and other wastes discharged from a marine toilet and which is constructed and installed in such a manner that it can only be emptied by pumping out the contents of such holding tank. 
    Homemade vessel means any vessel that is built by an individual for personal use from raw materials that does not require the assignment of a federal hull identification number by a manufacturer pursuant to federal law. A person furnishing raw materials under a contract may be considered the builder of a homemade vessel. Antique boats, boats reconstructed from existing boat hulls, and rebuilt or reconstructed vessels are not considered homemade vessels. 
    Hull identification number or HIN means a number assigned to vessels by the manufacturer of the vessel or by the issuing authority of a state as required by the United States Coast Guard in accordance with federal law. 
    Idle speed means a slow speed maintained by the operator of a mechanically propelled vessel reached by engaging the engine of the vessel into said speed by reducing the throttle to a minimum. 
    Issuing authority means, as to this state, the department of natural resources; and, as to other states, the state if it has a numbering system approved by the United States Coast Guard or the United States Coast Guard if the state that does not have an approved numbering system. 
    Marine toilet includes any equipment for installation on board a vessel which is designed to receive, retain, treat, or discharge sewage and any process to treat such sewage. A marine toilet must be equipped with a holding tank which can be emptied only by pumping out. 
    Mechanically propelled vessel means, for the purpose of determining fire extinguisher requirements, those vessels propelled by machinery using a volatile liquid for fuel. 
    Nonmotorized vessel means any vessel other than a sailboat which has no motor attached in a manner to make it readily available for operation. 
    No wake means that the wake or wash created by the movement of the vessel through the water is minimal. 
    Operate means to navigate or otherwise use a vessel which is not at anchor or moored, including vessels which are being paddled, are drifting, or are being powered by machinery. 
    Operator means the person who operates or has charge of the navigation or use of a vessel. 
    Owner means a person, other than a lienholder, having the property in or title to a vessel. The term includes a person entitled to the use or possession of a vessel subject to an interest in another person reserved or created by agreement and securing payment or performance of an obligation but the term excludes a lessee under a lease not intended as security. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, firm, corporation, association, or other legal entity. 
    Personal flotation device means any lifesaving device classified and approved as Type I, Type II, Type III, Type IV, or Type V (Hybrid) by the United States Coast Guard. 
    Portable marine toilet means any device which is movable or portable and is not permanently installed on a vessel and which is designed to receive and temporarily retain sewage. 
    Power boat means any boat, vessel, or water-going craft which is propelled by mechanical rather than manual means whether or not such propulsion device forms an integral part of the structure thereof. 
    Protected fresh waters means the waters of Lake Allatoona, Lake Blackshear, Clarks Hill Lake, Hartwell Lake, Lake Sidney Lanier, Lake Oconee, Lake Seminole, Lake Sinclair, Russell Lake, Walter F. George Reservoir, and West Point Lake. 
    Reportable boating accident means an accident, collision, or other casualty involving a vessel subject to this article which results in loss of life, injury sufficient to cause incapacitation for at least 24 hours, or actual physical damage to property, including vessels, in excess of $2,000.00. 
    Sailboard means any sailboat whose unsupported mast is connected by a swivel or a flexible universal joint to a hull similar to the hull of a surfboard. 
    Sewage means human body wastes and the waste from toilets and other receptacles intended to receive or retain body wastes. 
    Undocumented vessel means a vessel which is not required to have and does not have a valid marine document issued by the United States Coast Guard or federal agency successor thereto. 
    Vessel means every description of watercraft, other than a seaplane on the water or a sailboard, used or capable of being used as a means of transportation on water and specifically includes, but is not limited to, inflatable rafts and homemade vessels; provided, however, section 8-11 relating to rules of the road for boat traffic, shall be applicable to sailboards. 
    Waters of this state means any waters within the territorial limits of this state and the marginal sea adjacent to this state and the high seas when navigated as a part of a journey or ride to or from the shore of this state. This definition shall not include privately owned ponds or lakes not open to the public. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-3. - Classification of vessels; required equipment. 
(a)  Classification. Vessels subject to the provisions of this article shall be divided into four classes as follows: 
(1) Class A ..... Less than 16 feet in length (2) Class 1 ..... 16 feet or over and less than 26 feet in length (3) Class 2 ..... 26 feet or over and less than 40 feet in length (4) Class 3 ..... 40 feet or more in length  
(b)  Lights. Every vessel in all weathers from sunset to sunrise shall carry and exhibit lights as provided by regulations of the board. 
(c)  Whistle or horn. Every vessel of Class 2 or 3 shall be provided with an efficient whistle or horn or other sound-producing mechanical appliance capable of producing signals required by the rules for the prevention of collision enacted by Congress. 
(d)  Lifesaving devices. 
(1)  Every vessel shall be equipped with and carry aboard, at all times, at least one Type I, II, III, or V (hybrid) personal flotation device for each person on board; provided, however, Type V (hybrid) devices are acceptable only when worn and securely fastened. In addition to the individual personal flotation device, each vessel 16 feet or more in length, except for canoes and kayaks, must at all times be equipped with at least one Type IV (throwable) device. 
(2)  No person may use a vessel upon the waters of this state unless the personal flotation devices as required in subsection (1) of this subsection are readily accessible to the occupants of the vessel, are in good and serviceable condition, are legibly marked with the United States Coast Guard approved number, and are of an appropriate size for the occupants of the vessel for whom they are intended; provided, however, that provisions of this subsection shall not apply to racing sculls, racing shells, and racing sweeps. 
(3)  No person shall operate a moving vessel upon the waters of this state with a child under age ten on board such vessel unless the child is wearing an appropriately sized personal flotation device, as required by this subsection to be on board the vessel. This requirement shall not apply when the child is within a fully enclosed roofed cabin or other fully enclosed roofed compartment or structure on the vessel. 
(e)  Fire extinguishers. 
(1)  Every mechanically propelled Class A and Class 1 vessel, constructed so as to have enclosed areas which permit entrapment of gases or vapors, shall carry aboard one Type B-I United States Coast Guard approved hand portable fire extinguisher unless there is a United States Coast Guard approved fixed fire-extinguishing system installed in the machinery space. When such a fixed fire-extinguishing system is installed in the machinery space, no hand portable fire extinguisher will be required. 
(2)  Every mechanically propelled Class 2 vessel, regardless of construction, shall carry aboard two Type B-I or one Type B-II United States Coast Guard approved hand portable fire extinguisher. When a United States Coast Guard approved fixed fire-extinguishing system is installed in the machinery space, one less Type B-I hand portable fire extinguisher is required. 
(3)  Every mechanically propelled Class 3 vessel, regardless of construction, shall carry aboard three Type B-I or one Type B-I and one Type B-II United States Coast Guard approved hand portable fire extinguisher. When a United States Coast Guard approved fixed fire-extinguishing system is installed in the machinery space, one less Type B-I hand portable fire extinguisher is required. 
(4)  The carriage of any dry stored pressure fire extinguishers not fitted with pressure gauges or indicating devices or any vaporizing liquid fire extinguishers containing carbon tetrachloride, chloromethane, or any other toxic vaporizing liquids is prohibited. 
(5)  The carriage of any United States Coast Guard approved hand portable fire extinguisher or any fixed fire extinguishing system which is not fully charged shall be prohibited. 
(f)  Equipment exemptions in authorized races. Subsections (c) and (e) of this Code section shall not apply to vessels while competing in any race conducted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 52-7-19 or, if such vessels are designed and intended solely for racing, while engaged in such navigation as is incidental to the tuning up of the boats and engines for the race. 
(g)  Flame arrester for carburetor. Every vessel shall have the carburetor or carburetors of every engine therein, except outboard motors using gasoline as fuel, equipped with an efficient United States Coast Guard approved flame arrester, backfire trap, or other similar device. 
(h)  Ventilation. Every such vessel, except open boats, using as fuel any liquid of a volatile nature, shall be provided with means for properly and efficiently ventilating the bilges of the engine and fuel tank compartments so as to remove any explosive or flammable gases. 
(i)  Rules and regulations. No person shall operate or give permission for the operation of a vessel which is not equipped as required by this article or the rules and regulations of the department made pursuant thereto. 
(j)  Sale of personal flotation devices. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale within this state any personal flotation device which is not United States Coast Guard approved unless such device is clearly marked as follows: "Notice: This personal flotation device is not United States Coast Guard approved." As used in this Code section, the words "personal flotation device" shall not include flotation devices such as plastic toys, rafts, and other devices used for recreational purposes in or around swimming pools, lakes, or beaches when such devices are easily recognizable as not being designed or intended for use as lifesaving devices. Any person who violates this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-4. - Restrictions on operation of personal watercraft. 
(a)  As used in this Code section, the term: 
(1)  Accompanied by means in the physical presence within the vessel of a person who is not under the influence of alcohol or drugs to a degree which would constitute a violation of section 8-6 were such person operating the vessel. 
(2)  Class A vessel means a boat less than 16 feet in length. 
(3)  Personal watercraft means a Class A vessel which: 
(A)  Has an outboard motor or which has an inboard motor which uses an internal combustion engine powering a water jet pump as its primary source of motive propulsion; 
(B)  Is designed with the concept that the operator and passenger ride on the outside surfaces of the vessel as opposed to riding inside the vessel; and 
(C)  Has the probability that the operator and passenger may, in the normal course of use, fall overboard. 
Such term includes, without limitation, any vessel where the operator and passenger ride on the outside surfaces of the vessel, even if the primary source of motive propulsion is a propeller, and any vessels commonly known as a "jet ski." 
(4)  Under the direct supervision means within sight of and within 400 yards of a person who is not under the influence of alcohol or drugs to a degree which would constitute a violation of section 8-6 were such person operating the vessel and who is aware of his or her supervisory responsibility. 
(b)  No person shall operate or give permission to operate personal watercraft on the waters of this state unless each person aboard such personal watercraft is wearing a United States Coast Guard approved personal flotation device, Type I, Type II, Type III, or Type V. Each such personal flotation device must be properly fastened, in good and serviceable condition, and the proper size for the person wearing it. 
(c)  No person shall rent, lease, or let for hire a personal watercraft to any person under the age of 16 years. 
(d)  No person shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters of this state after sunset or before sunrise unless such person is engaged in the enforcement of the laws of this state or this nation. 
(e)  No person shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters of this state unless such personal watercraft is equipped with a self-circling device or a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch. 
(f)  No person shall operate on the waters of this state a personal watercraft which has been equipped by the manufacturer with a lanyard-type engine cutoff switch unless the lanyard and the switch are operational and unless the lanyard is attached to the operator, the operator's clothing, or a personal flotation device worn by the operator. 
(g)  No person shall operate on the waters of this state a personal watercraft which has been equipped by the manufacturer with a self-circling device if the self-circling device or the engine throttle has been altered in any way that would prohibit the self-circling device from operating in its intended manner. 
(h)  It shall be unlawful for any person who owns a personal watercraft or who has charge over or control of a personal watercraft to authorize or knowingly to permit such personal watercraft to be operated in violation of this Code section or of section 8-5. 
(i)  The provisions of this Code section shall not apply to vessels engaged in any activity authorized under O.C.G.A. § 52-7-19. 
(j)  No person shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters of this state at a speed greater than idle speed within 100 feet of any moored or anchored vessel, any vessel adrift, or any wharf, dock, pier, piling, bridge structure or abutment, person in the water, or shoreline adjacent to a full-time or part-time residence, public park, public beach, public swimming area, marina, restaurant, or other public use area. 
(k)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a personal watercraft on the waters of this state while towing a person or persons on water skis, aquaplanes, surfboards, tubes, or any similar device; provided, however, that the provisions of this subsection shall not apply to any personal watercraft designed by the manufacturer to carry three or more persons, provided that such personal watercraft has on board a competent observer in addition to the operator at any time that a person is being towed. 
(l)  On and after June 1, 1995, no person under the age of 16 years shall operate a personal watercraft on the waters of this state; provided, however, that a person age 12 through 15 years may operate a personal watercraft if he or she is accompanied by an adult age 18 or over or he or she has successfully completed a personal watercraft safety program approved by the department or is under direct supervision by an adult age 18 or over. The department may, but shall not be required to, conduct or provide personal watercraft safety courses to the public. 
(m)  On and after July 1, 1995, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or knowingly permit such person's child or ward who is less than 12 years of age or the child or ward of another over whom such person has a permanent or temporary responsibility of supervision if such child or ward is less than 12 years of age to operate a personal watercraft. 
(n)  It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or knowingly permit such person's child or ward who is age 12 through 15 years or the child or ward of another over whom such person has a permanent or temporary responsibility of supervision if such child or ward is age 12 through 15 years to operate a personal watercraft other than in compliance with the provisions of subsection (l) of this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-5. - Operation of watercraft; identification; operation by minors. 
(a)  A person age 16 or over may operate any vessel or personal watercraft on any of the waters of this state, and such person shall have in such vessel proper identification. 
(b)  A person age 14 or 15 may operate: 
(1)  A personal watercraft or nonmotorized Class A vessel on any of the waters of this state in compliance with the provisions of this article; and 
(2)  Any other vessel if such person: 
(A)  Is accompanied by an adult age 18 or over who is authorized to operate such vessel under the provisions of subsection (a) of this Code section; 
(B)  Has completed a safe boating course approved by the department; or 
(C)  Is under direct supervision by an adult age 18 or over. 
(c)  A person age 12 or 13 may operate any Class A vessel utilizing mechanical means of propulsion not exceeding 30 horsepower, under the conditions set forth in subsections (b)(2)(A) through (b)(2)(C) of this Code section. Such person may operate a personal watercraft in compliance with section 8-4, and such person may operate nonmotorized Class A vessels without restriction. 
(d)  No person under the age of 12 shall operate any Class 1, 2, or 3 vessel or any personal watercraft on any of the waters of this state, and no such person shall operate any Class A vessel utilizing mechanical means of propulsion exceeding 30 horsepower. Such person may operate a Class A vessel, other than a personal watercraft, utilizing mechanical means of propulsion not exceeding 30 horsepower only where such person is accompanied by an adult age 18 or over who is authorized to operate such vessel under the provisions of subsection (a) of this Code section. 
(e)  As used in this Code section, the term: 
    Accompanied by means in the physical presence within the vessel of a person who is not under the influence of alcohol or drugs to a degree which would constitute a violation of section 8-6 were such person operating the vessel. 
    Proper identification shall have the same meaning as in subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23, relating to furnishing of alcoholic beverages. 
    Under the direct supervision means within sight of and within 400 yards of a person who is not under the influence of alcohol or drugs to a degree which would constitute a violation of section 8-6 were such person operating the vessel and who is aware of his or her supervisory responsibility. 
(f)  No person having ownership or control of a vessel shall permit another person to operate such vessel in violation of this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-6. - Operation of watercraft while under influence of alcohol or drugs; legal drug use not exempted; blood and other chemical tests; test refusal; owner's liability for allowing another to operate while intoxicated; civil and criminal actions; child endangerment. 
(a)  No person shall operate, navigate, steer, or drive any moving vessel, or be in actual physical control of any moving vessel, nor shall any person manipulate any moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device while: 
(1)  Under the influence of alcohol to the extent that it is less safe for the person to operate, navigate, steer, drive, manipulate, or be in actual physical control of a moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device; 
(2)  Under the influence of any drug to the extent that it is less safe for the person to operate, navigate, steer, drive, manipulate, or be in actual physical control of a moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device; 
(3)  Under the combined influence of alcohol and any drug to the extent that it is less safe for the person to operate, navigate, steer, drive, manipulate, or be in actual physical control of a moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device; 
(4)  The person's alcohol concentration is 0.10 grams or more at any time within three hours after such operating, navigating, steering, driving, manipulating, or being in actual physical control of a moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device from alcohol consumed before such operating, navigating, steering, driving, manipulating, or being in actual physical control ended; or 
(5)  Subject to the provisions of subsection (b) of this Code section, there is any amount of marijuana or a controlled substance, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-13-21, present in the person's blood or urine, or both, including the metabolites and derivatives of each or both without regard to whether or not any alcohol is present in the person's breath or blood. 
(b)  The fact that any person charged with violating this Code section is or has been legally entitled to use a drug shall not constitute a defense against any charge of violating this Code section; provided, however, that such person shall not be in violation of this Code section unless such person is rendered incapable of operating, navigating, steering, driving, manipulating, or being in actual physical control of a moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device safely as a result of using a drug other than alcohol which such person is legally entitled to use. 
(c)  Upon trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while operating, navigating, steering, driving, manipulating, or being in actual physical control of a moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device while under the influence of alcohol or drugs, evidence of the amount of alcohol or drug in a person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance at the alleged time, as determined by a chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substances, shall be admissible. Where such chemical test is made, the following provisions shall apply: 
(1)  Chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance, to be considered valid under this Code section, shall have been performed according to methods approved by the Division of Forensic Sciences of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation and by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Division of Forensic Sciences for this purpose. The Division of Forensic Sciences of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation is authorized to approve satisfactory techniques or methods to ascertain the qualifications and competence of individuals to conduct analyses and to issue permits, which shall be subject to termination or revocation at the discretion of the Division of Forensic Sciences; 
(2)  When a person shall undergo a chemical test at the request of a law enforcement officer under subsection (e) of this Code section, only a physician, registered nurse, laboratory technician, emergency medical technician, or other qualified person may withdraw blood for the purpose of determining the alcoholic content therein, provided that this limitation shall not apply to the taking of breath or urine specimens. No physician, registered nurse, laboratory technician, emergency medical technician, or other qualified person or employer thereof shall incur any civil or criminal liability as a result of the medically proper obtaining of such blood specimens when requested in writing by a law enforcement officer; 
(3)  The person tested may have a physician or a qualified technician, chemist, registered nurse, or other qualified person of his or her own choosing administer a chemical test or tests in addition to any administered at the direction of a law enforcement officer. The justifiable failure or inability to obtain an additional test shall not preclude the admission of evidence relating to the test or tests taken at the direction of a law enforcement officer; and 
(4)  Upon request of the person who shall submit to a chemical test or tests at the request of a law enforcement officer, full information concerning the test or tests shall be made available to such person or such person's attorney. The arresting officer at the time of arrest shall advise the person arrested of his or her rights to a chemical test or tests according to this Code section. 
(d)  Upon the trial of any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person while operating, navigating, steering, driving, manipulating, or being in actual physical control of a moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device while under the influence of alcohol, the amount of alcohol in the person's blood at the time alleged, as shown by chemical analysis of the person's blood, urine, breath, or other bodily substance, shall give rise to the following presumptions: 
(1)  If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of 0.05 grams or less, it shall be presumed that the person was not under the influence of alcohol, as prohibited by paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of this Code section; 
(2)  If there was at that time an alcohol concentration in excess of 0.05 grams but less than 0.08 grams, such fact shall not give rise to any presumption that the person was or was not under the influence of alcohol, as prohibited by subsections (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of this Code section, but such fact may be considered with other competent evidence in determining whether the person was under the influence of alcohol, as prohibited by paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of this Code section; 
(3)  If there was at that time an alcohol concentration of 0.08 grams or more, it shall be presumed that the person was under the influence of alcohol, as prohibited by subsections (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of this Code section; and 
(4)  If there was at that time or within three hours after operating, navigating, steering, driving, manipulating, or being in actual physical control of a moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device from alcohol consumed before such operating, navigating, steering, driving, manipulating, or being in actual physical control ended an alcohol concentration of 0.10 or more grams, the person shall be in violation of subsection (4) of subsection (a) of this Code section. 
(e)  The State of Georgia considers that persons who are under the influence of alcohol or drugs while operating a vessel on the waters of this state constitute a direct and immediate threat to the welfare and safety of the general public. Therefore, any person who operates a vessel upon the waters of this state shall be deemed to have given consent, subject to subsections (c) and (d) of this Code section, to a chemical test or tests of his or her blood, breath, or urine or other bodily substances for the purpose of determining the alcoholic or drug content of his or her blood if arrested for any offense arising out of acts alleged to have been committed while the person was operating, navigating, steering, driving, manipulating, or in actual physical control of a moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard, or similar moving device while under the influence of alcohol or any drug. The test or tests shall be administered at the request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe that the person has been operating or was in actual physical control of a vessel upon the waters of this state while under the influence of alcohol or any drug. Subject to subsections (c) and (d) of this Code section, the requesting law enforcement officer shall designate which of the aforesaid tests shall be administered. 
(f)  Any person who is dead, unconscious, or otherwise in a condition rendering him or her incapable of refusal shall be deemed not to have withdrawn the consent provided by subsection (e) of this Code section, and the test or tests may be administered subject to subsections (c) and (d) of this Code section. 
(g)  If a person refuses, upon the request of a law enforcement officer, to submit to a chemical test designated by the law enforcement officer as provided in subsection (e) of this Code section, no test shall be given; however, such refusal shall be admissible in evidence. 
(h)  In the event of a boating accident involving a fatality, the investigating coroner or medical examiner having jurisdiction shall direct that a chemical blood test to determine blood alcohol concentration (BAC) or the presence of drugs be performed on the dead person or persons and that the results of such test be properly recorded in his or her report. 
(i)  It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vessel knowingly to allow or authorize any person to operate such vessel or to manipulate any water skis, aquaplane, surfboard, or similar device being towed by such vessel when the owner knows or has reasonable grounds to believe that said person is intoxicated or under the influence of alcohol or drugs in violation of this Code section. 
(j)  In any civil or criminal action or proceeding arising out of acts alleged to have been committed by any person in violation of subsection (k) of this Code section, if there was at that time or within three hours after operating, navigating, steering, driving, or being in actual physical control of a moving vessel or personal watercraft from alcohol consumed before such operating, navigating, steering, driving, or being in actual physical control ended an alcohol concentration of 0.02 grams or more in the person's blood, breath, or urine, the person shall be in violation of subsection (k) of this Code section. 
(k)  (1)  A person under the age of 21 shall not operate, navigate, steer, drive, or be in actual physical control of any moving vessel, moving water skis, moving aquaplane, moving surfboard or similar moving device, or personal watercraft while the person's alcohol concentration is 0.02 grams or more at any time within three hours after such operating, navigating, steering, driving, or being in actual physical control from alcohol consumed before such operating, navigating, steering, driving, or being in actual physical control ended. 
(2)  No plea of nolo contendere shall be accepted for any person under the age of 21 charged with a violation of this Code section. 
(l)  A person who violates this Code section while transporting in a moving vessel or personal watercraft or towing on water skis, an aquaplane, a surfboard or similar device a child under the age of 14 years is guilty of the separate offense of endangering a child by operating a moving vessel or personal watercraft under the influence of alcohol or drugs. The offense of endangering a child by operating a moving vessel or personal watercraft under the influence of alcohol or drugs shall not be merged with the offense of operating a vessel under the influence of alcohol or drugs for the purposes of prosecution and sentencing. An offender who is convicted of a violation of this subsection shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of subsection (d) of O.C.G.A. § 16-12-1, relating to the offense of contributing to the delinquency, unruliness, or deprivation of a child. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-7. - Ordering drug or alcohol tests; implied consent notice; reports; suspension; hearing; certificate of inspection. 
(a)  The test or tests required under section 8-6 shall be administered as soon as possible at the request of a law enforcement officer having reasonable grounds to believe that the person has been operating or was in actual physical control of a moving vessel upon the waters of this state in violation of section 8-6 and the officer has arrested such person for a violation of section 8-6, any federal law in conformity with section 8-6, or any local ordinance which is identical to O.C.G.A. § 52-7-12 in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 52-7-21 or the person has been involved in a boating accident resulting in serious injuries or fatalities. Subject to section 8-6, the requesting law enforcement officer shall designate which test shall be administered, provided that the officer shall require a breath test or a blood test and may require a urine test. 
(b)  At the time a chemical test or tests are requested, the arresting officer shall select and read to the person the appropriate implied consent warning from the following: 
(1)  Implied consent notice for suspects under age 21: 
"Georgia law requires you to submit to state administered chemical tests of your blood, breath, urine, or other bodily substances for the purpose of determining if you are under the influence of alcohol or drugs. If you refuse this testing, your privilege to operate a vessel on the waters of this state will be suspended for a minimum period of one year. Your refusal to submit to the required testing may be offered into evidence against you at trial. If you submit to testing, the results of that test or tests may be used against you. If the results of such test or tests indicate an alcohol concentration of 0.02 grams or more or the presence of any illegal drug, your privilege to operate a vessel on the waters of this state may be suspended for a minimum period of one year. After first submitting to the required state tests, you are entitled to additional chemical tests of your blood, breath, urine, or other bodily substances at your own expense and from qualified personnel of your own choosing. Will you submit to the state administered chemical tests of your (designate which tests) under the implied consent law?"; or 
(2)  Implied consent notice for suspects age 21 or over: 
"Georgia law requires you to submit to state administered chemical tests of your blood, breath, urine, or other bodily substances for the purpose of determining if you are under the influence of alcohol or drugs. If you refuse this testing, your privilege to operate a vessel on the waters of this state will be suspended for a minimum period of one year. Your refusal to submit to the required testing may be offered into evidence against you at trial. If you submit to testing, the results of that test or tests may be used against you. If the results of such test or tests indicate an alcohol concentration of 0.10 grams or more or the presence of any illegal drug, your privilege to operate a vessel on the waters of this state may be suspended for a minimum period of one year. After first submitting to the required state tests, you are entitled to additional chemical tests of your blood, breath, urine, or other bodily substances at your own expense and from qualified personnel of your own choosing. Will you submit to the state administered chemical tests of your (designate which tests) under the implied consent law?" 
If any such notice is used by a law enforcement officer to advise a person of his or her rights regarding the administration of chemical testing, such person shall be deemed to have been properly advised of his or her rights under this Code section and under O.C.G.A. § 52-7-16.2 and the results of any chemical test, or the refusal to submit to a test, shall be admitted into evidence against such person. This notice shall be deemed sufficient if such notice read by an arresting officer is substantially complied with. 
(c)  Subsection (b) of this Code section shall apply to any case wherein the request for chemical testing is made regarding an offense committed on or after June 1, 1998. Subsection (b) of this Code section shall not apply to any case wherein the request for chemical testing was made regarding an offense committed prior to June 1, 1998, in which case those provisions of former O.C.G.A. § 52-7-12 governing the admissibility of evidence of results of chemical testing or refusal to submit to chemical testing which were in effect at the time the offense was committed shall apply. 
(d)  If a person under arrest or a person who was involved in any boating accident resulting in serious injuries or fatalities submits to a chemical test upon the request of a law enforcement officer and the test results indicate that a suspension of the privilege of operating a vessel on the waters of this state is required under this Code section, the results shall be reported to the department. Upon the receipt of a sworn report of the law enforcement officer that the officer had reasonable grounds to believe the arrested person had been operating or was in actual physical control of a moving vessel upon the waters of this state in violation of section 8-6 or that such person had been operating or was in actual physical control of a moving vessel upon the waters of this state and was involved in a boating accident involving serious injuries or fatalities and that the person submitted to a chemical test at the request of the law enforcement officer and the test results indicate either an alcohol concentration of 0.10 grams or more or, for a person under the age of 21, an alcohol concentration of 0.02 grams or more, and the vessel being operated was a motorized vessel having ten or more horsepower or was a sailboat more than 12 feet in length, the department shall suspend the person's privilege to operate a vessel upon the waters of this state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 52-7-12.6, subject to review as provided for in this Code section. 
(e)  If a person under arrest or a person who was involved in any boating accident resulting in serious injuries or fatalities refuses, upon the request of a law enforcement officer, to submit to a chemical test designated by the law enforcement officer as provided in subsection (a) of this Code section, no test shall be given; but the law enforcement officer shall report the refusal to the department. Upon the receipt of a sworn report of the law enforcement officer that the officer had reasonable grounds to believe the arrested person had been operating or was in actual physical control of a moving vessel upon the waters of this state in violation of section 8-6 or that such person had been operating or was in actual physical control of a moving vessel upon the waters of this state and was involved in a boating accident which resulted in serious injuries or fatalities and that the person had refused to submit to the test upon the request of the law enforcement officer, and the vessel being operated was a motorized vessel having ten or more horsepower or was a sailboat more than 12 feet in length, the department shall suspend the person's privilege of operating a vessel on the waters of this state for a period of one year. 
(f)  (1)  The law enforcement officer, acting on behalf of the department, shall personally serve the notice of intention to suspend or disqualify the privilege of operating a vessel on the waters of this state of the arrested person or other person refusing such test on such person at the time of the person's refusal to submit to a test or at the time at which such a test indicates that suspension or disqualification is required under this Code section. The officer shall forward to the department the notice of intent to suspend and the sworn report required by subsection (d) or (e) of this Code section within ten calendar days after the date of the arrest of such person. The failure of the officer to transmit the sworn report required by this Code section within ten calendar days shall not prevent the department from accepting such report and utilizing it in the suspension of an operator's privilege as provided in this Code section. 
(2)  If notice has not been given by the arresting officer, the department, upon receipt of the sworn report of such officer, shall suspend the person's privilege to operate a vessel and, by regular mail, at the last known address, notify such person of such suspension. The notice shall inform the person of the grounds of suspension, the effective date of the suspension, and the right to review. The notice shall be deemed received three days after mailing. 
(g)  (1)  A person whose operator's privilege is suspended pursuant to this Code section shall request, in writing, a hearing within ten business days from the date of personal notice or receipt of notice sent by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, or the right to said hearing shall be deemed waived. Within 30 days after receiving a written request for a hearing, the department shall hold a hearing as is provided in Chapter 13 of Title 50, the "Georgia Administrative Procedure Act." The hearing shall be recorded. 
(2)  The scope of the hearing shall be limited to the following issues: 
(A)  (i)  Whether the law enforcement officer had reasonable grounds to believe the person was operating or in actual physical control of a moving vessel while under the influence of alcohol or a controlled substance and was lawfully placed under arrest for violating section 8-6. 
(ii)  Whether the person was involved in a vessel accident or collision resulting in serious injury or fatality; 
(B)  Whether at the time of the request for the test or tests the officer informed the person of the person's implied consent rights and the consequence of submitting or refusing to submit to such test and: 
(i)  Whether the person refused the test; or 
(ii)  Whether a test or tests were administered and the results indicated an alcohol concentration of 0.10 grams or more or, for a person under the age of 21, an alcohol concentration of 0.02 grams or more; and 
(C)  Whether the test or tests were properly administered by an individual possessing a valid permit issued by the Division of Forensic Sciences of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation on an instrument approved by the Division of Forensic Sciences or a test conducted by the Division of Forensic Sciences, including whether the machine at the time of the test was operated with all its electronic and operating components prescribed by its manufacturer properly attached and in good working order, which shall be required. A copy of the operator's permit showing that the operator has been trained on the particular type of instrument used and one of the original copies of the test results or, where the test is performed by the Division of Forensic Sciences, a copy of the crime lab report shall satisfy the requirements of this subparagraph. 
(3)  The hearing officer shall, within five calendar days after such hearing, forward a decision to the department to rescind or sustain the suspension of the person's privilege to operate a vessel on the waters of this state. If no hearing is requested within the ten business days specified in subsection (1) of this subsection, and the failure to request such hearing is due in whole or in part to the reasonably avoidable fault of the person, the right to a hearing shall have been waived. The request for a hearing shall not stay the suspension of the person's privilege to operate a vessel on the waters of this state; provided, however, that if the hearing is timely requested and is not held within 60 days and the delay is not due in whole or in part to the reasonably avoidable fault of the person, the suspension shall be stayed until such time as the hearing is held and the hearing officer's decision is made. 
(4)  In the event the person is acquitted of a violation of section 8-6 or such charge is initially disposed of other than by a conviction or plea of nolo contendere, then the suspension shall be terminated. An accepted plea of nolo contendere shall be entered on the operator's record and shall be considered and counted as a conviction for purposes of any future violations of section 8-6. 
(h)  If the suspension is sustained after such a hearing, the person whose privilege to operate a vessel on the waters of this state has been suspended under this Code section shall have a right to file for a judicial review of the department's final decision, as provided for in Chapter 13 of Title 50, the "Georgia Administrative Procedure Act"; while such appeal is pending, the order of the department shall not be stayed. 
(i)  Each time an approved breath-testing instrument is inspected, the inspector shall prepare a certificate which shall be signed under oath by the inspector and which shall include the following language: 
"This breath-testing instrument (serial no. ____________ ) was thoroughly inspected, tested, and standardized by the undersigned on (date ;daterule;) and all of its electronic and operating components prescribed by its manufacturer are properly attached and are in good working order." 
    When properly prepared and executed, as prescribed in this subsection, the certificate shall, notwithstanding any other provision of law, be self-authenticating, shall be admissible in any court of law, and shall satisfy the pertinent requirements of subsection (1) of subsection (c) of section 8-6 and subsection (g)(2)(C) of this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-8. - Boating safety zones; restrictions on use of motors and operation of houseboats on certain lakes; exceptions. 
(a)  (1)  The following are established as boating safety zones from May 1 through the following September 30: 
(A)  The ocean waters adjacent to Jekyll Island, which shall include all those waters for a distance of 1,000 feet from the high-water mark on Jekyll Beach from the northernmost point to the southernmost point of Jekyll Island; 
(B)  The ocean waters adjacent to Tybee Island Beach, which shall include all those waters for a distance of 1,000 feet from the high-water mark on Tybee Island Beach from the northernmost point to the southernmost point of Tybee Island Beach; 
(C)  The ocean waters adjacent to Saint Simons Island, which shall include all those waters for a distance of 1,000 feet from the high-water mark on Saint Simons Island from the northernmost point to the southernmost point of Saint Simons Island; and 
(D)  The ocean waters adjacent to Sea Island, which shall include all those waters for a distance of 1,000 feet from the high-water mark on Sea Island from the northernmost point to the southernmost point of Sea Island. 
(2)  The following are established as boating safety zones at all times of the year: 
(A)  The area within the marked boundary of any designated swimming area; and 
(B)  The area within the marked boundary upstream or downstream of any dam designated by the commissioner. 
(b)  Except for lifesaving, emergency, law enforcement, or dam operation and maintenance craft, it shall be unlawful to launch, float, or operate: 
(1)  Any power boat within the boundaries of those boating safety zones defined in subsection (a) of this Code section; or 
(2)  Any vessel within the boundaries of those boating safety zones defined in subsections (a)(2)(A) and (a)(2)(B) of this Code section, provided such zones are marked in accordance with the uniform waterway marking system. 
(c)  With the exception of law enforcement crafts, no motor in excess of 9.9 horsepower shall be used on any vessel being operated on the Ogeechee River from the point where it crosses State Highway No. 119 to its point of origin. 
(d)  The operation of any vessel, specifically including a houseboat, with a marine toilet, galley, or sleeping quarters shall be prohibited on Lake Burton, Bull Sluice Lake, Goat Rock Lake, Lake Harding, Lake Jackson, North Highlands Lake, Lake Oliver, Lake Rabun, Seed Lake, Tallulah Falls Lake, Tugalo Lake, Lake Oconee, and Yonah Lake. 
(e)  (1)  No person shall operate or use any vessel within an area designated and appropriately marked as a "hazardous area" unless each person aboard such vessel is wearing a United States Coast Guard approved personal flotation device, which device is designated as a Type I, Type II, Type III, or Type V device. Such device must be properly fastened, in good and serviceable condition, and the proper size for the person wearing the device. 
(2)  The provisions of this subsection shall not affect regulations promulgated by any agency of the federal government related to activities that may or may not be conducted within designated hazardous areas which are located within the jurisdiction of such agency. 
(f)  With the exception of law enforcement or scientific research or dam operation and maintenance craft, no motor in excess of 25 horsepower shall be used on any vessel being operated on Tugalo Lake. 
(g)  The operation of any of the following vessels on Lake Oconee shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Any motorized vessel greater than 30 feet six inches in length; except for law enforcement, scientific research, or dam operation and maintenance craft or a vessel not greater than 40 feet in length used for conducting group tours on behalf of the owner or operator of a REAP certified by the Department of Community Affairs under O.C.G.A. § 50-8-192; or 
(2)  Any vessel equipped with any type of bypass mechanism that reduces or eliminates the effectiveness of the muffler or baffler system required by O.C.G.A. § 52-7-10. 
(h)  The operation of any of the following vessels on Lake Burton, Seed Lake, Lake Rabun, Lake Tugalo, Tallulah Falls Lake, and Lake Yonah shall be prohibited: 
(1)  Any motorized vessel greater than 30 feet six inches in length; except for law enforcement, scientific research or dam operation and maintenance craft; or 
(2)  Any vessel equipped with any type of bypass mechanism that reduces or eliminates the effectiveness of the muffler or baffler system required O.C.G.A. § 52-7-10. 
(i)  The provisions of this Code section shall not apply to vessels engaged in any activity authorized under O.C.G.A. § 52-7-19. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-9. - Towing persons on water skis, aquaplanes, surfboards or similar device. 
(a)  No person shall operate a vessel on any of the waters of this state for towing a person or persons on water skis, aquaplane, surfboard, or any similar device unless the vessel is equipped with a wide-angle mirror mounted in such a manner as to permit the operator of the vessel to observe at all times the person or persons being towed or unless there is in such vessel a competent person, in addition to the operator, in a position to observe at all times the person or persons being towed. 
(b)  No person shall operate any vessel on any of the waters of this state for towing a person or persons on water skis, aquaplane, surfboard, or similar devices nor shall any person or persons engage in water skiing, aquaplaning, surfboarding, or similar activities unless such person or persons being towed are wearing a ski belt, ski jacket, or a Type I, II, or III United States Coast Guard approved personal flotation device. 
(c)  No person shall operate a vessel on any waters of this state towing a person or persons on water skis, aquaplane, surfboard, or similar devices nor shall any person engage in water skiing, aquaplaning, surfboarding, or similar activity at any time between the hours from sunset to sunrise. 
(d)  Subsections (a), (b), and (c) of this Code section do not apply to a performer engaged in a professional exhibition or a person or persons engaged in an activity authorized under O.C.G.A. § 52-7-19. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-10. - Speed and load restrictions; riding of bow or gunwale of vessel. 
(a)  The speed of each vessel shall at all times be regulated so as to avoid danger or injury or damage or unnecessary inconvenience, directly or by the effect of the wash or wave raised by the vessel, while in the vicinity of swimming areas, docks, floating boat houses, moored boats, or boats engaged in fishing activities. 
(b)  No vessel shall be loaded beyond the recommended capacity. 
(c)  No person operating any vessel shall allow any person or persons to ride the bow or gunwale of any vessel nor shall any person or persons ride on the bow or gunwale of any vessel unless the vessel is equipped with a railing or some other retaining device on the bow or gunwale, so located that any person or persons might hold to such railing or other retaining device to avoid falling or being thrown overboard. For the purposes of this Code section, eyes or cleats shall not be considered retaining devices. 
(d)  No vessel shall be operated at a speed greater than is reasonable and prudent under the conditions, and such vessel's operator shall have regard for the actual and potential hazards then existing. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-11. - Rules of the road for boat traffic. 
(a)  All vessels operating on the coastal waters of this state shall conform to the "Steering and Sailing Rules" established by Section II, Rules 11 through 18, of the International Navigation Rules Act of 1977, as amended. 
(b)  All vessels operating on the inland waters of this state shall conform to the "Steering and Sailing Rules" established by Subpart II, Rules 11 through 18, of the Inland Navigation Rules Act of 1980, as amended. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of each operator to keep his vessel to the starboard or right side of the center of any channel, stream, or other narrow body of water; provided, however, this provision shall not give to the operator of a sailing vessel the right to hamper, in a narrow channel, the safe passage of another vessel which can navigate only inside that channel. 
(d)  Powered vessels approaching nonpowered vessels shall reduce their speed so that their wake shall not endanger the life or property of those occupying the nonpowered vessel. 
(e)  Whenever a vessel approaches a bend, point, or other blind area, it shall be the duty of the operator to: 
(1)  Move as far to the right or starboard as possible; 
(2)  Reduce speed to allow for an unexpected stop if necessary; and 
(3)  Sound a blast of eight to ten seconds' duration on a sounding device if such a device is carried. 
(f)  No person shall operate any vessel or tow a person or persons on water skis, an aquaplane, a surfboard, or any similar device on the waters of this state at a speed greater than idle speed within 100 feet of any vessel which is moored, anchored, or adrift outside normal traffic channels, or any wharf, dock, pier, piling, bridge structure or abutment, person in the water, or shoreline adjacent to a full-time or part-time residence, public park, public beach, public swimming area, marina, restaurant, or other public use area. This subsection shall not be interpreted to prohibit any person from initiating or terminating water skiing from any wharf, dock, or pier owned by such person or used by such person with the permission of the owner of said wharf, dock, or pier nor shall it be interpreted to prohibit the immediate return of a tow vessel to a downed water skier. 
(g)  No vessel shall run around or within 100 feet of another vessel at a speed greater than idle speed unless such vessel is overtaking or meeting such other vessel in compliance with the rules of the road for vessel traffic. 
(h)  No vessel shall be operated in such a manner as to ride or jump the wake of another vessel within 100 feet of such other vessel unless the vessel is overtaking or meeting such other vessel in compliance with the rules of the road for vessel traffic and, having passed or overtaken such other vessel, the operator of the passing or overtaking vessel shall not change or reverse course for the purpose of riding or jumping the wake of such other vessel within 100 feet of such other vessel. 
(i)  Subsections (f), (g), and (h) of this Code section shall not apply to ocean-going ships or to tugboats or other powered vessels which are assisting ocean-going ships during transit or during docking or undocking maneuvers. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-12. - Enforcement of article. 
(a)  Any person empowered to enforce this article and any rule or regulation adopted pursuant hereto shall have the authority to stop and board any vessel subject to this article or any such regulation for the purpose of inspection or determining compliance with this article and is empowered to issue a summons for appearance in court or before a magistrate for all violations of this article or of the rules and regulations prescribed hereunder. Vessels of law enforcement personnel shall be marked to identify them as designated enforcement vessels. 
(b)  An officer empowered to enforce this article shall have the power: 
(1)  To arrest on view for any violation relating to boating and all rules and regulations prescribed by the board under this article; 
(2)  To execute all warrants and search warrants for violations of the boat laws and regulations; 
(3)  To serve subpoenas issued for the examination, investigation, and trial of all offenses against the laws and regulations relating to boats; 
(4)  To board vessels in use, for purposes of examining any documents and safety equipment, and to search without warrant any vessel which is not at its regular mooring or berth when he believes that any law of this state or any rule or regulation of the board of natural resources relating to boating has been violated; 
(4.1)  To board vessels in use or floating, whether moored or not, for purposes of examining any marine toilets, holding tanks, and documents related to them, including records of pump-out and certificates of compliance, and to search without warrant any such vessel to determine compliance with the provisions of this article related to marine toilets when the officer believes that any of said provisions of this article relating to marine toilets have been violated; 
(5)  To detain the vessel and arrest the operator of a suspected stolen vessel; 
(6)  To enter upon any land or water in the performance of his duty; 
(7)  To demand and secure proper assistance in case of emergency; 
(8)  To exercise the powers and duties of peace officers; and 
(9)  To investigate any boating accident which occurs on the waters of this state. 
(c)  Every vessel subject to this article if underway and upon being hailed by a designated law enforcement officer shall stop immediately and lay to or shall maneuver in such a way as to permit the officer to come aboard. 
(d)  Any person employed or elected by this state or a political subdivision thereof, whose duty it is to preserve the peace or to make arrests or to enforce the law, including, but not limited to, members of the sheriffs' departments, state patrolmen, and conservation rangers, are empowered to enforce this article. The department of natural resources shall be primarily responsible for enforcement of this article and the rules and regulations issued under this chapter. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to resist or interfere by force, menace, threat, or in any other manner with any arrest for violation of this article. It shall also be unlawful for any person to refuse to go with any law enforcement officer of this state after an arrest has been made or to interfere with the officer in the performance of his duty. 
(f)  The department is authorized and empowered to identify by appropriate signs and markers those public waters in which certain activities may be prohibited or restricted. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Sec. 8-13. - Penalty. 
    Except as otherwise provided in this article, any person who violates this article or any rule or regulation promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 988, § 1, 5-16-2007) 
Secs. 8-14-8-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CITY DOCK[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 943, § 1, adopted July 5, 2000, added new provisions to ch. 8 as §§ 8-1-8-16. For classification purposes and in order to provide for the future expansion of ch. 8, the provisions of Ord. No. 943 have been redesignated by the editor as art. II of this chapter. 

Sec. 8-31. - Position of dockmaster created; duties. 
    There is hereby created the position of dockmaster, who shall be designated by the city manager. It shall be the responsibility of the dockmaster to manage the operation of the city dock located at the western foot of Gloucester Street in the city adjacent to Mary Ross Waterfront Park, to enforce the provisions of this article, to collect dock rentals fees and remit said collections to the city finance department, to report to the city commission as the commission may form time to time require, and to carry out such further duties as may be assigned by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-32. - Requirements for occupying berth or dock space. 
    No owner, operator, master or any person in charge of any vessel (including any recreational, commercial, fishing, passenger, cargo or other watercraft of any kind) shall cause or permit any vessel to occupy any berth or dock space at the city dock without having first registered the vessel in the office of the dockmaster, paid the appropriate dock rental fee, obtained a permit for dock usage and obtained an assignment of dock space. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-33. - Registration for berth or dock space; application for permit. 
    The operator of any vessel which will be docking at the city dock shall immediately, and in no event later than 24 hours after arrival of the vessel at the city dock, report the vessel's arrival to the dockmaster, register the vessel and make arrangements with the dockmaster for berth/dock space if it is available. To obtain a permit for use of dock space, the vessel operator shall submit written application on a form provided by the dockmaster, including at least the following information: 
(1)  Name, home address, Social Security number, and business telephone number of the vessel owner(s). 
(2)  Name, home and local address, Social Security number and local telephone number of the vessel operator/master. 
(3)  Name, home or local addresses, Social Security number and telephone number of each crewmember. 
(4)  Vessel length overall, beam, draft and displacement. 
(5)  Whether vessel is for recreational purposes or commercial (and if commercial, identity of license holder and nature of any licenses under which it operates). 
(6)  Anticipated length of stay. 
(7)  U.S. Coast Guard official vessel documentation number; any state registration numbers; and identification of vessel by name and homeport. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-34. - Dock rental fee. 
    No person, including the owner, master, or operator of any vessel, shall cause or allow the vessel to occupy or use any berth or dock space at the city dock without first having paid a dock rental fee, together with a deposit, all in an amount to be determined from time to time by the city commission, nor shall any person cause or allow the vessel to occupy or use any such berth or dock space after the period for which rent paid has expired, nor after written notice has been provided by the dockmaster to the vessel operator or other person present on the vessel to leave the dock. All rent for berth or dock space shall be payable in advance at the dockmaster's office. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-35. - Temporary permit. 
    Upon submission of a completed application, payment of advance rent and deposit, and approval of the application by the dockmaster, a temporary permit may be issued by the dockmaster for use of dock space. All permits for use of dock space shall be temporary in nature and shall not entitle any person or vessel to continued use of dock space beyond the current rental period, which shall not exceed a period of one calendar month. Permits for dock usage are not intended to, and do not, create a property interest. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-36. - Permit not transferable. 
    No permit for use of berth or dock space at the city dock may be assigned or sublet to any person or vessel, and transfer of ownership of the permitted vessel shall automatically terminate the permit. The new owner shall be required to apply for and obtain a new permit and pay appropriate advance rent and a deposit in order to continue use of the dock. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-37. - Alteration, modification or repair of dock. 
    No person shall make any alteration, modification or repair of the dock (or any part, fixture or appurtenance attached or adjacent to the dock) without the express written authorization of the dockmaster. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-38. - Littering prohibited. 
    No person shall deposit, throw off, or abandon any equipment, trash or waste on or about the city dock, the approaches thereto, or Mary Ross Waterfront Park. All dock area adjacent to the space occupied by any vessel using the city dock shall be maintained in a clean and litter-free condition by the operator of the vessel. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-39. - Vessel, vessel owner and vessel operator liable for damage. 
    The vessel owner, and vessel operator shall be jointly and severally liable for any physical damage done to the city dock, its fixtures, appurtenances and adjacent facilities which may occur as a result of or in connection with the vessel's use of the dock facility, including any damage done by any crew member or guest, and shall agree to reimburse the city for the cost of repair or any such damage as condition of obtaining a permit to use the dock. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-40. - Responsibilities of vessel owner and operator. 
    The vessel owner and operator shall have the responsibility to inspect the dock and acquaint themselves with its condition, and accept the dock for use in an "as is" condition, thereby assuming the risk of any loss or damage to the vessel or of any personal injury as a result of any deficiency, hazard or defective condition of the dock. The vessel owner and operator shall have the responsibility to familiarize all crew members, guests and visitors with the condition of the dock and to notify them of any hazards or dangers. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-41. - Alternative use of dock facility. 
    Use of the dock is subject to alternative use of the dock facility by other vessels or for other purposes or events as the city manager may from time to time direct. In the event any vessel is displaced from the dock as a result of such alternative use, then the obligation to pay rent shall abate on a per diem basis in accordance with the determination of the dockmaster. This abatement of rent shall be the only remedy or recourse for vessels displaced or inconvenienced by such alternative use of the dock. The dockmaster will endeavor to notify registered users of the dock in advance, to the extent practicable, of such alternative uses of dock space in order to minimize the inconvenience and afford the vessel opportunity to make other arrangements for dockage elsewhere. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-42. - Right to establish rules concerning conduct on and about the dock and use of the facility. 
    The city manager may from time to time establish written rules concerning conduct on and about the dock and use of the facility, including parking, loading and unloading, and other matters, subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-43. - Firearms, alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
    There shall be no use, display or discharge of any firearm on, about or adjacent to the city dock. No alcoholic beverage may be used or consumed on the dock or adjacent areas and approaches, including Mary Ross Park. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-44. - Violation; revocation of dock use permit. 
    Any violation of any rule established by the city manager, or of any of the terms of the dock use permit, or of this or any other city ordinance, or of any state or federal statute, rule, regulation or court or administrative order by the vessel, its owner, its operator, any crew member, or any supplier or guest on or serving the vessel shall be grounds for immediate revocation of the dock use permit regardless of whether or not such violation becomes the subject of any criminal prosecution or any civil or criminal enforcement proceeding. In the event the dockmaster determines that a violation justifies revocation, then the dockmaster shall notify the permit holder in writing of the revocation, giving the permit holder 48 hours from the effective time of notification to remove the vessel from the dock in compliance with the notification. The manner of notice shall be to hand deliver same to any person present upon the vessel or in the absence of any person by tacking of the notice in a conspicuous place upon the vessel, and notice shall be effective upon such delivery or tacking. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-45. - Disputes arising under this article. 
    Any dispute arising under this article, or under any dock use permit issued or revoked hereunder, or in connection with any use of the dock, shall be submitted to the city manager, in writing, for resolution; the decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Sec. 8-46. - Penalty for violation. 
    Violations of any provisions of this article shall be punished in the same manner as provided by Charter or local law for punishment of violations of other validly enacted ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 943, § 1, 7-5-2000) 
Chapter 9 - ELECTIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Voting and elections, Ga. Const. 1983, art. II; elections generally, O.C.G.A. tit. 21; municipal elections, O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 9-1. - Conduct of municipal elections generally. 
    The county board of elections is hereby authorized to conduct all elections held pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-3-1 et seq. in and for the city and to perform all functions imposed by such law upon the city commission with reference to any municipal election. The county board of elections is hereby requested to conduct all municipal elections in and for the city and to perform such functions, including, but not limited to, voter registration, qualification of candidates, determining challenges to the qualification of candidates, designation of polling places, hearing of election contests, and every other function essential to the election process. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 4, 7-11-1985) 
Sec. 9-2. - Political party primaries prohibited. 
    No political party shall conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for election to the city commission. Candidates for election to the commission shall be nominated by petition. The nomination petition of a candidate shall be signed by at least one percent of the registered voters eligible to vote in the last municipal election for the particular office for which the candidate is qualifying. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 6, 7-11-1985; Ord. No. 923, § 1, 9-6-1995) 
Secs. 9-3-9-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - VOTER REGISTRATION 

Sec. 9-21. - Use of county list. 
    The voter registration list of the county shall be used in all municipal elections held in and for the city. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 1, 7-11-1985) 
Sec. 9-22. - Supplementation of county list for use by city. 
    All persons who are lawfully registered to vote in municipal elections in the city, but who are not registered to vote in county elections shall be added to the voters registration list of the county prior to the use of the county registration list in a municipal election. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 2, 7-11-1985) 
Sec. 9-23. - Maintenance by city not permitted. 
    The city shall not maintain its own voter registration list for use in municipal elections. 
(Ord. No. 820, § 3, 7-11-1985) 
Chapter 10 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1000, § 1, adopted June 18, 2008, amended Ch. 10 in its entirety, in effect deleting former ch. 10 and enacting a new ch. 10 to read as herein set out. Former ch. 10 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Code 1952, §§ 17.5-17.10; Code 1953, §§ 10.3; Ord. No. 949, § 1, adopted Mar. 6, 2002; and Ord. No. 989, 1, adopted May 16, 2007. 
Cross reference- Fire department, § 2-186 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; housing, ch. 12. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide for fire protection, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1); fire protection and safety, O.C.G.A. tit. 25. 

Sec. 10-1. - Fire districts designated. 
(a)  The territory within the following bounds and limits shall be known as the First Fire District: On a line running on the northern line of H Street and running on a line running straight with H Street to the city limits of the city on both the easterly and westerly directions of H Street, thence all land and waters within the city limits of the city south of such line. 
(b)  The territory within the following bounds and limits shall be known as the Second Fire District: On a line beginning at a point where First Street meets Parkwood Drive running on the northern line of First Street in a westerly direction running straight with First Street to the city limits of the city, thence on a line beginning at a point where Parkwood Drive meets First Street running on the northern line of Parkwood Drive in a easterly direction running straight with Parkwood Drive to the city limits of the city, thence all land and waters within the city limits of the city south of both such lines and north of a line running on the northern line of H Street and running on a line running straight with H Street to the city limits of the city on both the easterly and westerly directions of H Street. 
(c)  The territory within the following bounds and limits shall be known as the Third Fire District: On a line beginning at a point where First Street meets Parkwood Drive running on the northern line of First Street in a westerly direction running straight with First Street to the city limits of the city, thence on a line beginning at a point where Parkwood Drive meets First Street running on the northern line of Parkwood Drive in a easterly direction running straight with Parkwood Drive to the city limits of the city, thence all land and waters within the city limits of the city north of both lines. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this section, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth herein: 
    Apartment building or multifamily residential means a building or portion thereof containing three or more dwelling units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities. 
    Approved monitored fire alarm system means a monitored fire alarm system that meets or exceeds the requirements set forth by NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code and shall notify emergency services when activated. 
    Approved system-commercial for commercial/residential structures, one- or two-family dwelling, or those structures required to be sprinkled by some other applicable code, means a sprinkler system designed in accordance with National Fire Protection Association standards and referenced publications. 
    Authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) means an organization, office, or individuals responsible for enforcing the requirements of a code or standard, or for approving equipment, materials, an installation, or a procedure. The authority having jurisdiction and any interpretation of this chapter, NFPA codes to include Life Safety Code falls under the guidance of the Brunswick Fire Department's Fire Marshal, Fire Inspectors and the Fire Chief. 
    Commercial means a business involved in the exchange of services, products, or property of any kind by purchase, sale, trade, barter, loan, or rental, including facilities offering transient lodging in ten or more rooms to the general public. 
    Day care means a building or portion of a building in which more than four or more clients receive care, maintenance, and supervision, by other than their relative(s) or legal guardian(s), for less than 24 hours per day as per Life Safety Code NFPA 101. 
    Fire lane means a lane of traffic which is a free travel passage for the orderly access of the fire apparatus and other emergency equipment to all necessary areas around buildings, facilities, developments and premises. These passages are to be clear in all seasons and in all kinds of weather. Unless site conditions dictate a lesser requirement, a fire lane shall be a designated unobstructed passageway at least 20 feet in width and with an outside turning radius or 50 feet. 
    Fire marshal/fire inspector refers to an individual deputized by the State of Georgia Office of the Insurance Commissioner, state fire marshal's office as a "local state fire marshal." 
    High hazard means occupancies which include contents that are likely burn with extreme rapidity or intensity or are highly combustible or from which explosions are likely in the event of a fire; or toxic, noxious or corrosive materials; heat producing equipment. By way of example, this includes, but it is not limited to: dry cleaning fluid; gasoline, kerosene or diesel fuel; paints, lacquers, thinners, strippers, or solvents; photo processing chemicals; resins and epoxies for fiber glassing or other purposes; flammable gases (e.g., propane, butane, or other); compressed gases (oxygen or other); or pesticides or corrosive or toxic cleaning beyond such as are kept purely for on-premises housekeeping purposes. The authority having jurisdiction shall have the final interpretation and determination on what is considered to be high hazard occupancy. 
    Hazardous area means any area of a structure that poses a degree of hazard greater than normal to the general occupancy of the structure, such as areas used for the storage or use of combustibles or flammables; of toxic, noxious or corrosive materials; or heat producing equipment. The fire suppression or fire detection requirements, or both, may be more demanding than those for the less hazardous areas of the structure, if deemed appropriate by the fire marshal/fire inspector. Where there is a combination of commercial and residential areas or both, depending upon the presence of fire walls, means of egress and other pertinent factors which increase the risk of fire, the difficulty of detection, the difficulty of suppression, the risk of spread to other structures, and the risk to human life the requirements below are required. The authority having jurisdiction shall have the final interpretation and determination on what is considered to be high hazard occupancy. 
a.  The area shall be separated from other parts of the building by fire barriers having a fire resistance rating of not less than one hour, with all openings, therein protected by 3/4-hour, fire protection-rated, self closing fire door assemblies. 
b.  The area shall be protected by an automatic extinguishing system in accordance with Life Safety Code NFPA 101 9.7.1.1(1) or 9.7.1.2.which states "Each automatic sprinkler system required by another section of this Code shall be in accordance with one of the following: 
1.  NFPA 13, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems. 
2.  NFPA 13D, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings and Manufactured homes. 
3.  NFPA 13R, Standard for the Installation of Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height. 
    Historic building is classified as a building or facility deemed to have historical, architectural, or cultural significance by a local, regional, or national jurisdiction-as per Life Safety Code NFPA 101. A structure need not be located within a designated historic district to qualify for purposes of this section as "historic." 
    Life safety evaluation means a written review dealing with adequacy of life safety features relative to fire, storm, collapse, crowd behavior, and other related safety considerations- as per the current Life Safety Code NFPA 101. The authority having jurisdiction has the final interpretation of what is considered a "Life Safety Evaluation" and shall refer to any NFPA standard applicable. 
    Modified sprinkler system is a combination sprinkler system operating off the domestic water supply designed in accordance with the appropriate National Fire Protection Association Code for Sprinklers Systems, i.e. NFPA 13, 13R, 13D as set by the fire marshal/fire inspector's office. Where a sprinkler system provides automatic detection and alarm system initiation, it shall be provided with an approved alarm initiation device that operates when the flow of water is equal to or greater than that from a single automatic sprinkler. A fire alarm system required for life safety shall be installed, tested, and maintained in accordance with the applicable requirements of the NFPA 70, National Electrical Code, and NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code, unless it is an approved existing installation, which shall be permitted to be continued in use. The scope of NFPA 13, 13R, and 13D are as follows: 
a.  NFPA 13: This standard shall provide the minimum requirements for the design and installation of automatic fire sprinkler systems and exposure protection sprinkler systems covered within this standard. 
b.  NFPA 13D: This standard shall cover the design and installation of automatic sprinkler systems for protection against the fire hazards in one- and two-family dwellings and manufactured homes. 
c.  NFPA 13R: This standard shall cover the design and installation of automatic sprinkler systems for protection against fire hazards in residential occupancies up to and including four stories in height. 
    New means all new construction, including additions to existing buildings, (an increase in the building area, aggregate floor area, height or number of stories to a structure) or any existing building or structure which shall hereby be deemed for purposes of this chapter to be new because such building is subject to substantial renovation or because of fire or other casualty, a change in occupancy classification, or has sat vacant for a period of five years or more. For purposes of this chapter renovation is the replacement in kind or strengthening of load-bearing elements; or the refinishing, replacement, bracing, strengthening, or upgrading of existing materials, elements, equipment, or fixtures, without involving the reconfiguration of spaces. 
    NICET is the National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies sponsored by the National Society of Professional Engineers. 
    Open burning means the process of burning any materials, such as the building or kindling of flames, where the products of combustion pass directly into the open air without going through a chimney, stack, or appropriate cover or lid. 
    Planned business groups means multiple structures constructed on a parcel of land, excluding farmland, under the ownership, control, or development by an individual, a corporation, a partnership, or a firm as NFPA 1141 Standard for Fire Protection in Planned Building Groups as interpreted by the authority having jurisdiction. 
    Residential board and care occupancy means a building or portion thereof that is used for lodging and boarding of four or more residents, not related by blood or marriage to the owners or operators, for the purpose of providing personal care services. 
    Special hazard means a condition confined to a definite field of action: designed or selected for a particular purpose, occasion, or other end: limited in range to a thing or condition that might operate against success or safety: a possible source of peril, danger, duress, or difficulty- per 2003 International Fire Code 201.4 The authority having jurisdiction has the final interpretation of what is considered a "special hazard" and shall refer to any NFPA standard applicable. 
    Two-family dwelling unit/duplex means a building that consists solely of two dwelling units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008; Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 2-19-2014) 
Sec. 10-3. - Fire detection and suppression requirements. 
(a)  All new commercial buildings shall be protected throughout with an approved monitored fire alarm system, as defined by this chapter. 
(1)  For buildings less than 10,000 square feet constructed mainly for storage of products with limited life loss potential some flexibility may be allowed provided that either the following requirements of subsection 10-2 are met: High hazard, hazardous area, Life safety evaluation and Special hazard. In the event of any changes made that contribute to the hazard and reclassification of any contents within the occupancy, the owner shall notify the fire marshal's office in writing of such changes. Where more than two sprinklers are installed in a single area for protection, water flow detection shall be provided to sound the building fire alarm or to notify by a signal, any constantly attended location, such as PBX, security, or emergency room, at which the necessary correction shall be taken. 
(2)  Building storing materials that are water reactive or may be more damaged by water fighting a fire than by a fire may be allowed a variance or allowed alternative methods of fire suppression upon petition to the fire marshal/fire inspector's office. 
(3)  Additions to existing unprotected buildings where the additions totals less than 50 percent of the area of the building may be granted exemption by the fire marshal/fire inspector's office; provided, however, the addition must be separated by fire rated construction in accordance with building codes in the Glynn-Brunswick Area and is not required to be protected by some other applicable code. 
(4)  Where the total area of all the reconstruction (the reconfiguration of a space that affects an exit or a corridor shared by more than a single tenant; or the reconfiguration of a space such that the rehabilitation work area is not permitted to be occupied because existing means of egress and fire protection systems, or their equivalent, are not in place or continuously maintained) included in a modification exceeds 50 percent of the area of the building; the work shall be considered as a reconstruction and shall comply with the requirements of the Life Safety Code NFPA 101 sections 43.6 for the applicable occupancy. On any one story with rehabilitation work areas involving over 50 percent of the area of the story, a sprinkler system shall be provided throughout the story in accordance with Life Safety Code NFPA 101 applicable to new construction for the occupancy. 
(b)  All new multifamily residential structures and two-family dwellings/duplexes shall be protected throughout with an approved automatic fire suppression system. 
(c)  Reserved. 
(d)  There shall be early fire detection systems in all sections of all dwellings/dwelling units and all new construction. Existing buildings may have an approved battery operated smoke detector. The fire marshal/fire inspector's office may require a hard-wired detection system if battery operated detectors are not maintained according to manufacturers recommendations. 
(e)  There shall be a fire detection system to meet NFPA 72, National Fire Alarm Code, as applicable, in all new occupancies of the following classifications that provide a sprinkler system: educational, health care, detention, daycare for children, elderly or handicapped, and group care homes. The system shall notify emergency forces when activated. 
(f)  The owner is responsible for having the fire detection system required by the preceding subsection (e) inspected and tested in accordance with NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code. The system shall be inspected annually and a copy of the inspection report shall be submitted to the fire marshal/fire inspector's office. 
(g)  If this Code section in any way conflicts with the provisions in the Standard Building Code, Fire Prevention Code, or the Life Safety Code; the Life Safety Code will apply. 
(h)  In existing buildings, it is not always practical to strictly apply the provisions of the Life Safety Code NFPA 101. Physical limitations can cause the need for disproportionate effort or expense with little increase in life safety. In such cases, the authority having jurisdiction needs to be satisfied that reasonable life safety is insured. In existing buildings, it is intended that any conditions that represents a serious threat to life be mitigated by the application of appropriate safeguards. It is not intended to require modifications for conditions that do not represent a significant threat to life, even though such conditions are not literally in compliance with the Life Safety Code NFPA 101. 
(i)  Renovation of existing buildings or structures may be exempted in part or in whole from any rule, regulation, code or standard by the enforcement agency under the following conditions. 
(1)  All noted conditions hazardous to life, economic impact, or hazardous to the environment based on the provisions of applicable state and local standards or codes for existing buildings shall be corrected to a reasonable and realistic degree as determined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(2)  The existing building becomes the minimum performance standard. 
(3)  The degree of compliance of the building or structure after the changes must not be below that existing before the changes. 
(4)  Required fire suppression and detection systems, as determined by the fire marshal/fire inspector's office, or the authority having jurisdiction, shall be installed. 
(5)  Requested variance does not conflict with another law, code or statute. 
(j)  All required or voluntary fire detection systems or other alarm systems which include or are adding fire detection, whether in commercial or residential, will require a permit to be issued as follows: 
(1)  Application for a permit will be made at the building inspector's office accompanied by the appropriate and applicable fee. 
(2)  Applications will be accompanied with a floor plan showing location of all appliances, i.e. control panels, battery back up, smoke detectors, heat detectors, horns, strobes, pull stations and all other system components. 
(3)  Applications will be accompanied by copies of certification of the designer, job supervisor and installers. 
(4)  All systems are required to be designed by a certified engineer or an engineer technician with a minimum of a NICET Level Three Certification in the fire alarm subfield. 
(5)  All supervisors or acting supervisors will have at least one NICET Level Two Certification in the fire alarm [subfield]. 
(6)  All installers will have at least a NICET Level One Certification in the fire alarm subfield. 
(7)  All companies operating in the Brunswick area may submit a master file including all listed requirements above the fire marshal/fire inspector's offices. After a master file is approved, the company may only submit the floor plan, component and personnel list with their application. It is the responsibility of the installing company to keep the master file current. 
(8)  Service personnel shall be qualified and experienced in the inspection, testing, and maintenance of fire alarm systems. Examples of qualified personnel shall be permitted to include but not be limited to, individuals with the following qualifications: NFPA 72 National Fire Alarm Code Edition. 
a.  Factory trained and certified. 
b.  National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies fire alarm certified. 
c.  International Municipal Signal Association fire alarm certified. 
d.  Certified by a state or local authority. 
e.  Trained and qualified personnel employed by an organization listed by a national testing laboratory for the servicing of fire alarm systems. 
(k)  Upon approval of this ordinance all new one- and two-family dwellings shall be inspected in accordance with Life Safety Code NFPA 101 and meet these standards. 
(l)  All new daycare facilities shall be protected throughout by an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with 24.3.5.2. Life Safety Code NFPA 101. 
(m)  Any development in planned business groups or high rise building that is classified as a building where the floor of an occupiable story is greater than 75 feet (23 m) above the lowest level of fire department vehicle access, which shall mean where the tires of the fire department vehicle touch the ground. All planned business groups and high rise buildings shall comply with NFPA 1141, Standard for Fire Protection in Planned Building Groups. This standard applies to new planned business groups. 
(1)  This standard applies to planned building groups in suburban and rural areas that the authority having jurisdiction (AHJ) determines would be impacted by one or more of the following during a fire: limited water supply, limited fire department resources, extended fire department response time, delayed alarms, limited access, hazardous vegetation, unusual terrain, or unusual characteristics. 1.1.2* This standard applies to new planned building groups. If the authority having jurisdiction determines that additions to existing structures or new structures negatively impact the fire hazard of the overall building group, the necessary requirements of this standard shall be imposed. This standard does not apply to farms or to mobile home or recreational vehicle parks. 
(n)  Permit fees are to be added to and collected with the building permit at the building inspector's office. Such fee schedule may be enacted and amended by the city commission of the City of Brunswick, as it sees fit, by process of resolution. A copy of the current fee schedule may be found at the offices of the clerk of the City of Brunswick. 
(o)  All codes, ordinances, standards, and pamphlets adopted in this chapter shall be construed as the standard for fire codes compliance among buildings within the city and shall prevail in matters of life safety over all other local codes, ordinances or standards which apply to the same building components or systems covered by this chapter. Final approving authority for fire codes compliance covered in this section shall be the authority having jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008; Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 2-19-2014) 
Sec. 10-4. - Intent of fire detection and suppression system requirements. 
    It is not the intent of section 10-3 to prevent commercial or residential structures not listed from installation of fire protection systems or early warning systems. Nothing in section 10-3 will prohibit compliance with requirements more stringent than those provided in section 10-3. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-5. - Fire extinguishers in public garages. 
(a)  Each and every public garage, and place for the storage of automobiles for hire shall be equipped with and maintain suitable fire extinguishers, not less than two in number for each such garage and place. 
(b)  Such garages and places, in addition to the number of fire extinguishers as provided in the preceding section, shall be equipped with and maintain such additional fire extinguishers as may be deemed necessary and ordered by the chief of the fire department; such additional number to be dependent upon the size of such garage and place, and the fire hazard thereof. 
(c)  The chief of the fire department, and such other persons as may be authorized and directed by him, shall have reasonable access to such garages and places for the inspection of the same, and the testing of such fire extinguishers from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-6. - Removal of combustible matter during building construction. 
    Any person erecting a building within 75 feet of another building shall, before sunset each day, remove all shavings and other combustible matter from such building to a place not less than 150 feet from any building. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-7. - Building fires in streets, vacant lots, private and public property etc. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful have an open burning on a sidewalk, street, public square, lane, alley, vacant lot, public property, private property, occupied lot, unoccupied lot, or other public or private yard, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  For any open burning cooking, such as an oyster roast, barbeque, low country boil, etc., within ten feet of a sidewalk, building, structure, lot line, or other combustible materials, including, but not limited to, trees, bushes, wood piles, and other flammable liquids and materials, a resident of such property at which the open burning cooking is to occur must be granted permission from the fire marshal or his designee to conduct said cooking. 
(c)  Permission may be granted by the fire chief or his designee and fire department must be notified with name, address, contact information and any other relevant information the fire department may require to insure safety within the community and at said open burning cooking event. 
(d)  Any person who has been granted permission by the fire marshal or his designee to have an open burning cooking but fails to have such open burning properly supervised by an adult or fails to completely extinguish the open burning cooking before it is left unsupervised shall be in violation of this section of the City Code of Brunswick. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-8. - Keeping or storing gasoline. 
    It shall be illegal and unlawful for any person to sell, barter or handle gasoline in any quantities whatsoever at retail, where the same is kept or stored within the corporate limits of the city, until the person shall file in writing in duplicate with the chief of the fire department and the city clerk a statement of his or its intention so to do, which statement shall designate by street and number where such gasoline is to be kept or stored. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-9. - False alarms. 
(a)  The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this section, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
(1)  Alarm contractor shall mean any person who installs, maintains, repairs, alters, monitors or services alarm systems for compensation. 
(2)  Alarm signal shall mean the audible sound or a transmission of a signal or a message as the result of the activation of an alarm system or an audible alarm. 
(3)  Alarm system shall mean any mechanical or electrical or radio-controlled device which is designed to be used for the detection of smoke or fire or of any unauthorized entry into a building, structure or facility, or for alerting others of the commission of an unlawful act within a building, structure or facility, or both, which emits a sound or transmits a signal or message when activated. Alarm systems include audible, silent, fire and panic alarms and proprietor alarms. 
(4)  Audible alarm shall mean a device designed for the detection of fire or smoke or of unauthorized entry on premises which generates an audible sound when it is activated. 
(5)  False alarm shall mean an alarm signal which is responded to by the police or fire departments of the city and which is caused by other than an emergency situation, or which is not caused by the activation of either an alarm system or audible alarm as the result of fire or smoke, a burglary, robbery, assault, forced entry or attempted forced entry into the premises protected by such alarm or any other criminal act on the premises. An alarm will be deemed to be a false alarm (i) when there is not substantial physical evidence which would clearly indicate that smoke, fire, or a criminal act was the sole reason for activation of the alarm signal, (ii) when the alarm system was intentionally activated by an individual under circumstances where there was no reasonable basis to believe that a fire, crime or other emergency, warranting immediate response by the appropriate authorities, had occurred or was occurring, or (iii) when the alarm signal is activated due to failure of the alarm system to be maintained in proper working condition. A false alarm shall not be deemed to have occurred when the responding agency is notified that no response is necessary before any act of response is substantially completed. Only those false alarms occurring in the city are punishable by this chapter. 
(6)  Person shall mean any individual, association, partnership, firm or corporation, or any combination of one or more of them, and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the state. 
(b)  The following rules shall govern the use of alarm systems within the city. 
(1)  No person shall make, cause to be made or suffer to be made any false alarm from any location in the city. 
(2)  No person shall allow, sound or permit the sounding of any burglar or fire alarm or any motor vehicle burglar alarm in the city, which is audible outside the building or vehicle it is installed in unless such alarm is automatically terminated within 15 minutes of activation. 
(3)  No company or individual shall connect or cause to be connected, by any means whatsoever any alarm system or alarm that transmits directly into the Glynn-Brunswick 911 Center or to any telephone line located at Brunswick Fire Department, Brunswick Police Department or Lanier Plaza substation, provided, however, it shall not be a violation of this ordinance for an alarm system to be connected or to transmit directly to any phone number maintained by the Brunswick Fire Department or Glynn-Brunswick 911 Center for such purpose. 
(4)  No individual or company shall test or cause to be tested any alarm system in the city without at least 30 minutes prior notification of the test to the Glynn-Brunswick 911 Center. Failure to make such prior notifications will be subject to a $300.00 fine for each occurrence. 
(c)  Responsibility for false alarms under this chapter shall be borne by the person or persons occupying or having the right to occupy the premises, unless otherwise stated herein. Violations of this chapter will be returned to the City of Brunswick Municipal Court for resolution and disposition. 
(d)  The following penalties will be assessed for each violation within a 12-month period: 
(1)  First and second false alarms: Written warning 
(2)  Third false alarm: $50.00 
(3)  Fourth false alarm: $100.00 
(4)  Fifth and later false alarms: $150.00 
    Written warnings for first and second false alarms shall be hand delivered or mailed to the location of the false alarm. Failure to make, deliver, mail or receive any warning shall not affect any subsequent enforcement efforts or the penalty for any subsequent false alarm. The fire marshal or his/her designee shall be given the power to issue warnings related to false alarms at their discretion upon each violation. 
(e)  False alarms: Requirements and penalties for alarm contractors. 
(1)  Shall provide each alarm customer with a copy of this chapter and shall obtain a written acknowledgment of receipt of a copy of this false alarm ordinance signed by the customer. 
(2)  Shall retain on file for the duration of each alarm contract a copy of this chapter containing the signed acknowledgment of the customer. 
(3)  Penalty for failure to comply: For each occurrence of a violation of this section of the false alarm ordinance after the fifth one the fine shall be $250.00 per violation. 
(f)  Each and every time a violation occurs, it shall be deemed a separate offense. No provision of this chapter shall be construed to impair any common law or statutory cause of action, or legal remedy there from of any person for injury or damage arising from any violation of this chapter or other law. 
(g)  Any person charged with a violation of this false alarm ordinance may offer proof at any hearing relating to such violation that the false alarm in question was caused by: 
(1)  A lightning strike or other act of God; 
(2)  The act of some third party whom the person could not control; or 
(3)  Failure of an alarm contractor to repair the alarm system which made the false alarm after being employed by the person to make such repair; provided however, the person has again made a good faith attempt to have the alarm system repaired after the false alarm which is the subject of the charge. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008; Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 2-19-2014) 
Sec. 10-10. - Temporary occupancy. 
(a)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be issued for a portion or portions of a facility. The fire marshal's office shall forward written comments to the building official of the city allowing or disallowing occupancy of a partially completed facility. 
(b)  All facilities described in this section shall be equipped with the following minimum features in order for a temporary certificate of occupancy to be issued: 
(1)  All required portions of the means of egress shall be complete which does not include carpet, wall covering, etc. 
(2)  All exit signage shall be in place and in proper working order. 
(3)  All emergency lighting fixtures shall be in place and in proper working order. 
(4)  All required exits shall be installed and equipped with approved hardware. 
(5)  All automatic sprinkler systems (if so equipped) shall be installed, tested, and in proper working order. 
(6)  All fire barriers shall be installed and properly sealed. 
(c)  Any facility where a temporary certificate of occupancy has been issued shall be in compliance with the above features. If necessary, certain portions of a facility may be issued a temporary certificate of occupancy as long as all the above criteria have been met for that particular area. The fire prevention bureau and the building inspectors conducting the inspection shall agree upon the terms of the temporary certificate of occupancy and the document shall bear the names and signatures of both parties granting the approval. 
(d)  A temporary certificate of occupancy may be granted to a facility for a fire detection system for a period not to exceed 30 days, provided the occupant supplies a constant firewatch. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008; Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 2-19-2014) 
Sec. 10-11. - Persons allowed in the vicinity of a fire. 
    No persons except firefighters, police officers, members of the governing body of the city, the owners of the subject property or their agents, and the agents of insuring companies shall be allowed within the immediate vicinity of any fire without being requested there by the fire chief or the officer in charge at the time. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in charge of a fire may be arrested for violation of this section and, on conviction thereof, be punished for the violation of a city ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-12. - Following fire apparatus prohibited. 
    The driver of any vehicle other than one on official business shall not follow any fire apparatus traveling in response to a fire alarm closer than 500 feet or drive into or park such vehicle within the block where fire apparatus has stopped in response to a fire alarm. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in charge of a fire may be arrested for violation of this section and on conviction thereof be punished. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-13. - Crossing fire hose prohibited. 
    No vehicle shall be driven over any unprotected hose of the department of fire and emergency services when laid down on any street, roadway, or private driveway without the consent of the fire service official in command. Any person refusing to obey the orders and directions of the officer in charge of a fire may be arrested for violation of this section and, on conviction thereof, be punished for the violation of a City of Brunswick ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-14. - Obstructing a fire station. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to put any obstruction of any nature whatsoever in front of any fire station or location where fire service equipment is located. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-15. - Relocation of commercial occupancies. 
    When an existing commercial occupancy relocates to another structure, the owner or responsible parties are to notify in writing the building's inspectors office, the fire marshal's office and the business license office of the relocation. A new inspection shall be scheduled and performed prior to the occupancy of the new structure. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-16. - Fire extinguishing equipment installation in restaurants or other public facilities having cooking equipment. 
(a)  Approved fire extinguishing equipment shall be installed in restaurants or other public facilities having cooking appliances such as ranges, deep fat fryers, grills or broilers. 
(b)  The standards for approval of such facilities shall be based on NFPA 96 or an equivalent measure deemed acceptable to the fire marshal or assistant fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-17. - Combustible roof construction. 
    Plans for the construction of all roofs shall comply with NFPA pamphlets 203M, 220, 251 and 256. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-18. - Portable buildings. 
(a)  All portable buildings open to the public shall provide adequate measures to prevent the superstructure from sliding, uplift, rotation and overturning. 
(b)  Such portable buildings shall be provided with anchors and tie downs such as cast-in-place, concrete dead-men eyelets embedded in concrete slabs, and runways. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-19. - Standards for installation of standpipes and water supply connections for firefighting use. 
(a)  Any structure erected with a maximum travel distance over 200 feet from any planned operating position of responding fire apparatus will provide a standpipe system that meets or exceeds NFPA 14, Standard for the Installation of Standpipe and Hose Systems. 
(Ord. No. 1035, § 1, 2-19-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1035, § 1, adopted February 19, 2014, repealed the former section 10-19, and enacted a new section 10-19 as set out herein. The former section 10-19 pertained to Standards for minimum size water mains and spacing of fire hydrants for all new construction and additions and renovations on private property and derived from Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008. 
Sec. 10-20. - Standards for minimum size water mains and spacing of fire hydrants for all new construction and additions and renovations on private property. 
(a)  Subdivisions of freestanding single-family homes shall have eight-inch water mains with three-way fire hydrants spaced no more than 450 feet apart. 
(b)  Approved subdivisions of multifamily residential units shall have eight-inch or larger water mains installed. Three-way type fire hydrants shall be located to permit all portions of all buildings to be reached with hose lays not to exceed 400 feet by road travel. All hydrants shall be capable of providing a minimum flow of 1,000 gallons per minute (GPM). Verification of water flow GPM shall be conducted as set forth in NFPA 291. 
(1)  Exception: Hose lays may be extended to 500 feet in fire sprinkled projects. 
(c)  Industrial and commercial developments shall have 12-inch or larger mains installed with three-way fire hydrants spaced no more than 300 feet apart along dedicated roadways. 
(1)  Exception: This shall not apply to private driveways giving access from a public way to three or less buildings totaling a maximum of 500,000 square feet. 
(2)  Exception: Fire hydrants and water mains of a minimum of eight inches with a flow of 1,250 gallons per minute shall be placed so that all portions of all buildings shall be reached with hose lays not to exceed 400 feet by road travel. 
(d)  Existing six-inch or larger water mains and fire hydrants may be continued in use that meet the following criteria: 
(1)  The existing fire hydrant is in compliance with specified hose lay requirements. 
(2)  Any additional water mains and fire hydrants to be installed to meet hose lay requirements shall be supplied by a minimum of an eight-inch or larger water main. 
(3)  The existing fire hydrant shall provide a minimum of 1,000 gallons of water per minute. Verification of water flow shall be in accordance with NFPA 291. 
(e)  Commercial or industrial buildings provided with automatic fire sprinkler or standpipe systems shall have a three-way type fire hydrant placed within 150 feet of the fire department Siamese connection. 
(f)  Residential multifamily occupancies provided with automatic fire sprinkler protection or standpipe systems shall have a three-way fire hydrant placed within 250 feet of the fire department Siamese connection. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct the approach or visibility of any fire hydrant or fire department connection, closer than five feet in any direction, parallel with street access. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-21. - Inspections required. 
(a)  The fire marshal shall inspect or cause to be inspected at various intervals, to be determined by the authority having jurisdiction, all construction work pertaining to fire codes and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, site or facility. 
(b)  Owners, their agents or designees, of all buildings, tenant spaces, and/or commercial sites covered by this chapter are required to submit plans and specifications of the project to the building inspector's office prior to obtaining the necessary construction permits. For any plans submitted on the part of any planned business group, as defined by this chapter, said planned business group shall provide a designated project manager, who shall be responsible for all communications and plan submissions with the city. 
(1)  For any plans submitted on the part of any planned business group, as defined by this chapter, the authority having jurisdiction strongly recommends a pre-construction conference between the planned business group and the authority having jurisdiction. 
(c)  An 80 percent completion inspection, a 100 percent final inspection and a certificate of occupancy shall be obtained from the building inspector's office prior to the occupancy of the facility. 
(1)  Exception: Projects consisting of multifamily residential projects mandate 50 percent inspections in order to inspect the methods of sealing penetrations within and through walls. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-22. - Inspections permitted. 
    Inspections by the fire department may periodically be made of buildings and structures that are used for residential or non-residential purposes as follows: 
(1)  The time and frequency of inspections shall be determined by the fire marshal, but may be done at least annually for commercial structures, day cares, high hazard structures, apartment buildings or multifamily residential structures, industrial structures, or any other structures deemed appropriate by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(2)  The fire marshal may appoint his designee and/or the building official to undertake any inspection required by this chapter. 
(3)  A fee for inspections may be established in the adopted building inspector's office fee schedule to offset costs of the regulatory inspection program and shall be collected by the building inspector's office from each property subject to this chapter as required. Revenues shall be used for the inspection and enforcement program. 
(4)  Nothing in this section is intended to prevent inspections of property under nuisance abatement or other laws. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-23. - Further requirements. 
    It shall be the duty and requirement of any builder, contractor, developer, constructor, architect, planner, and any other person or persons involved in the construction, addition, renovation, remodeling, and planning of any building, home site, planned neighborhood, or any other structure or area to strictly follow the rules of this chapter of the City Code of Brunswick, the statutes of the State of Georgia, the NFPA, the IBC, the IFC, and any other rules, regulations, statutes, guidelines, and ordinances that may be applicable. It shall be the responsibility of such party to consult appropriate fire and building officials and get final approval and/or interpretation of definitions from all appropriate officials before commencing work on such projects. Failure to do so, when such approval was required, may result in appropriate penalties under this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-24. - Establishment and identification of fire lanes. 
(a)  The authority having jurisdiction may establish fire lanes for any new building and/or facility to ensure access for emergency equipment and to ensure the reasonable safety of persons occupying or using said premises, but such fire lanes shall not disturb existing, marked parking areas and/or roadways. Such fire lanes must also leave enough room for the free flow of traffic as required for that paved area, as determined by the authority having jurisdiction. 
(b)  The authority having jurisdiction may require the establishment of fire lanes around existing buildings and/or facilities where paved areas already exist provided that these fire lanes do not disturb existing, marked parking areas and leave enough room for the free flow of traffic as required for that paved area, as determined by the authority having jurisdiction. In said cases the areas will not be required to be to be upgraded to meet the design requirements of this chapter except for the posting of signs or curb markings to delineate the fire lanes. 
(c)  This section shall not apply to two-family dwellings unit/duplex or one- and two-family dwellings of any type. Also, the design of roadways and driveways in subdivisions, apartment buildings or multi-family residential, and residential board and care occupancy structures shall be governed by zoning regulations and requirements of the city and not by this chapter. 
(d)  Fire lanes, as established, shall be within the driving portions of the vehicle parking area and/or areas designated to accommodate emergency equipment on said premises. 
(e)  Such fire lanes shall be posted with signs stating "Fire Lane/No Parking" by the owner/business group of the property involved. The fire lane sign shall have a white background with red lettering and measure a minimum of 12 inches wide by 18 inches tall. The lettering of the sign shall be a minimum of two inches in height. The number of signs shall be determined by the authority having jurisdiction, but must have one sign at the beginning of a fire lane and one at the end and at least one sign every 50 feet of fire lane, be visible from both directions of the driving surface, and not be any more than five feet from the driving surface. All pavement curbs located in a fire lane shall be painted traffic red to designate the fire lane. 
(f)  Any property owner who fails to comply within 120 days from being notified in writing to establish or post such fire lanes may be issued a citation for failure to comply with this chapter, issued by summons to the municipal court, which notice shall be given to the property owner and/or business group by registered mail. 
(g)  A property owner/business group may appeal a decision made by the authority having jurisdiction to a panel consisting of the city engineer, or his designee, the fire marshal, or his designee, and the building official, or his designee, within 30 days of receiving notice of a decision by the authority having jurisdiction. This notice of appeal shall be filed with the fire marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-25. - Fire lane parking restrictions. 
(a)  Fire lanes shall be kept free of all obstructions with the exception given to emergency equipment and emergency vehicles. 
(b)  Non-emergency vehicles shall not park within any established fire lane. 
(c)  Whenever a non-emergency vehicle is found unattended or standing disabled in an established fire lane, a police officer or fire officer in charge shall attach to such vehicle a notice and/or citation to the owner of said vehicle, setting forth that such vehicle has been parked unlawfully, such citations shall be in the form of a summons to the municipal court. 
(d)  In an emergency situation, if such unlawful parking constitutes a hazard or impedes the orderly access of emergency equipment and/or emergency vehicles, the police officer or the fire officer in charge may have the vehicle towed to another portion of the lot or to another location off premises, which is not within the fire lane, all at the expense of the owner of such vehicle. 
(e)  In any prosecution or proceeding for unlawful parking in a fire lane the registered owner of the vehicle so parked shall be presumed to be the operator or in possession thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-26. - Construction of codes. 
    All codes, ordinances, standards and pamphlets adopted in this chapter shall be construed as the standard for fire codes' compliance among buildings within the city and shall prevail in matters of life safety over all other local codes, ordinances or standards which apply to the same building components or systems covered by this chapter. Final approving authority for fire codes' compliance covered in this section shall be the city fire marshal's office. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-27. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be enforced by authorized personnel of the city fire and emergency services, or by authorized officers of the city division of police services. In addition, the provisions of this chapter may be enforced by authorized officers of the Brunswick Police Department. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-28. - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter or the codes adopted by reference in this chapter or fail to comply therewith or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made pursuant to this chapter, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved there under and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the board of commissioners within the time set forth in this chapter, shall constitute a violation of a city ordinance. Any person violating this chapter or any of the codes and/or laws incorporated in this chapter shall be deemed guilty of violating a City of Brunswick ordinance and shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $500.00 or by imprisonment in the common jail of the county not to exceed 60 days, or by both fine and imprisonment. The imposition of one penalty shall not excuse the violation nor permit it to continue, and such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a specified time. When not otherwise specified, each day that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The application of the penalty in subsection (a) of this section shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of the prohibited conditions. 
(c)  Upon written notice from the fire marshal or his designee, work on any project that is being performed contrary to the provisions of this chapter and the codes adopted in this chapter, or otherwise being done in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall cease immediately. Such notice shall be given to the owner of the property, his agent, or the person doing the work and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. 
(d)  Permits or approvals may be revoked by the fire marshal or his designee when there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any materials or facts contained in plans or other information on which the permit or approval has been based, or when construction is not carried out in accordance with the approved plans. 
(e)  Whenever any of the officers or inspectors of the city fire department and city building inspections find conditions which are unsafe and/or in violation of the provisions or intent of the codes or ordinances enforced by the fire marshal's office, written notice, which has been approved by the fire marshal, shall be given to the owner, the owner's agent or the occupant or occupant's representative requiring that any activities impacted by the conditions shall cease until the condition is corrected. 
(f)  Any person or persons found to be in violation of sections 10-24 or 10-25 of this chapter shall be fined a minimum of $50.00 per offense. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-29. - Affirmation and adoption. 
    The city affirms through adoption all Codes and Standards legally enforced by the Georgia State Fire Marshal's Office. 
    Such affirmation/adoption shall take place automatically upon the adoption of a new Code or version thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Sec. 10-30. - Establishments and duties of the fire prevention section. 
(a)  The fire prevention codes shall be enforced by the fire prevention section in the department of fire and emergency services for the city. The fire prevention section shall also be known as the office of the fire marshal. 
(b)  The fire marshal in charge of the fire prevention section shall be appointed by the chief of the department of fire and emergency services in accordance with the city human resources rules and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1000, § 1, 6-18-2008) 
Chapter 11 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 983, § 1, adopted Sept. 6, 2006, revised ch. 11 in its entirety, in effect deleting ch. 11 and enacting a new ch. 11 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 11 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 862, §§ 1-17, adopted Jan. 20, 1988; and Ord. No. 907, §§ 1-5, adopted Dec. 18, 1997. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; housing, ch. 12; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 17; zoning, ch. 23; subdivision regulations, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - STATUTORY AUTHORIZATION, FINDINGS OF FACT, PURPOSE AND OBJECTIVES 

Sec. 11-1. - Statutory authorization. 
    Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Board of Commissioners of the City of Brunswick, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-1), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-2. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of Brunswick, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-2), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-3. - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(a)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(b)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(c)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; and 
(d)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; 
(e)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-3), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-4. - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
(a)  To protect human life and health; 
(b)  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
(c)  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(d)  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(e)  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(f)  To minimize prolonged business interruptions, and; 
(g)  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-4), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-5. - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the City of Brunswick, Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-5), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-6. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) in its flood insurance study (FIS), dated January 5, 2018, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this chapter. For those land areas acquired through annexation, the current effective FIS, supporting data and any revision thereto, for unincorporated Glynn County, dated January 5, 2018, are hereby adopted by reference. 
    Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in the FIS dated January 5, 2018. 
    The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located: City Engineer's Office, City Hall, 601 Gloucester Street, Brunswick. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-6), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-7. - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-7), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-8. - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-8), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-9. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance (other than Ordinance No. 862, as amended, which is the previous version of this chapter), easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-9), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-10. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body, and; (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-10), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-11. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or of any elected official or any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made thereunder. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-11), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-12. - Penalties for violation. 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than the maximum amount allowed under chapter 15 of the City Code of Brunswick or imprisoned for not more than 30 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-12), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-13. - Defined terms. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application: 
    Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
    Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction". 
    Appeal means a request for a review of the administrator's interpretation of any provision of this chapter. 
    Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    Area of special flood hazard is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 11-6. 
    Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    Basement means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(a)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials. 
(b)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events. 
(c)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
(d)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
    Development means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    Existing construction means any structure for which the "start of construction" commenced before March 6, 1974. 
    Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 6, 1974. 
    Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(a)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(b)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
    Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    Flood insurance study [means] the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    Floodplain administrator means the city engineer or such other person as the city manager may designate in writing from time to time. 
    Flood-proofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, blockage of bridge and culvert openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(a)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(b)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(c)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(d)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    LiMWA means the limit of moderate wave action and represents the approximate landward limit of the 1.5-foot breaking wave. The effects of wave hazards between the VE zone and the LiMWA (or between the shoreline and the LiMWA for areas where VE zones are not identified) will be similar to, but less severe than those in the VE zone. The LiMWA also determines the landward limit of the coastal A zone (CAZ). 
    Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
    Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929, the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988, or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a communities' Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    New construction means any structure (see definition) for which the "start of construction" commenced after March 6, 1974 and includes any subsequent improvements to the structure. 
    New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 6, 1974. 
    North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) as corrected in 1988 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    Recreational vehicle means a vehicle, which is: 
(a)  Built on a single chassis; 
(b)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(c)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(d)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    Substantial improvement means any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. The term does not, however, include either: 
(a)  Any project for improvement of a structure to correct existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the local code enforcement official and which are the minimum necessary to assure safe living conditions, or 
(b)  Any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the structure commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the structure. 
    Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    V zone certificate means that the National Flood Insurance Program (NFIP) regulations require coastal communities to ensure that buildings built in V zones are anchored to resist wind and water loads acting simultaneously. Buildings in V zones are subject to a greater hazard than buildings in other types of floodplains. Not only do they have to be elevated above the base flood elevation (BFE), they must be protected from the impact of waves, hurricane-force winds, and erosion. A registered professional engineer or architect must certify that the design and planned methods of construction meet NFIP requirements. The community must maintain a copy of this certification in the permit file for all structures built or substantially improved in the V zone. If breakaway walls are used to enclose areas below the building that exceed a design safe loading resistance of 20 pounds per square feet, those walls must also be certified by the registered professional engineer or architect. 
    Variance is a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-24), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Secs. 11-14-11-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 11-31. - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
    The city building official or such other person as may hereafter be designated in writing by the city manager is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-13), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-32. - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the administrator on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
    Specifically, the following information is required: 
(a)  Application stage: 
(1)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
(2)  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
(3)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of subsections 11-52(2) and 11-54(b); 
(4)  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of subsection 11-55(e); 
(5)  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development, and; 
(b)  Construction stage: For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood proofing is completed. Where a structure is subject to the provisions applicable to coastal high hazards areas, after placement of the lowest horizontal structural members. Any regulatory floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
    Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
    The administrator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-14), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-33. - Duties and responsibilities of administrator. 
    Duties of the administrator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
(a)  Review all development permits to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied; 
(b)  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(c)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(d)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 11-6, then the administrator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of article III. 
(e)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the regulatory floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with subsection 11-32(b). 
(f)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with subsection 11-32(b). 
(g)  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the administrator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with subsections 11-32(a)(3) and 11-52(2) or 11-54(b). 
(h)  Obtain design certification and a V zone certificate from a registered professional engineer or architect that any new construction or substantial improvement placed in a coastal high hazard area will meet the criteria of subsection 11-55(e). 
(i)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(j)  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(k)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(l)  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the administrator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
(m)  If a portion of the structure is located in a SFHA, the entire structure shall comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
(n)  If a structure is located in multiple flood zones and/or BFE's, the entire structure shall comply with the most restrictive requirements of this chapter. 
(o)  The administrator shall be authorized to render decisions regarding on-site construction activities involving fill placement and other floodplain management related activities. 
(p)  All records pertaining to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained in the office of the administrator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-15), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Secs. 11-34-11-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 

Sec. 11-51. - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions are required: 
(a)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure. 
(b)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
(c)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
(d)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. (Not applicable in coastal high hazard areas). 
(1)  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings on opposing walls having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and, 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
(2)  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area. 
(3)  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
(4)  The building permit applicant (owner or agent) must sign a "Non-conversion agreement for certain structures in the floodplain," a document provided by the floodplain administrator. The non-conversion agreement provides the right to the floodplain administrator to inspect the enclosed area at any time. The document will be recorded and kept with the building file. This agreement will apply to all floor levels below the BFE that are protected by flood vents. 
(e)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
(f)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces. 
(g)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
(h)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
(i)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding. 
(j)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter, shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-16), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-52. - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard designated as A1-30, AE, AH, A (with estimated BFE), the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 11-51(d), "elevated buildings". 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Wood framed construction shall not be allowed as a structure's foundation system below the BFE plus one foot. FEMA approved types 4 and 5 flood resistant materials are allowed within the freeboard zone. CMU type exterior walls used in garages shall be erected to the BFE plus one foot. 
(2)  Non-residential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify, using the latest version of the Flood-Proofing Certificate, FEMA form 086-0-34, that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in subsection 11-33(f). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an either existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that: 
(i)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
(ii)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 48 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement (ref. subsection 11-51(f) above). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(i)  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
(ii)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
(iii)  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "new construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsection (3)a. and c., above. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-6, are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this article. 
(5)  Areas of special flood hazard (zones AE) with established base flood elevations and without designated floodways: For properties located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-6, where streams exist and base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements, shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principals. 
b.  New construction and substantial improvements shall be elevated or flood proofed to elevations established in accordance with section 11-6. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-17), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-53. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-6, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(a)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 11-6, then the administrator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this article. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (b) and (c) shall apply: 
(b)  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 25 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
(c)  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 11-51(d), "Elevated buildings". 
(d)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(e)  The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(f)  For subdivisions and developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-18), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-54. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-6, may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of subsection 11-51(d), "Elevated buildings". 
(b)  The administrator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(c)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in subsections 11-32(a)(3) and (b). 
(d)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-19), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-55. - Coastal high hazard areas (V-zones and Coastal A (LiMWA)). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 11-6, are areas designated as coastal high hazard areas (V-zones and Coastal A (LiMWA)). These areas have special flood hazards associated with wave action and storm surge, therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
(a)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be located a minimum of 25 feet landward of the reach of mean high tide. 
(b)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be elevated on piles, columns, or shear walls parallel to the flow of water so that the bottom of the lowest supporting horizontal structural member (excluding pilings or columns) is located no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation level. All space below the lowest supporting member shall remain free of obstruction. Open lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action and in accordance with subsection (f) below. 
(c)  All new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be securely anchored on pilings, columns, or shear walls. 
(d)  Wood framed construction shall not be allowed as a structure's foundation system below the BFE plus one foot. 
(e)  All pile and column foundations and the structures attached thereto shall be anchored to resist flotation, collapse, and lateral movement due to the combined effects of wind and water loads acting simultaneously on all building components, both (non-structural and structural). Water loading values shall equal or exceed those of the base flood. Wind loading values shall be in accordance with the most current edition of the Standard Building Code. 
(f)  A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify, using a V zone certificate and elevation certificate, which the design, specifications and plans for construction are in compliance with the provisions contained in subsections (i), (j) and (k) herein. 
(g)  All space below the lowest horizontal supporting member must remain free of obstruction. Open lattice work or decorative screening may be permitted for aesthetic purposes only and must be designed to wash away in the event of abnormal wave action without causing structural damage to the supporting foundation or elevated portion of the structure. The following design specifications are allowed: 
1.  No solid walls shall be allowed. 
2.  Material shall consist of lattice or mesh screening only. 
3.  If aesthetic lattice work or screening is utilized, any enclosed space shall not be used for human habitation, but shall be designed to be used only for parking of vehicles, building access, or limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises. 
4.  The enclosure must not exceed 299 square feet. 
(h)  Prior to construction, plans for any structures having latticework or decorative screening must be submitted to the administrator for approval. 
(i)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to any structure shall not enclose the space below the lowest floor except with latticework or decorative screening, as provided in this section. 
(j)  There shall be no fill used as structural support. Non-compacted fill may be used around the perimeter of a building for landscaping/aesthetic purposes provided the fill will wash out from storm surge, (thereby rendering the building free of obstruction) prior to generating excessive loading forces, ramping effects, or wave deflection. The administrator shall approve design plans for landscaping/aesthetic fill only after the applicant has provided an analysis by an engineer, architect, and/or soil scientist, which demonstrates that the following factors have been fully considered: 
1.  Particle composition of fill material does not have a tendency for excessive natural compaction; 
2.  Volume and distribution of fill will not cause wave defection to adjacent properties; and 
3.  Slope of fill will not cause wave run-up or ramping. 
(k)  There shall be no alteration of sand dunes or mangrove stands, which would increase potential flood damage. 
(l)  Prohibit the placement of manufactured homes (mobile homes), except in an existing manufactured homes park or subdivision. A replacement manufactured home may be placed on a lot in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision provided the anchoring standards of this section are met. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-20), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-56. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than 50 lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-21), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Sec. 11-57. - Standard for critical facilities. 
(a)  No new critical facilities nor any substantially improved critical facilities shall be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(c)  Hazardous materials shall not be stored in the SFHA. The following materials are prohibited in the SFHA: acetone, ammonia, benzene, calcium carbide, carbon disulfide, celluloid, chlorine, hydrochloric acid, prussic, magnesium, nitric acid, oxides of nitrogen, phosphorus, potassium, sodium, and sulfur. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-22), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Secs. 11-58-11-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 

Sec. 11-71. - Variances. 
(a)  The city commission shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
(b)  The city commission shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the administrator in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the city commission may appeal such decision to the appropriate court, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(d)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as an historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(e)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(f)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(g)  In reviewing such requests, the city commission shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(h)  Conditions for variances: 
(1)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
a.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
b.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and; 
c.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(2)  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(3)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(4)  The administrator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(i)  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the administrator may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 983, § 1(11-23), 9-6-2006; Ord. No. 1052, § 1, 12-20-2017) 
Cross reference- Subdivision regulations, App. B. 
Chapter 12 - HOUSING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; fire prevention and protection, ch. 10; flood damage prevention, ch. 11; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 17; utilities, ch. 22; zoning, ch. 23; subdivision regulations, app. B. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide housing codes, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III; establishment of housing authorities, O.C.G.A. § 8-3-4. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 12-1. - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "Minimum Standards Housing Code" of the city. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.01, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-2. - Purpose. 
    It is the purpose of the chapter to provide minimum basic and uniform standards governing the condition, occupancy and maintenance of dwellings, apartment houses, rooming houses or buildings, structures or premises used as such or designated or intended for such use in the city and to establish necessary safeguards for the safety, health and welfare of the occupants and users thereof. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.02, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-3. - Scope. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use and occupancy location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure or any appurtenances connected or attached to such buildings or structures and accessory structures or buildings located on such premises within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  No provision of this chapter shall be held to deprive any federal or state agency, municipal authority or health department having jurisdiction, of any power or authority which it had on the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives or of any remedy then existing for the enforcement of its orders, regulations, ordinances or laws, nor shall it deprive any individual or corporation of its legal rights as provided by law. 
(c)  In any case where a provision of this chapter is found to be in conflict with a portion of any other provision of this Code or city ordinance, the provision which establishes the higher standard for the protection of health, welfare and safety of the occupants of dwellings, apartment houses, rooming houses or buildings, structures or premises used as such or designated or intended for such use shall prevail. 
(d)  Buildings which are moved or relocated shall be considered new buildings and shall comply with all of the requirements of applicable codes and ordinances of the city. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.03, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-4. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alter or alteration means any change or modification in construction or occupancy. 
    Apartment means a room or a suite of rooms occupied, or which is intended or designed to be occupied, as the home or residence of one individual, family or household, for housekeeping purposes. 
    Apartment house means any building, or portion thereof which is designed, built, rented, leased, let or hired out to be occupied, or which is occupied as the home or residence of more than two families living independently of each other and doing their own cooking in the building, and shall include flats and apartments. 
    Appeal board means the housing standards appeal board. 
    Approved means approved by the commissioner of health. 
    Area, as applied to the dimensions of a building, means the maximum horizontal projected area of the building at grade. 
    Area (See Floor area). 
    Attic story means any story situated wholly or partly in the roof, so designated, arranged or built as to be used for business, storage or habitation. 
    Basement means that portion of a building between floor and ceiling, which is partly below and partly above grade (as defined in this section), but so located that the vertical distance from grade to the floor below is less than the vertical distance from grade to ceiling, provided, however, that the distance from grade to ceiling shall be at least four feet, six inches. (See also Story.) 
    Building means any structure built for the support, shelter, or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels, or property of kind. The term "building" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof." Further, the term shall include but not be limited to structure, appurtenance, dwelling, apartment or rooming house. 
    Building, existing, means a building erected prior to the adoption of this chapter or one for which a legal building permit has been issued. 
    Cellar means that portion of a building, the ceiling of which is entirely below grade or less than four feet, six inches above grade. (See also Story.) 
    Commissioner of health means the legally designated health officer of the county board of health or his authorized representative, and one of such authorized representatives shall be and is hereby designated the city building inspector, his assistants, agents, servants and employees. 
    Dwelling, when used in this chapter without other qualifications, means a structure occupied exclusively for residential purpose by not more than two families. 
    Dwelling unit means any room or group of rooms located within a dwelling and forming a single habitable unit with facilities which are used or intended to be used, for living, sleeping, cooking and eating. 
    Existing building (See Building, existing.) 
    Exit corridor means any corridor or passageway used as an integral part of the exit system. That portion of a corridor or passageway which exceeds the allowable distance of travel to an exit, becomes an exit corridor or passageway. 
    Exit passageway means an enclosed hallway or corridor connecting a required exit to a street. 
    Extermination means the control and elimination of insects, rodents or other pests by eliminating their harborage places; by removing or making inaccessible materials that may serve as their food; by poisoning, spraying, fumigating, trapping; or by any other recognized and legal pest elimination methods approved by the commissioner of health. 
    Family means one or more persons living together, whether related to each other by birth or not, and having common housekeeping facilities. 
    Floor area means the area included within surrounding walls of a building, exclusive of vent shafts and courts. 
    Garbage means the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food. 
    Habitable room means a room occupied by one or more persons for living, eating or sleeping purposes, not including toilets, laundries, serving and storage pantries, corridors, halls, cellars and spaces that are not used frequently. 
    Health officer. (See Commissioner of health .) 
    Heating. The following definitions apply to heating installations: 
(1)  Central heating boilers and furnaces means and includes warm air furnaces, floor-mounted direct-fired unit heaters, hot water boilers and steam boilers operating at less than 15 pounds of gauge pressure, used for heating of buildings or structures. 
(2)  Chimney means a vertical shaft of masonry, reinforced concrete or other approved noncombustible, heat resisting material enclosing one or more flues, for the purpose of removing products of combustion from solid, liquid, or gas fuel. 
(3)  Flue means a vertical passageway for products of combustion. 
(4)  Vent pipe, as applied to heating, means a pipe for removing products of combustion from gas appliances. 
(5)  Water heater means a device for the heating and storage of water to be used for other than heating or industrial purposes. 
    Infestation means the presence, within or around a dwelling, of any insects, rodents or other pests. 
    Inner court means an open unoccupied space bounded by the walls of the building, but located within the exterior walls of the building. 
    Multiple dwelling has the same meaning as "apartment house." 
    Occupant means any person, over one year of age, living, sleeping, cooking, eating in or having actual possession of a dwelling unit or rooming unit. 
    Operator means any person who has charge, care or control of a building or part thereof, in which dwelling units or rooming units are let. 
    Ordinary minimum winter conditions means the temperature 20 degrees Fahrenheit above the lowest recorded temperature for the previous 15-year period. 
    Owner means and includes his duly authorized agent or attorney, a purchaser, devisee, fiduciary or a person having a vested or contingent interest in real property. 
    Plumbing means the practice, materials and fixtures used in the installation, maintenance, extension and alteration of all piping, fixtures, appliances and appurtenances in connection with any of the following: Sanitary drainage or storm drainage facilities; the venting system; public or private water-supply systems, within or adjacent to any building, structure or conveyance; also the practice and materials used in the installation, maintenance, extension or alteration of stormwater, liquid-waste or sewage, and water supply systems of any premises to their connection with any point of public disposal or other acceptable terminal. 
    Premises means a platted lot or part thereof or unplatted lot or parcel of land or plot of land including the buildings or structures thereon. 
    Public area means an unoccupied open space adjoining a building and on the same property that is used jointly by occupants of structure containing two or more dwelling units. 
    Repair means the replacement of existing work with the same kind of material used in the existing work, not including additional work that would change the structural safety of the building, or that would affect or change required exit facilities, a vital element of an elevator, plumbing, gas piping, wiring or heating installations, or that would be in violation of a provision of law or ordinance. The term "repair" or "repairs" shall not apply to any change of construction. 
    Required means required by some provision of this chapter. 
    Residential occupancy means buildings in which families or households live or in which sleeping accommodations are provided, and all dormitories. Such buildings include, among others, the following: dwellings, multiple dwellings, and lodging houses. 
    Rooming house means any dwelling, or that part of any dwelling containing one or more rooming units, in which space is let by the owner or operator to three or more persons who are not husband or wife, son or daughter, mother or father, or sister or brother of the owner or operator; and includes, but is not limited to, boardinghouses, lodginghouses or tenement houses. 
    Rooming unit means any room or group of rooms forming a single habitable unit used or intended to be used for living and sleeping, but not for cooking or eating purposes. 
    Rubbish means combustible and noncombustible waste materials, except garbage. The term shall include the residue from the burning of wood, coal, coke and other combustible material, paper, rags, cartons, boxes, wood excelsior, rubber, leather, tree branches, yard trimmings, tin cans, metals, mineral matter, glass, crockery and dust. 
    Supplied means paid for, furnished or provided by or under the control of the owner or operator. 
    Stairway means one or more flights of stairs, and the necessary landings and platforms connecting them, to form a continuous and uninterrupted passage from one story to another in a building or structure. 
    Story means that portion of a building included between the upper surface of any floor and the upper surface of the floor next above, except that the topmost story shall be that portion of a building included between the upper surface of the topmost floor and the ceiling or roof above. 
    Structure means that which is built or constructed, an edifice or building of any kind, or any piece of work artificially built up or composed of parts joined together in some definite manner. The term "structure" shall be construed as if followed by the words "or part thereof". 
    Walls means: 
(1)  Bearing walls means a wall which supports any vertical load in addition to its own weight. 
(2)  Cavity wall means a wall built of masonry units or of plain concrete, or a combination of these materials, so arranged as to provide an air space within the wall, and in which the inner and outer parts of the wall are tied together with metal ties. 
(3)  Curtain wall means a nonbearing wall between columns or piers and which is not supported by girders or beams, but is supported on the ground. 
(4)  Faced wall means a wall in which the masonry facing and backing are so bonded as to exert common action under load. 
(5)  Exterior wall means a wall, bearing or nonbearing, which is used as an enclosing wall for a building, but which is not necessarily suitable for use as a party wall or fire wall. 
(6)  Fire wall means a wall of incombustible construction which subdivides a building or separates buildings to restrict the spread of fire and which starts at the foundation and extends continuously through all stories to and above the roof, except where the roof is of fireproof or fire-resistive construction and the wall is carried up tightly against the underside of the roof slab. 
(7)  Foundation wall means a wall below the first floor extending below the adjacent ground level and serving as support for a wall, pier, column or other structural part of a building. 
(8)  Hollow wall of masonry means a wall built of masonry units so arranged as to provide an air space within the wall, and in which the inner and outer parts of the wall are bonded together with masonry units or steel. 
(9)  Nonbearing wall means a wall which supports no load other than its own weight. 
(10)  Panel wall means a nonbearing wall in skeleton or framed construction, built between columns or piers and wholly supported at each story. 
(11)  Parapet wall means that part of any wall entirely above the roof line. 
(12)  Party wall means a wall used or adapted for joint service between two buildings. 
(13)  Retaining wall means any wall used to resist the lateral displacement of any material. 
    Writing means and includes printing and typewriting. 
    Meaning of certain words. Whenever the words "apartment," "apartment house," "dwelling," "dwelling unit," "rooming house," "rooming unit" or "premises" are used in this chapter, they shall be construed as though they were followed by the words "or any part thereof." 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.09, 7-5-1972) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 12-5. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant, or let to another for occupancy, any dwelling for the purpose of living, sleeping, cooking, or eating therein, which does not comply with the provisions or standards contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.10, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-6. - Application to existing buildings. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any dwelling, apartment house, rooming house or building, structure or premises used as such or designated or intended for such use, irrespective of when such buildings were constructed, altered or repaired. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.04, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-7. - Maintenance. 
    All buildings or structures, both existing and new, and all parts thereof, shall be maintained in a safe and sanitary condition. All devices or safeguards which are required by the ordinances of the city in a building when erected, altered, relocated or repaired, shall be maintained in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.08, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-8. - Responsibilities of owner. 
    The responsibilities of the owner are as follows: 
(1)  To let no dwelling or dwelling unit to anyone for occupancy unless it meets minimum standards set forth in sections 12-61 and 12-63 through 12-67. 
(2)  To have dwelling in clean, sanitary, habitable condition, and free from infestation before renting; to clean, repair and exterminate if needed, to meet the aforestated requirements before offering for rent. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.19, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-9. - Responsibilities of occupant. 
    The responsibilities of the occupant are as follows: 
(1)  To keep dwelling and premises under his control in a clean and sanitary condition. No dwelling shall be vacated until it is reasonably cleaned by vacating occupant. 
(2)  To dispose of rubbish and garbage as prescribed in this chapter. 
(3)  To keep plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and to exercise reasonable care in the proper use and the operation thereof. 
(4)  To use reasonable care not to deposit or permit to be deposited any matter or object in water closet, bathing facility, sink, lavatory or other plumbing fixture which will prohibit or obstruct the fixture's intended use, or which may directly or indirectly result in, or contribute to, the obstruction of any sanitary service or septic tank. 
(5)  In single dwellings to exterminate rodents, pests, and household insects both within the dwelling and on the premises; in a dwelling unit, to exterminate rodents, pests, and household insects. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this section where the occupant is not the owner, the owner shall take reasonable action to make the dwelling and premises reasonably vermin, insect and rodent proof before renting same. 
(6)  No occupant shall willfully destroy, deface, remove or impair any of the facilities, equipment or any part of the structure of a dwelling unit, dwelling, multi-dwelling or apartment. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.20, 7-5-1972) 
Secs. 12-10-12-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, Ch. 2. 

Sec. 12-36. - Enforcement officers; records. 
(a)  The commissioner of health as the health officer or city building inspector or assistant building inspector shall administer the provisions of this chapter and he or his authorized representative shall have authority to make inspections to determine the conditions of dwellings, apartment houses, rooming houses or buildings, structures or premises used as such or designated or intended for such use within the corporate limits of the city. 
(b)  The health officer or city building inspector or assistant building inspector shall keep or cause to be kept a record opened for public inspection of activities relating to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.05, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-37. - Right of entry. 
    The commissioner of health or his duly authorized representative or city building inspector or assistant building inspector may enter any dwelling, apartment house, rooming house or building, structure or premises used as such or designated or intended for such use in the city at all reasonable times to perform any duties imposed upon them by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.06, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-38. - Action by board. 
    After hearing, the appeal board may vary the application of any provision of this chapter, or extend the time for compliance with the provisions of this chapter to any particular case when the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice or cause undue hardship and when it is clearly evident that reasonable safety and sanitation is assured, provided, such variance would not be contrary to the purpose and intent of this chapter. In every such case and after such hearing, the appeal board shall sustain, modify or withdraw notice depending upon its findings. Such findings shall be in writing and shall be open for public inspection. A certified copy of the appeal board's decision shall be mailed to the appellant. The decision of the appeal board shall be final; subject, however, to such remedy or appeal which any aggrieved party may have at law or in equity. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.07(f), 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-39. - Appeals board; composition, etc. 
    A housing standards appeal board consisting of five members is hereby established. The members shall be appointed by the city commission, and shall serve for overlapping terms of three years or until succeeded. The initial individual appointments shall be for staggered terms. No member of the board shall hold any public office or position. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled by the appointing authority. Members shall be removed for cause by the city commission upon written charges and after a public hearing. Absence without cause in excess of 33 1/3 percent from the number of yearly meetings shall be cause for removal from office. Three members of the board shall constitute a quorum and such quorum shall be required to conduct any and all official business of appeal board. Members may succeed themselves. No compensation shall be paid to members of the board. The board shall adopt such administrative rules as it may deem necessary in order to carry out the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.07(g), 7-5-1972) 
Cross reference- Boards, commissions and government agencies, § 2-301 et seq. 
Secs. 12-40-12-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - MINIMUM STANDARDS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 12-61. - Plumbing systems and equipment. 
    Every dwelling unit shall contain not less than the following: 
(1)  Each dwelling unit shall be connected to a potable water supply and to a public sewer system or other approved sewage disposal system; provided that if a public sewer is within 200 feet of a dwelling unit such unit must be connected to the public sewer system. 
(2)  Each dwelling unit shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, water closet and hot water heater, all in good working condition and installed in accordance with the plumbing code of the city. 
(3)  Each existing dwelling unit shall contain not less than a water closet, lavatory and kitchen sink. After the effective date of the ordinance from which this chapter derives all dwelling units shall contain not less than a kitchen sink, lavatory, tub or shower, a water closet and a hot water heater, all in good working condition and installed in accordance with the plumbing code of the city. The hot water heater shall be of the usual dwelling house type and capable of maintaining a supply of water at 12 degrees Fahrenheit equal to the gallonage capacity of the heater tank. 
(4)  All plumbing fixtures and distribution systems shall meet the standards of the plumbing code of the city and shall be maintained in a state of good repair and in good working order. 
(5)  All required plumbing fixtures shall be located within the dwelling unit in such manner to be accessible to the occupants of same. Provided that if it is not physically practicable to install the water closet within the existing dwelling unit such closet may be installed on a properly enclosed portion of a roofed porch attached to the dwelling, if the installation is adjacent to the dwelling unit and can be reached by occupants of the dwelling unit without passage through or by any other dwelling unit. The water closet, and tub or shower shall be located in a room or rooms affording privacy to the user. 
(6)  No owner, tenant or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall cause any service facility, equipment or utility which is required under section 12-63 to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies, when discontinuance of service is approved or required by enforcement agency or other governmental unit. 
(7)  When a water closet has been properly installed, the existing privy or outside water toilet shall be completely removed and the place where it was located shall be filled and properly disinfected. 
(8)  Every occupant of a dwelling unit shall keep all plumbing fixtures therein in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be required to exercise reasonable care in the proper use and operation thereof. 
(9)  All new construction shall meet applicable state minimum standard codes to require the installation of high-efficiency plumbing fixtures. 
(a)  The definitions for section 12-61(9) are as follows: 
1.  "Construction" means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet, or urinal in an existing building. 
2.  "Department" means the Department of Community Affairs. 
3.  "Lavatory faucet" means a faucet that discharges into a lavatory basin in a domestic or commercial installation. 
4.  "Plumbing fixture" means a device that receives water, waste, or both and discharges the water, waste, or both into a drainage system. The term includes a kitchen sink, utility sink, lavatory, bidet, bathtub, shower, urinal, toilet, water closet, or drinking water fountain. 
5.  "Plumbing fixture fitting" means a device that controls and directs the flow of water. The term includes a sink faucet, lavatory faucet, showerhead, or bath filler. 
6.  "Pressurized flushing device" means a device that contains a valve that: 
(A)  Is attached to a pressurized water supply pipe that is of sufficient size to deliver water at the necessary rate of flow to ensure flushing when the valve is open; and 
(B)  Opens on actuation to allow water to flow into the fixture at a rate and in a quantity necessary for the operation of the fixture and gradually closes to avoid water hammer. 
7.  "Toilet" means a water closet. 
8.  "Water closet" means a fixture with a water-containing receptor that receives liquid and solid body waste and on actuation conveys the waste through an exposed integral trap into a drainage system and which is also referred to as a toilet. 
9.  "WaterSense" means a voluntary program of the United States Environmental Protection Agency designed to identify and promote water efficient products and practices. 
(b)  The standards related to high-efficiency plumbing fixtures shall include without limitation, the following: 
1.  A water closet or toilet that: 
(A)  Is a dual flush water closet that meets the following standards: 
(i)  The average flush volume of two reduced flushes and one full flush may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
(ii)  The toilet meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the following standards, as applicable: 
(I)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2-2008; and 
(II)  American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.14-2006 "Six-Liter Water Closets Equipped with a Dual Flushing Device"; and 
(iii)  Is listed to the WaterSense Tank-Type High Efficiency Toilet Specification; or 
(B)  Is a single flush water closet, including gravity, pressure assisted, and electro-hydraulic tank types, that meets the following standards: 
(i)  The average flush volume may not exceed 1.28 gallons; 
(ii)  The toilet must meet the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.192/CSA B45.1 or A112.19.14; and 
(iii)  The toilet must be listed to the WaterSense Tank-Type High efficiency toilet specification; 
2.  A shower head that allows a flow of no more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
3.  A urinal and associated flush valve that: 
(A)  Uses no more than 0.5 gallons of water per flush; 
(B)  Meets the performance, testing, and labeling requirements prescribed by the American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.2/CSA B45.1; 
(C)  For flushing urinals, meets all WaterSense specifications for flushing urinals; and 
(D)  Where nonwater urinals are employed, complies with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.3/CSA B45.4 or American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.19.19/CSA B45.4. Nonwater urinals shall be cleaned and maintained in accordance with the manufacturer's instructions after installation. Where nonwater urinals are installed they shall have a water distribution line roughed-in to the urinal location at a minimum height of 56 inches (1,422 mm) to allow for the installation of an approved backflow prevention device in the event of a retrofit. Such water distribution lines shall be installed with shut-off valves located as close as possible to the distributing main to prevent the creation of dead ends. Where nonwater urinals are installed, a minimum of one water supplied fixture rated at a minimum of one water supply fixture unit shall be installed upstream on the same drain line to facilitate drain line flow and rinsing; 
4.  A lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 1.5 gallons of water per minute at a pressure of 60 pounds per square inch in accordance with American Society of Mechanical Engineers Standard A112.18.1/CSA B.125.1 and listed to the WaterSense High-Efficiency Lavatory Faucet Specification; and 
5.  A kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of no more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute. 
(c)  To the extent that the standards set forth in this Code section exceed the National Energy Conservation Policy Act, as amended, and 10 C.F.R. 430.32, the department is directed to petition the Department of Energy for a waiver of federal preemption pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 6297(d). 
(d)  A person may be exempted from the requirements of subsection 12-61(b), relative to new construction and to the repair or renovation of an existing building, under the following conditions: 
1.  When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets, or shower heads within such existing building; 
2.  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design, or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets, or shower heads required by this part were installed; 
3.  When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
4.  When units to be installed are: 
(A)  Specifically designed for use by persons with disabilities; 
(B)  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
(C)  Toilets for juveniles. 
(e)  To be exempted under subsection 12-61(d), a person must submit an application, together with an exemption permit fee of ten dollars to the building inspector's office, stating the reasons he or she wishes to be exempted from the requirements of subsection 12-61(b) and include which specific exemption(s) under subsection 12-61(d) is/are applicable. The application must include a statement from a licensed plumber that the applicant meets one or more exemptions listed under subsection 12-61(d). The building inspector's office has two business days to grant or deny the request. A denied applicant may appeal to the city manager; provided the denied applicant submit a written appeal to the city manager within five days after the application is denied. The city manager's decision is final. 
(f)  Any person who installs any toilet, faucet, urinal, or shower head in violation of this Code section shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.11, 7-5-1972; Ord. No. 1024, § 1, 7-18-2012) 
Sec. 12-62. - Light and ventilation. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or let to another for occupancy any dwelling or dwelling unit, for the purpose of living therein, which does not comply with the following requirements: 
(1)  Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight facing directly to the outdoors. The minimum total window area, measured between stops, for every habitable room shall be ten percent of the floor area of such room. Whenever walls or portions of adjacent structures are located less than five feet from the window and extend to a level above that of the ceiling of the room, such a window shall not be deemed to face directly to the outdoors and shall not be included as contributing to the required minimum total window areas. Whenever the only window in a room is a skylight-type window in the top of such room the total window area of such skylight shall equal at least 15 percent of the total floor area of such room. 
(2)  Every habitable room shall have at least one window or skylight which can easily be opened, or such other device as will adequately ventilate the room. The total of openable window area in every habitable room shall equal to at least 45 percent of the minimum window area size or minimum skylight-type window size, as required, or shall have other approved, equivalent ventilation. 
(3)  Every bathroom and water closet compartment shall comply with the light and ventilation requirements for habitable rooms except that no window or skylight shall be required in adequately ventilated bathrooms and water closet rooms equipped with an approved automatic ventilation system. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.12, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-63. - Electrical systems. 
(a)  Every dwelling shall be wired for electric lights and convenience receptacles. Every habitable room shall contain floor or wall-type electric convenience receptacles, in such manner as determined by the standards established in the electrical code of the city. There shall be installed in every bathroom, water closet room, laundry room and furnace room at least one supplied ceiling or wall type electric light fixture. 
(b)  Every public hall and stairway in every multiple family dwelling shall be adequately lighted by electric lights at all times when natural daylight is not sufficient. 
(c)  All fixtures, receptacles, equipment and wiring shall be maintained in a state of good repair, safe and capable of being used and installed in accordance with the electrical code of the city. 
(d)  No owner, tenant or occupant of a dwelling or dwelling unit shall cause any service facility, equipment or utility which is required under section 12-65 to be removed from or shut off from or discontinued for any occupied dwelling let by him, except for such temporary interruption as may be necessary while repairs or alterations are in process, or during temporary emergencies, when discontinuance of service is approved or required by enforcement agency or other governmental unit. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.13, 7-5-1972) 
Cross reference- Electrical code, § 5-46 et seq. 
Sec. 12-64. - Heating systems. 
    Every dwelling unit shall have provisions for providing heat in accordance with this section. 
(1)  Central and electric heating systems. Every central or electric heating system shall be of sufficient capacity so as to heat each dwelling unit to which it is connected with a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary minimum winter conditions. 
(2)  Other heating facilities. Where a central or electric heating system is not provided, each dwelling unit shall be provided with sufficient fireplaces, chimneys, flues, or gas vents whereby heating appliances may be connected so as to furnish a minimum temperature of 70 degrees Fahrenheit measured at a point three feet above the floor during ordinary minimum winter conditions. 
(3)  Installation and maintenance. Heating appliances and facilities shall be installed in accordance with the building code of the city and shall be maintained in a safe and good working condition. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.14, 7-5-72) 
Sec. 12-65. - Space, use and locations. 
    No person shall occupy or shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit or rooming unit which does not comply with the following minimum standards for space, use and location: 
(1)  Dwelling unit. Every dwelling unit shall contain at least 200 square feet of habitable floor area for the first occupant, at least 100 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each of the next three occupants, and at least 75 square feet of additional habitable floor area for each additional occupant. 
(2)  Rooms occupied for sleeping purposes. In every dwelling unit and in every rooming unit, each room occupied for sleeping purposes by the first two occupants shall contain at least 70 square feet of floor area, and every room occupied for sleeping purposes by more than two occupants shall contain at least 50 square feet of floor area for each occupant 12 years of age and over and at least 35 square feet of floor area for each occupant under 12 years of age. 
(3)  Floor area calculation. Floor area shall be calculated on the basis of habitable room area. However, closet area and hall area within the dwelling unit, where provided, may count for not more than ten percent of the required habitable floor area. At least one-half of the floor area of every habitable room shall have a ceiling height of at least 71/2 feet; and the floor area of any part of any room where the ceiling height is less than six feet shall not be considered as part of the floor area in computing the total floor area of the room to determine maximum permissible occupancy. 
(4)  Occupant. For the purpose of this section a person under one year of age shall not be counted as an occupant. 
(5)  Cellar. No cellar shall be used for living purposes. 
(6)  Basements. No basement shall be used for living purposes unless: 
a.  The floor and walls are substantially watertight. 
b.  The total window area, total openable area and ceiling height are equal to those required for habitable rooms. 
c.  The required minimum window area of every habitable room is entirely above the grade adjoining such window area, not including stair wells or access ways. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.15, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-66. - Safe and sanitary maintenance. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, dwelling unit, or rooming unit which does not comply with the following minimum standards for safe and sanitary maintenance: 
(1)  Exterior foundation, walls, and roofs. Every foundation wall, exterior wall and exterior roof shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodentproof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(2)  Interior floor, walls, and ceilings. Every floor, interior wall and ceiling shall be substantially rodentproof; shall be kept in sound condition and good repair; and shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load which normal use may cause to be placed thereon. 
(3)  Windows and doors. Every window, exterior door and basement or cellar door and hatchway shall be substantially weathertight, watertight and rodent proof; and shall be kept in sound working condition and good repair. 
(4)  Stairs, porches and appurtenance. Every inside and outside stair, porch, and any appurtenance thereto shall be safe to use and capable of supporting the load that normal use may cause to be placed thereon; and shall be kept in sound condition and good repair. 
(5)  Bathroom floors and walls. Every bathroom floor surface and wall and water closet compartment floor surface and wall shall be constructed and maintained so as to be substantially impervious to water and so as to permit such floor to be easily kept in a clean and sanitary condition. 
(6)  Supplied facilities. Every supplied facility, piece of equipment or utility, which is required under this chapter shall be so constructed and installed that it will function safely and effectively, and shall be maintained in sound working condition. 
(7)  Drainage. Every yard shall be properly graded so as to obtain reasonable drainage that will prevent the accumulation of stagnant water. 
(8)  Egress. Every dwelling unit and rooming unit shall be provided with means of egress as required by the building code of the city. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.16, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-67. - Rodent control, infestations, insect protection, garbage and rubbish disposal. 
    No person shall occupy as owner-occupant or shall let to another for occupancy any dwelling, rooming house, or rooming unit which does not comply with the following minimum standards for rodent control, infestations and insect control: 
(1)  Screens. Within one year after the passage of this chapter, every dwelling unit, for protection against mosquitoes, flies, and other insects, every door opening directly from a dwelling unit to outdoor space shall have installed screens with self-closing device. Every window or other device with openings to outdoor space, used or intended to be used for ventilation, shall likewise have installed full screens. 
(2)  Rodent control. Every basement or cellar window used or intended to be used for ventilation, and every other opening to a basement which might provide an entry for rodents, shall have installed screens or such other approved device that will effectively prevent the entrance of rodents. 
(3)  Infestation. Every occupant of a dwelling containing a single-dwelling unit shall be responsible for the extermination of any insects, rodents or other pests therein or on the premises. Every occupant of a dwelling unit in a dwelling containing more than one dwelling unit shall be responsible for such extermination whenever his dwelling unit is the only one infested. Notwithstanding the foregoing provisions of this subsection, whenever infestation is caused by failure of the owner to maintain a dwelling in a ratproof or reasonably insect proof condition, extermination shall be the responsibility of the owner. Whenever infestation exists in two or more of the dwelling units of any structure, extermination thereof shall be the responsibility of the owner. 
(4)  Rubbish. Each dwelling unit shall be supplied with adequate rubbish storage facilities. Each occupant of such dwelling shall dispose of rubbish in a clean and sanitary manner by placing same in the rubbish storage facilities so provided. 
(5)  Garbage. Each dwelling unit shall have sufficient garbage storage containers to store three days accumulation of garbage. Each container shall have a capacity of not more than 30 gallons, and shall be equipped with a watertight lid. Every occupant of a dwelling or a dwelling unit shall dispose of all garbage and other organic wastes, which might provide food for rodents, in a safe and sanitary manner by placing same in garbage disposal facilities or garbage storage container. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.17, 7-5-1972) 
Secs. 12-68-12-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROOMING HOUSES 

Sec. 12-81. - Compliance required. 
    No person shall operate a rooming house or shall let to another for occupancy any room unless such rooming house or room shall comply with the standards contained in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.18, 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-82. - Plumbing systems and equipment. 
(a)  Each rooming house shall contain not less than a water closet, lavatory and tub or shower, properly installed and connected to an approved water and sewer system for each eight occupants or fraction thereof including members of the operator's family that share the use of such facilities, provided that in a rooming house where rooms are let only to males, urinals may be substituted for not more than one-half the required number of water closets. 
(b)  All facilities shall be so located within the rooming house so as to be reasonably accessible from a common hall or passageway to all occupants sharing and utilizing such facilities. Every lavatory and tub or shower shall be supplied with hot water at all times. No such facilities shall be located in a basement except by written approval of the commissioner of health. 
(c)  All plumbing fixtures and distribution system shall meet the standards contained in the plumbing code of the city and shall be in a state of good repair and in good working order. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.18(a), 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-83. - Supply of bed linen and towels. 
    The operator of every rooming house shall change supplied bed linen and towels therein at least once each week and prior to the letting of any room to any occupant. The operator shall be responsible for the maintenance of all supplied bedding in a clean and sanitary manner. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.18(b), 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-84. - Responsibility for sanitary condition of premises. 
    The operator of every rooming house shall be responsible for the sanitary maintenance of all walls, floors, ceilings, furniture and fixtures and for the maintenance of a sanitary condition in every other part of the rooming house. The operator shall be further responsible for the sanitary maintenance of the entire premises where the entire structure or a portion thereof is leased or occupied by the operator. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.18(c), 7-5-1972) 
Sec. 12-85. - Hotels and motels. 
    Every provision of this chapter which applies to rooming houses shall apply to hotels and motels. 
(Ord. No. 635, § 70.18(d), 7-5-1972) 
Secs. 12-86-12-109. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - UNFIT BUILDINGS AND PREMISES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 961, § 1, adopted Apr. 7, 2004, amended Art. IV in its entirety, in effect deleting Art. IV and enacting a new Art. IV to read as set out herein. Former Art. IV pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 938, § 1, adopted Feb. 3, 1999. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5. 
State Law reference- Nuisances, O.C.G.A. tit. 41. 

Sec. 12-111. - Findings. 
(a)  The city commission of the city hereby finds that dwelling, building, or structure conditions as described in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 exist in the city; that there is, in this municipality, the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and which are inimical to the welfare and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the people of this municipality; that there is in existence in this city a condition or use of real estate which renders adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, and such use is dangerous and injurious to the health, safety and welfare of the public; that there exist within this municipality dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities, or due to lack of adequate, ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; that there exist vacant, dilapidated, or abandoned buildings or structures in which drag crimes are being committed as defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8; and that there is a public necessity for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings or structures. 
(b)  It is the intention to make the foregoing findings so as to comply with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a). 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-112. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicable codes means the optional codes or standards referred to in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(1), the general nuisance law referred to therein, the fire and life safety codes referred to therein, any property maintenance standards adopted by the city by resolution or ordinance, and the minimum standard codes referred to therein. 
    Building official means the building official appointed by the city manager pursuant to section 5-2 of this Code, or such other public officers, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8(10), including but not limited to fire, sanitation, health, water, wastewater, public works, police or other employees, as the city manager may designate to act as such for purposes of this article (article IV of chapter 12 of the Code of the City of Brunswick), and their agents or assistants. 
    Closing means securing (so as to prevent entry) and causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
    Drug crime means an act which is a violation of article 2 of chapter 13 of O.C.G.A. "Title 16, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." Dwelling, building or structure means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation, or commercial, industrial or business uses or intended to be so used and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. Parties in interest means the owner of property, the persons in possession thereof, and all individuals, associations, and corporations who have an interest of record in such property, including mortgagees, lien-holders of record, persons having paid an occupational tax to the city for a location or office at the subject building, persons having filed a property tax return for the subject property, executors, administrators, guardians and trustees. 
    Public authority means any member of a governing authority, any housing four authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the city relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
    Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building or structure so as to bring it into compliance with applicable codes in this jurisdiction, and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
    Resident means any person residing in the city on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
    Unfit building means any dwelling, building or structure described as follows: 
(1)  Any building which is in violation of any of the provisions of the applicable codes; 
(2)  Any building in which a load bearing wall or other vertical structural member lists, leans or buckles to such extent as to weaken the structural support of such wall or member below the minimum required by the applicable building regulations; 
(3)  Any building having an improperly distributed load on the floor or roof so as to create a danger of collapse of the floor or roof or some portion thereof; 
(4)  Any building in which there is damage or deterioration of 33 percent or more of the supporting members or 50 percent or more of the non-supporting enclosing or outside walls, exclusive of the foundation; 
(5)  Any building with any part thereof so attached as to create a danger that it will fall and cause injury to person or property; 
(6)  Any building which is so dilapidated, decayed, deteriorated or damaged from any cause or in any manner as to create a danger of injury to person or property; 
(7)  Any building likely to cause injury to person or property because it contains a weakened, defective or deteriorated footing, foundation, flooring, floor support, ceiling, ceiling support, roof or chimney; 
(8)  Any building which has visible soil erosion adjacent to or under any structural support; 
(9)  Any building in which any means of egress or portion thereof, including for example but not limited to fire doors, closing devices, stairways and fire escapes, is in disrepair or is in a dilapidated or non-working condition or not of adequate size or is not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic; 
(10)  Any building determined by ordinance as provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 O(b) to be vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(11)  Any building with such defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamity. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-113. - Enforcement officer. 
    The municipal officer charged with primary responsibility for the enforcement of this article shall be the building official appointed by the city manager pursuant to section 5-2 of this Code or his or her designated representative. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-114. - Nuisance declared. 
    It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the corporate limits of this city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure or property in conformance with the applicable codes in the city, and any city ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. Unfit buildings are hereby declared to be public nuisances and are hereby prohibited. The unfit building nuisance shall be abated by repair and rehabilitation, closing, or by demolition, in accordance with the provisions of this article. It shall be a violation of this article for any person to maintain an unfit building within the city. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-115. - Accumulations of weeds, trash, junk, etc. 
    The provisions of this article and the method and procedure prescribed in this article may also be applied to any private property in the city where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions create a public health hazard or general nuisance to persons in the vicinity thereof. Such conditions are hereby prohibited as public nuisances, and it shall be a violation for any person having control of a premises to maintain such conditions or permit them to exist within the city. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-116. - Complaints and investigations. 
    Any person may register a complaint against a building or premises with the building official. Upon request filed by a public authority, or by the structural fitness advisory board, or by at least five residents of the city, the building official shall make an investigation of the specific structure or property. The building official shall have authority to investigate any building, structure, premise or property that he or she has reason to believe may be in violation of this article. The building official shall have authority at all reasonable times of the day or night to enter in or upon any building or premises for the purpose of making investigations under this article. If the owner or person in possession of the building or premise refuses permission to enter, the building official or other public officer may request an administrative search warrant from the judge of the municipal court, and the judge shall be authorized to issue the warrant upon a showing of probable cause. The structural fitness advisory board may, pursuant to such complaint as it may receive, or upon its own initiative, make recommendations to the building official as to the need for investigation or other action with respect to potential violations of this article. The board shall be made up of five persons selected by the city commission and who are residents of the city or owners of real property within the city at the time of appointment. Board members shall serve for a term of one year from the date of selection and may serve additional terms if reappointed by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-117. - Court proceedings, complaint in rem, service of complaint, hearing. 
    If the investigation of the building official identifies any building, structure, dwelling, premises or property to constitute an unfit building or other public nuisance as declared herein, the building official may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract or parcel upon which the unfit building or nuisance is situated. The building official shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on all parties in interest. The complaint shall set forth at least the matters provided for in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(3), and the summons shall notify the parties in interest that a hearing will be held before a court of competent jurisdiction, i.e., municipal court or superior court, at a date, time and place certain. Said hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after filing of the complaint with the court unless otherwise allowed by law. The owner and any parties in interest may file an answer to the complaint and may appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the date and time fixed for the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-118. - Service of complaint, filing of lis pendens. 
    A summons and copy of the complaint shall be posted and served on the parties in interest in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 at least 15 days prior to the date scheduled for hearing. A notice of lis pendens shall be filed with the clerk of superior court in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-119. - Hearing decision and post-hearing action. 
    After hearing evidence, the court shall make a determination whether the building or premises is an unfit building or otherwise a public nuisance in violation of this article. If the building or premises is found to be a public nuisance, the court shall issue a written order as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(4). 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-120. - Reserved. 
Sec. 12-121. - Failure to comply. 
    If the owner or other parties in interest fail to comply with the order and direction of the court requiring remedial action, such failure shall constitute a violation of this article, the building official shall be authorized to cause the property to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or to be demolished as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-9(a)(5) and (6). 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-122. - Costs of remedial action; lien. 
    The cost of remedial action taken by the building official or by the city, shall constitute a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred and shall be perfected and collected as provided for in O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-9(a)(7), 41-2-9(b), and 41-2-9(c). 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-123. - Penalties for violation. 
    In addition to other remedies and sanctions authorized in this article, a violation of this article may be punished in the municipal court by fine or imprisonment as provided in section 15-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Sec. 12-124. - Remedies cumulative. 
    The remedies provided by this article shall be cumulative and in addition to any other remedies provided by law and are not intended to limit or preclude such other remedies, including, but not limited to, suits for injunctive or other equitable relief, proceedings in municipal court as contemplated by O.C.G.A. § 41-2-1 or other statute, citation of violations under section 15-8 of this Code, or withholding/revoking a certificate of occupancy, or issuing an administrative stop work order on any construction subject to the inspection jurisdiction of the building official or fire marshal. 
(Ord. No. 961, § 1, 4-7-2004) 
Chapter 13 - LICENSES AND BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2; alcoholic beverages, ch. 3; cable television, ch. 6; rooming houses, § 12-81 et seq.; taxation, ch. 20; taxes on businesses and occupations, § 20-40 et seq.; taxicabs, ch. 21; zoning, ch. 23. 
State Law reference- Revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. tit. 48; specific business and occupation taxes, § 48-13-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 13-1. - Preaching, lecturing, etc., in public streets restricted. 
    No preaching, lecturing, speaking or entertainment of any nature shall be permitted in the public streets or public places unless a written permit for same is obtained from the city manager, nor shall any preaching, lecturing, speaking, exhibition or entertainment, any street vending or pushcart stands be permitted except as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 634, § 20.19, 7-5-1972) 
Secs. 13-2-13-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FOOD TRUCKS 

Sec. 13-26. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this section is to allow for the licensing and regulation of "food trucks" operating within the city limits of the City of Brunswick. In the interest of the public health, safety and welfare, the mayor and board of commissioners may exercise limited discretion in evaluating the proposed operation of a "food truck," or the like which requires a license in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 13-27 - Definitions. 
    Food means a raw, cooked, or processed edible substance, ice, beverage, or ingredient used or intended for use or for sale in whole or in part for human consumption, or chewing gum. 
    Food truck means a licensed, readily movable motorized wheeled vehicle or trailer, which is temporarily stored on a premise where food items are sold to the general public. Included in the definition are vehicles and equipment defined as "mobile food service unit" and/or "extended food service unit" contained and amended in Rules of Department of Public Health, Ga. Comp. R. and Regs. 511-6-1-.01 and 511-6-1-.08. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 13-28. - Food truck vendor requirements. 
(a)  Prior to an application for any license to operate a food truck in the City of Brunswick, the food truck vendor shall first submit for inspection and be approved by the Glynn County Health Department, or by the Georgia Department of Agriculture if selling commercially packaged food. 
(b)  The food truck vendor must obtain an annual City of Brunswick Business Tax Certificate. During the food truck's hours of operation, the vendor shall at all times display a current business tax certificate. The food truck vendor shall renew any business tax certificate in accordance with chapter 20 of this Code. 
(c)  The food truck vendor shall obtain and display the Glynn County Health Department-issued Georgia Department of Public Health Mobile Food Service Permit at all times during its hours of operations. 
(d)  The food truck vendor shall obtain written authorization from the property owner or registered agent of the property for food vending in writing. Such authorization must be maintained and accessible in the truck at all times during the hours of operations. 
(e)  Prior to the issuance of a business tax certificate, the food truck vendor shall make available the operating food truck for inspection by the City of Brunswick Fire Department. In order to obtain the business tax certificate, the food truck vendor shall provide proof that the truck has been inspected by the City of Brunswick Fire Department and the truck is in compliance with the City of Brunswick Fire Department Mobile Food Vehicle Fire Safety and Specifications Practices. 
(f)  Food truck vendors shall comply with all city, county, and state retail sales tax regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 13-29. - Location requirements. 
    Food trucks shall locate on privately owned lots zoned local commercial, general commercial, GC-CORE, or highway commercial with all-weather surface (or gravel) parking areas, accessible by emergency vehicles, and having at least ten legally designated off-street parking spaces, subject to the approval of the property owner and subject to the following: 
(a)  Written notice to the Glynn County Health Department seven days prior to operations begin. Such notice shall state the expected dates of operation and shall specify the physical location of operations. 
(b)  The food truck shall be positioned at least 50 feet from the customer entrance of an existing restaurant during the food truck's hours of operation; 
(c)  No food truck shall be operated within 600 feet of any public school in the city between the hours of 7:30 a.m. and 3:30 p.m. on days in which schools are actually in session; 
(d)  The food truck shall be positioned on designated parking spaces and shall not block drive aisles, other access to loading/service areas, or emergency access and fire lanes; 
(e)  No food truck shall be located within a building setback or landscape buffer; 
(f)  The food truck must be positioned at least 15 feet away from fire hydrants, driveway entrances, alleys, handicapped parking spaces, tree trunks, and vegetation; 
(g)  Food trucks shall not be located within 100 feet of gas pumps, underground gas storage tanks, and vent pipes; 
(h)  Food trucks may not be located in any portion of a parking lot when and where such location would prevent the use of parking spaces during the regular hours of operation of the primary business on the lot, or otherwise interfere in a significant [manner] with the movement of motor vehicles, unless prior permission to use the parking spots has been provided by the property owner; 
(i)  Cooking off the vehicle with a grill or smoker is prohibited; 
(j)  No seating shall be provided, although high top tables are allowed but shall not exceed three high top tables total; 
(k)  Vehicle-mounted roll-out awnings are allowed; and 
(l)  Vehicle must vacate premises by 10:00 p.m. and return to base of operation daily. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 13-30. - Hours of operation. 
    No food truck shall be located in public space between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 5:00 a.m. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 13-31. - Safety and utilities. 
(a)  Temporary connections to potable water are prohibited. All plumbing and electrical connections shall be in accordance with the building code. 
(b)  Grease is to be disposed of in recyclable grease container at an existing restaurant or commissary (not in dumpsters or storm drains). 
(c)  Grey water to be disposed of in the sanitary sewer at an existing restaurant or commissary (no open dumping or into storm drains) per Brunswick Public Works Department regulations. 
(d)  Food trucks must comply with Brunswick Fire Department Mobile Food Vendor Fire Safety Specifications and Practices. The Brunswick Fire Department will inspect for compliance before a business license will be issued. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 13-32. - Nuisance prevention. 
(a)  The food truck vendor shall not operate the food truck as a drive-in window. 
(b)  The noise level from the food truck motor and generator or any other source must comply with the noise ordinance. 
(c)  No vehicle using sound equipment or other method of attracting customers shall operate such equipment before 9:00 a.m. or after 9:00 p.m. daily or between the hours of 9:30 a.m. and 12:00 noon on Sundays. Furthermore, such equipment shall not be operated within one block of a church, or within one block of an existing restaurant, between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m. on Sundays. 
(d)  A covered trash receptacle shall be provided for customers. The food truck vendor and property owner shall be responsible for daily cleanup and proper disposal of litter. 
(e)  If the food truck is proposed to operate after dark, the food truck vendor shall provide a lighting plan which includes use of shielded fixtures and shall not include spotlights. Illumination shall be designed and installed in a manner that minimizes upward light pollution. A combination of shielding, screening, and directing the lighting away from areas beyond the vehicle sign, together with the use of landscaping, if available, to soften the impact of reflected light, shall be used. 
(f)  No signage shall be allowed other than: 
(1)  signs permanently attached to the motor vehicle; 
(2)  a portable, non-internally illuminated menu sign no more than six square feet in display area and no more than four feet in height that is placed on the ground in the customer waiting area. 
(3)  Temporary signs in accordance with section 23-24-13(u) shall not be permitted on a parcel when a food truck is located on that parcel. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 13-33. - Supplemental use regulations for public property or certain city-owned facilities. 
    Food truck vendors may apply to operate on public property by submitting an request to the city manager's office. Any request must include proof that the regulations set forth in this article have been met. The city manager shall review each application and approve or reject the same. 
    A food truck vendor may operate on the following city-owned facilities: Mary Ross Waterfront Park, Sidney Lanier Park or other city parks as may be available where approved in advance upon proper written explanation to the facility manager designated for such purpose by the city commission, and subject to such terms and conditions as the said facility manager may from time to time promulgate in writing, which may include terms as to insurance, clean-up fees, deposits, security personnel, limits on the number of guests and other matters as the facility manager may require. 
    This section shall only serve to allow the operation of a food truck on public property under the specific circumstances set forth herein. Nothing in this code section shall release a food truck vendor from the location requirements set forth in section 13-29 or any other regulation or requirement set forth in sections 13-28 through 13-34. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 13-34. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    All persons, firms, or corporations failing to comply with the mandatory provisions of this article or doing any act prohibited in this article shall be guilty of an offense, and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided in section 15-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Secs. 13-35-13-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - AMBULANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 14. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-71. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Ambulance means any motor vehicle that is especially designed or constructed, and equipped, and is intended to be used for, and is maintained or operated for, the transportation of patients. 
    Ambulance service means a business which owns and operates one or more ambulances, the principal activity of which is transporting patients in such ambulances for a fee. 
    Attendant means an individual, trained in advanced first aid, who is responsible for the care of patients being transported by ambulance. 
    Attendant-driver means an individual who is qualified as an attendant and who also drives an ambulance. 
    Patient means an individual who is sick, injured, wounded or otherwise incapacitated or helpless. 
(Ord. No. 526, § 1, 11-14-1966) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-72. - Exceptions. 
(a)  This article does not regulate an ambulance, attendant or attendant-driver when an ambulance and the personnel of the ambulance are rendering assistance in the case of a major catastrophe or emergency for which the local ambulance services are insufficient or unable to cope. 
(b)  This article does not regulate an ambulance and the operating personnel of such ambulance when such ambulance is operating from a location or headquarters outside the city; provided that such ambulance shall not be used to pick up patients within the city for transportation to locations within the city. 
(c)  This article does not regulate an ambulance and the operating personnel of an ambulance when such ambulance is operated by an agency of the federal or state governments. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 5, 11-14-1966) 
Sec. 13-73. - On-duty hours. 
    An ambulance service shall have properly equipped and manned ambulances on duty 24 hours each day. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 4(1), 11-14-1966) 
Sec. 13-74. - Minimum personnel. 
    An ambulance service shall, at all times, have in its employ the following: 
(1)  Sufficient personnel to man the dispatching desk 24 hours per day. 
(2)  One attendant-driver and one attendant for each of two ambulances. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 4(2), 11-14-1966) 
Sec. 13-75. - Trip log. 
    A trip log which shall show all calls for ambulance service received, the time thereof, the name, address and telephone number of the person requesting the service (where possible), the time the ambulance heads out, the place of the pick-up, the destination, and the time the destination is reached by the ambulance. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 4(3), 11-14-1966) 
Sec. 13-76. - Standards for attendants and attendant-drivers. 
    An attendant or attendant-driver shall meet the following requirements: 
(1)  He shall have been found, by a duly licensed physician, to be free of any physical defects or diseases which might impair his ability to drive or attend an ambulance; and he shall thereafter be reexamined yearly. 
(2)  He shall have a currently valid certificate giving evidence of successful completion of a course of training in the Advanced Course in First Aid given by the American Red Cross, or a course of instruction given by a competent qualified medical doctor or trained personnel. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 3, 11-14-1966) 
Sec. 13-77. - Operating requirements. 
    An ambulance shall comply with the following operating requirements: 
(1)  A public street shall not be used for the purposes of changing the linen, or for cleaning, an ambulance vehicle. 
(2)  When handling patients, each ambulance attendant and attendant-driver must wear a uniform conspicuously labeled with the name of the ambulance company and the name of the ambulance attendant or attendant-driver. 
(3)  An ambulance, when responding to an emergency call, shall have its beacon operating at all times. Its siren shall be operating as may be reasonably necessary and in accordance with law. 
(4)  The driver of an ambulance shall not be relieved from the duty of driving with due regard for the safety of all persons, nor may said driver endanger life or property by excessive speeds. 
(5)  An ambulance shall only be staffed by persons designated in this article. When in service, an ambulance shall be staffed by an attendant-driver and an attendant. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 2(5), 11-14-1966) 
Secs. 13-78-13-90. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - STANDARDS FOR AMBULANCES 

Sec. 13-91. - Insurance. 
(a)  For each ambulance there shall be in effect an insurance policy, or policies, in the amount of $100,000.00 for any one accident; $50,000.00) for any one person; and $10,000.00 for property damage. The insurer shall give notice 15 days in advance to the city, addressed to the city manager, before any policy of insurance required herein is voided for any cause. 
(b)  The policy of insurance provided for in this section shall be for the benefit of, and be subject to suit or action thereon, by any person who shall sustain actionable injury, either to person or property by the operation of any such ambulances shall have the right to bring any suit or action therefor, jointly against the owner or operator of such vehicle and the insurance company executing such liability insurance policy. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 2(1), 11-14-1966) 
Sec. 13-92. - Inspection. 
(a)  Each ambulance, its equipment and the premises from which it operates shall be open to inspection by the city manager, or his designated representative, at any time. 
(b)  The city manager shall cause to be inspected not less than twice each year, each ambulance operating within his jurisdiction, to ensure that such ambulance is being maintained as required by this article. A copy of each inspection report shall be promptly: 
(1)  Transmitted to the owner of the ambulance or ambulances in question; 
(2)  Reported to the city commission at its next regular meeting; and 
(3)  Filed with the city manager. 
Any defect shall be corrected within 15 days from receipt of notice of such defect given by the city manager. 
(c)  An ambulance shall not be substituted for an ambulance which has been inspected, unless such substitute ambulance meets all the requirements for an ambulance set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 2(2), 11-14-1966) 
Sec. 13-93. - Compliance with applicable laws. 
    An ambulance or ambulance service shall comply with all applicable laws relating to health, sanitation, and safety. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 2(3), 11-14-1966) 
Sec. 13-94. - Equipment. 
(a)  Each and every ambulance shall contain the following equipment, in operating condition: 
(1)  One or more permanently attached flashing beacons, one of which shall be attached to the top of the roof of the ambulance, and visible under normal atmospheric conditions from a distance of 500 feet in all directions. 
(2)  Siren. 
(3)  Heater. 
(4)  Back-up lights. 
(5)  A legend on each side of the vehicle giving the trade name of the firm operating the ambulance. 
(6)  Left and right side mirrors. 
(7)  Electric windshield wipers. 
(8)  Two-way radio, having a range of at least ten miles. 
(9)  Fire extinguisher. 
(10)  First-aid equipment as follows: 
a.  Large made dressings, four and 18 inches by 36 inches. 
b.  Sterile gauze pads, several, three-inch and four-inch roller. 
c.  Six-inch gauze or muslin bandages, three. 
d.  Six-inch cotton elastic roller bandages, three. 
e.  Adhesive tape rolls, cylinder cut one inch, two inches and three inches. 
f.  Tourniquets, two. 
g.  Tounge blades, three taped together and padded for mouth gag. 
h.  Bandage shears. 
i.  Safety pins, large size. 
j.  Triangular bandages and slings, four 40-inch triangular. 
k.  Hinged half-ring splints, for fractures of the thigh, with the web strap for ankle hitch, or suitable inflatable splint, or equivalent. 
l.  Two or more padded boards 15 by three inches, two or more padded boards three inches wide and three feet in length, and two or more padded boards three inches wide and 41/2 feet in length; or suitable inflatable splints, or other adequate splintage for immobilization of fractures. 
m.  Pillows as needed. 
n.  Oxygen tanks and masks of assorted sizes. 
o.  Orapharyngeal airways in assorted sizes, child and adult. 
p.  Mouth-to-mouth, two-way resuscitation airways, adult and children sizes. 
q.  Positive pressure breathing apparatus, such as Ambu-bags. 
r.  Two sandbags about four inches in width, two inches in thickness, and 12 inches in length. 
s.  Two hemostats. 
t.  Emesis basis. 
u.  Aspirator, rubber bulb type sufficient. 
v.  One ambulance cot and a collapsible stretcher, together with adequate straps to secure the patient to the stretcher or cot. Adequate wrist and ankle restraints. 
w.  Emergency childbirth kit (a sterile sheet, a sterile baby blanket, two sterile hemostats, one pair sterile scissors, and an oral suction such as an ear bulb syringe). 
(b)  The first-aid equipment herein listed shall be subject to yearly spot review by the Glynn-Brunswick Memorial Hospital Emergency Room Committee, in order to ensure that currently acceptable equipment is being maintained by ambulances. 
(Ord. No. 536, § 2(4), 11-14-1966) 
Secs. 13-95-13-115. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AMUSEMENT SHOWS, CIRCUSES AND CARNIVALS 

Sec. 13-116. - Definition. 
    For the purposes of this article, the word "amusement" shall mean and include all transient and itinerant circuses, carnivals, and amusement shows desiring to set up or operate in the city. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-117. - Notice of intent. 
    Before setting up or operating in the city, an amusement shall give written notice to the director of finance of the city by written application of intention to operate within the city 21 days prior to the date of commencement of the operation. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(a), 5-21-1969) 
Sec. 13-118. - Insurance coverage. 
    At the time of making application, an amusement shall procure and exhibit to the director of finance policies of insurance covering public liability for injuries to persons coming on or about the premises of operation for any purpose. Such policies of insurance shall be in the minimum amount of $50,000.00 and $100,000.00 and with a company approved by the director of finance. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(b), 5-21-1969) 
Sec. 13-119. - License required. 
    Before operating in the city, an amusement shall obtain a business license from the city in the amount of $200.00 per day or any fractional part of a day. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(c), 5-21-1969; Ord. No. 678, § 1, 12-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-120. - Compliance with safety codes. 
    Each amusement shall comply with all codes looking to the safety of the public as directed by fire chief and building inspector of the city. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(d), 5-21-1969) 
Sec. 13-121. - Time for set-up, removal. 
    Each amusement shall set up the operation in one day's time and remove the operation in one day's time. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(e), 5-21-1969) 
Sec. 13-122. - Clean up after operation. 
    Upon removal, the grounds used by an amusement shall be cleaned up and left in a neat and safe condition. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(f), 5-21-1969) 
Sec. 13-123. - Sunday operation prohibited. 
    Every amusement shall comply with the Sunday laws of the city and state and close the operation on Sunday. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(g), 5-21-1969) 
Sec. 13-124. - Location restricted. 
    The amusement operation shall be carried on at a fair grounds site or upon land zoned highway commercial as set out in the zoning ordinance of the city and on no other. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(h), 5-21-1969) 
Sec. 13-125. - Time for operation limited. 
    The duration of showing and operating an amusement in the city shall be for one seven-day period, Sundays excepted. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(i), 5-21-1969) 
Sec. 13-126. - Cancellation authorized. 
    All amusement operations shall comply with all laws of the city and the state. Any violation of such laws shall be cause for the cancellation of the business license issued, and upon notice by the city, its agents or employees, all operations shall cease. 
(Ord. No. 582, § 1(j), 5-21-1969) 
Secs. 13-127-13-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - GOING-OUT-OF-BUSINESS SALES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 931, § 1, adopted Aug. 20, 1997, repealed former art. V of this chapter and added new provisions as art. V as herein set out. Former art. V, §§ 13-151-13-160, pertained to bankrupt and closing-out sales and derived from the 1953 Code, §§ 8.1-8.10. 

Sec. 13-151. - Going out of business sale defined. 
    As used in this article, the term "going-out-of-business sale" means any offer to sell to the public or sale to the public of goods, wares or merchandise on the implied or direct representation that such sale is in anticipation of the termination of a business at its present location or that the sale is being held other than in the ordinary course of business and includes, without being limited to, any sale advertised either specifically or in substance to being a sale because the person is going out of business, liquidating, selling his entire stock or 50 percent or more of his stock, selling out to the bare walls, selling because the person has lost his lease, selling out his interest in the business, selling because everything in the business must be sold, or that the sale is a trustee's sale, bankrupt sale, save us from bankruptcy sale, insolvent sale, assignee's sale, must vacate sale, quitting business sale, receiver's sale, loss of lease sale, forced out of business sale, removal sale, liquidation sale, closing out sale, executor's sale, administrator's sale, warehouse sale, warehouse removal sale, fire sale, water damage sale, insurance sale, adjustment sale, creditor's sale, branch store discontinuance sale or defunct business sale. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Sec. 13-152. - License required. 
    It shall be unlawful to advertise, conduct or carry on a going-out-of-business sale of any goods, wares, merchandise, or business inventory of any kind or description without first obtaining from the city a license to conduct such sale and paying the prescribed fee thereof. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Sec. 13-153. - Inventory to be filed. 
    At the time of applying for a license under this article, the applicant shall file with the finance department an inventory containing a complete and accurate list of all the goods, wares, merchandise and items in inventory to be offered for sale at such sale. Said inventory shall be verified by affidavit to the effect that the inventory submitted contains a full, true, complete and accurate list of all the goods, wares, merchandise, and items in inventory to be offered for sale. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Sec. 13-154. - Time limitation on sale. 
    The license shall be issued for a specific number of days to be specified by the applicant, not to exceed a span of 90 consecutive days, including weekends and holidays, and for conduct of the sale within specific calendar dates. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Sec. 13-155. - Sale of goods not in inventory prohibited. 
    During the progress of any sale licensed pursuant to this article, it shall be unlawful to sell or offer for sale any goods, wares, merchandise, or items in inventory other than those shown on the list of inventory filed with the finance director at the time of making application for the license. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Sec. 13-156. - Replenishment of stock prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to make any replenishment or additions to the stock of goods, wares, merchandise, or items in inventory of the business for which the license has been issued during continuation of any sale licensed pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Sec. 13-157. - Record of articles sold. 
    The person conducting any sale licensed pursuant to this article shall keep an accurate record of all articles or things sold, which record shall be available at all reasonable hours for inspection by the city marshal or his deputy. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Sec. 13-158. - Continuing business beyond license period. 
    It shall be unlawful to conduct or carry on a sale licensed pursuant to this article for a period of time in excess of the time for which the license has been issued, and it shall be unlawful to continue to do business in any manner contrary to any representations which were made regarding the nature of the going-out-business sale. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Sec. 13-159. - License fee. 
    The fee charged for a license to conduct a going-out-of-business sale shall be a flat fee of $25.00 for the first 30 days and $10.00 per diem for each business day on which the sale is conducted thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Sec. 13-160. - Judicial sales, etc. excepted. 
    Nothing contained in this article shall apply to judicial sales or sales conducted by order of any court or to sales made or conducted by wholesalers, jobbers or manufacturers in the regular course of their business as such. 
(Ord. No. 931, § 1, 8-20-1997) 
Secs. 13-161-13-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 

Sec. 13-181. - Tax levied. 
    There is hereby levied upon all depository financial institutions located within the city a business license tax pursuant to the authority of O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 1, 12-19-1984) 
Sec. 13-182. - Amount of tax. 
    The rate of the tax levied by this article shall be 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such depository financial institutions, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(b). 
(Ord. No. 811, § 2, 12-19-1984) 
Sec. 13-183. - When return due. 
    The return required by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(c) shall be filed by March 1 of each year with the office of the finance director of the city. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 3, 12-19-1984) 
Sec. 13-184. - Collection. 
    The tax levied by this article shall be collected from all depository financial institutions located within the city. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 4, 12-19-1984) 
Sec. 13-185. - Application of tax. 
    The tax levied by this article shall apply to all depository financial institutions which have elected to file a return in 1984 based on 1983 gross receipts and which have taken the amount of such tax as a credit against state corporate income tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 5, 12-19-1984) 
Sec. 13-186. - Scope of tax. 
    It is the intent of the city commission that depository financial institutions of all kinds located within the city shall be taxed in the same manner and to the same extent pursuant to this article, so far as permitted by state and federal law, and that the distinctions made by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-98 to recognize differences between banks and savings and loan associations shall be applicable to the tax levied by this article, to the extent required by law. 
(Ord. No. 811, § 6, 12-19-1984) 
Secs. 13-187-13-210. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - LIFE INSURANCE COMPANIES[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference- License fee authorized, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8. 

Sec. 13-211. - License fee imposed-Insurers, companies. 
    There is hereby imposed upon each insurance company doing business within the city an annual license fee in the amount of $75.00 for the year 1989 and for each year thereafter. For each separate business location in excess of one which is operated and maintained by an insurance company within the city, there is hereby imposed an additional annual license fee in the amount of $75.00 for the year 1989 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 1, 11-16-1988) 
Sec. 13-212. - Same-Money lenders. 
    For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee under this article, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and which in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurance company, each insurance company shall pay an additional annual license fee of $26.25 per location for the year 1989 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 2, 11-16-1988) 
Sec. 13-213. - Same-Insurance agents, brokers. 
    There is hereby imposed upon each independent insurance agency or broker doing an insurance business within the city an annual license fee in the amount of $75.00) for the year 1989 and for each year thereafter. For each separate business location in excess of one which is operated and maintained by an independent insurance agency or broker doing an insurance business within the city, there is hereby imposed an additional annual license fee in the amount of $75.00 for the year 1989 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 3, 11-16-1988) 
Sec. 13-214. - Gross premium tax-Life insurers. 
    To the maximum extent permitted by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1, there is hereby imposed, for the year 1989 and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon the gross direct premiums, at a rate of one percent of such gross direct premiums, received during the preceding calendar year from policies insuring persons residing within the city by each life insurance company doing business within the state. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 4, 11-16-1988) 
Sec. 13-215. - Same-Insurers other than life. 
    To the maximum extent permitted by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2, there is hereby imposed, for the year 1989 and for each year thereafter, an annual tax upon the gross direct premiums, at a rate of 21/2 percent of such gross direct premiums, received by all foreign, alien and domestic insurance companies doing business in this state other than life insurance companies during the preceding calendar year and derived from policies insuring persons, property or risks in the state. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 5, 11-16-1988) 
Sec. 13-216. - Same-Collection. 
    The taxes imposed by sections 13-214 and 13-215 shall be collected by the commissioner of insurance and paid over to the city as provided by O.C.G.A. §§ 33-8-8.1 and 33-8-8.2, respectively. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 6, 11-16-1988) 
Sec. 13-217. - Same-When due and payable. 
    License fees imposed in sections 13-211, 13-212 and 13-213 shall be due and payable to the director finance on the first day of January, 1989, and on January 1 of each subsequent year and shall become delinquent after March 1 of each year. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 7, 11-16-1988) 
Sec. 13-218. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Gross direct premiums means gross direct premiums as defined in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. 
    Life insurance company means a company which is authorized to transact only the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5 as class (1). 
(Ord. No. 872, § 8, 11-16-1988) 
Sec. 13-219. - Copy of ordinance to insurance commissioner. 
    The secretary of the city commission is hereby directed to forward a duly certified copy of the ordinance from which this article is derived to the insurance commissioner of the state. 
(Ord. No. 872, § 9, 11-16-1988) 
Secs. 13-220-13-240. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - MASSAGE PARLORS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-241. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of the provisions regulating baths, sauna baths, massage parlors and similar businesses hereinafter set forth, the following words and phrases shall be construed to have the meanings herein set forth, unless it is apparent from the context that a different meaning is intended: 
    Massage means a method of treating the external parts of the body for remedial or hygienic purposes, consisting of rubbing, stroking, kneading, or tapping with the hand or any instrument. 
    Massage parlor or massage establishment means an establishment having a fixed place of business where any person engages in, conducts or carries on, or permits to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, any business of giving Turkish, Russian, Swedish, vapor, sweat, electric, salt, magnetic or any other kind or character of massage, baths, alcohol rub, fomentation or manipulation of the body or similar procedures. 
    Massage technician or technicians means any person, male or female, who administers to another person, for any form of consideration, a massage, alcohol rub, fomentation, bath, electric or magnetic massage procedure, manipulation of the body, or other similar procedure. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 1, 9-18-1974) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-242. - Violation and penalty. 
(a)  Every person, except those persons who are specifically exempted by this article, whether acting as an individual, owner, employee of the owner, operator or employee of the operator, or whether acting as a mere helper for the owner, employee, or operator, or whether acting as a participant or worker in any way, who gives massage or conducts a massage establishment or room, or who gives or administers, or who practices the giving or administering of steam baths, electric light baths, electric tub baths, shower baths, sponge baths, vapor baths, fomentation, sun baths, mineral baths, alcohol rubs, Russian, Swedish or Turkish baths, or any other type of therapy or who does or practices any of the other things or acts mentioned in this article without first obtaining a permit and paying for a license so to do from the city, or shall violate any provision of this article, shall be guilty of a violation. 
(b)  Any owner, operator, manager, or permittee in charge or in control of a massage establishment who knowingly employs a person performing as a massage technician who is not in possession of a valid permit, or who allows such an employee to perform, operate or practice within such a place of business, is guilty of a violation. 
(c)  Any massage establishment operated, conducted, or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance and the city attorney shall, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, revoke the business license pursuant to the procedure set forth in section 13-277, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings, for the abatement, removal and enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law; and shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court or courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such massage establishments and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting, or maintaining a massage establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 18, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-243. - Unlawful activities. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to massage any other person, or give or administer any bath or baths, or to give or administer any of the other things mentioned in this article for immoral purposes, or in a manner intended to arouse, appeal to or gratify the lust or passions or sexual desires. Any violation of this provision shall be deemed grounds for the revocation of the permit granted under this article. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 10, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-244. - Employees. 
(a)  It shall be the responsibility of the holder of the permit and license for the massage establishment, or the employer of any person purporting to act as massage technicians, to insure that each person employed as a massage technician shall first have obtained a valid permit and license pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Any massage technician aide shall comply with the requirements of section 13-269. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 11, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-245. - Inspection. 
    The building inspector, fire inspector and the city health officer shall, from time to time, and at least twice each year, make an inspection of each massage establishment in the city for the purpose of determining that the provisions of this article are met. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 12, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-246. - Records of treatment. 
    Every person operating a massage establishment under a permit under this article shall keep a record of the date and hour of each treatment, the name and address of the patron, and the name of the technician administering such treatment. Such record shall be open to inspection by officials charged with the enforcement of this article for the purposes of law enforcement and for no other purpose. The information furnished or secured as a result of any such inspection shall be confidential. Any unauthorized disclosure or use of such information by any officer or employee of the city shall constitute a violation and such officer or employee shall be subject to the penalty provisions of this article in addition to any other penalties provided by law. Identical records shall be kept of treatments rendered off the business site, and in addition, shall describe the address where the treatment was rendered. Such records shall be maintained for a period of two years. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 13, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-247. - Name of business. 
    No person licensed to do business under this article shall operate under any name or conduct his business under any designation not specified in his permit. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 14, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-248. - Applicability of regulations to existing businesses. 
    The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all persons and businesses described herein, whether the herein described activities were established before or after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article derives and including any person or persons whose application is presently under consideration or investigation by the city. However, those businesses operating prior to the date of adoption of this ordinance under a valid license granted by the city will have a 120-day grace period from the date of adoption within which to comply with all the conditions and requirements of this article as set forth hereinabove. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 17, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-249. - Right of entry. 
    The police department shall have the right to enter the building during all hours of operation. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 19, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-250. - Hours of operation. 
    Massage parlors shall open at 10:00 a.m., and close at 10:00 p.m. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 20, 9-18-1974) 
Secs. 13-251-13-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 13-266. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in, conduct or carry on, or to permit to be engaged in, conducted or carried on, in or upon any premises within the city the business of a massage establishment, or to render, or permit to be rendered, massage services at a location removed from a massage establishment within the city in the absence of a permit issued pursuant to the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 2, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-267. - Exceptions. 
    The requirements of this division shall have no application and no effect upon and shall not be construed as applying to any persons designated as follows: physician, surgeon, chiropractor, osteopath or any registered or licensed vocational nurse working under the supervision of a physician, surgeon, chiropractor or osteopath duly licensed to practice their respective professions in the state; nor shall the requirements of this division apply to any treatment administered in good faith in the course of the practice of any healing art or professions by any person licensed to practice any such art or profession under the Business and Professions Code of the State of Georgia or of any other law of this state. Practical nurses or other persons without qualifications as massage technicians, or other persons not otherwise licensed by the state to practice pursuant to the laws of the state, whether employed by physicians, surgeons, chiropractors or osteopaths or not, may not give massages or massage procedures. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 3, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-268. - Application-Fee. 
(a)  Any person desiring to obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment or to perform massage services shall make application to the director of finance who shall refer all such applications to the chief of police for an investigation. An application to obtain a permit to operate a massage establishment shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $100.00. 
(b)  Each application for a permit to permit an individual to perform massage services shall be accompanied by an investigation fee of $10.00. 
(c)  Permits and fees required by this article shall be in addition to any license, permit or fee required under any other chapter of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 4, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-269. - Same-Contents. 
    Any applicant for a permit shall submit the following information: 
(1)  The full name and present address of the applicant. 
(2)  The two previous addresses immediately prior to the present address of the applicant. 
(3)  Written statements of at least five bona fide residents of the city that the applicant is of good moral character. 
(4)  Written proof that the applicant is over the age of 18 years. 
(5)  Applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair. 
(6)  Two portrait photographs at least two inches by two inches. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment of the applicant for the three years immediately preceding the date of the application. 
(8)  The massage or similar business license history of the applicant; whether such person, in previously operating in this or another city or state under license, has had such license revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions and the reasons therefor. 
(10)  A certificate from a medical doctor stating that the applicant has, within 30 days immediately prior thereto, been examined and found to be free of any contagious or communicable disease. 
(11)  Applicant must furnish a diploma or certificate of graduation from a recognized school or other institution of learning wherein the method, profession and work of massage technicians is taught. The term "recognized school" shall mean and include any school or institution of learning which has for its purpose the teaching of the theory, method, profession, or work of massage technicians, which school requires a resident course of study of not less than 200 hours to be given in not less than three calendar months before the student shall be furnished with a diploma or certificate of graduation from such school or institution of learning showing the successful completion of such course of study or learning. 
a.  Schools offering a correspondence course not requiring actual attendance of class shall not be deemed a "recognized school." The city shall have a right to confirm the fact that the applicant has actually attended classes in a recognized school for the aforementioned minimum time periods by requiring the applicant to submit to a written examination in the field of massage techniques. 
b.  In lieu of the foregoing educational requirement an applicant may submit written proof that he or she has actually been engaged in practice as a massage technician for not less than one year in the city, or five years elsewhere, preceding the date of application and shall successfully pass a written examination in massage techniques to be administered by the city. 
(12)  Such other identification and information necessary to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application. 
(13)  Nothing contained herein shall be construed to deny to the police department of the city the right to take the fingerprints and additional photographs of the applicant, nor shall anything contained herein be construed to deny the right of the department to confirm the height and weight of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 5, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-270. - Minimum requirements. 
    No permit to conduct a massage establishment shall be issued unless an inspection by the city reveals that the establishment complies with each of the following minimum requirements: 
(1)  A recognizable and readable sign shall be posted at the main entrance identifying the establishment as a massage establishment; provided, that all such signs shall comply with the sign requirements of the city. 
(2)  Minimum lighting shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code, and, in addition, at least one artificial light not less than 40 watts shall be provided in each enclosed room or booth where massage services are being performed on a patron. 
(3)  Minimum ventilation shall be provided in accordance with the city's building code. 
(4)  Adequate equipment for disinfecting and sterilizing instruments used in performing the acts of massage shall be provided. 
(5)  Hot and cold running water shall be provided at all times. 
(6)  Closed cabinets shall be provided, which cabinets shall be utilized for the storage of clean linen. 
(7)  In any establishment in which massage services are rendered only to members of the same sex at any one time, such persons of the same sex may be placed in a single, separate room, or the operators of the massage establishment may elect to place such persons of the same sex in separate enclosed rooms or booths having adequate ventilation to an area outside such room or booth while massage services are being performed. 
(8)  Adequate bathing, dressing, locker, and toilet facilities shall be provided for patrons. A minimum of one tub or shower, one dressing room containing a separate locker for each patron to be served, which locker shall be capable of being locked, as well as a minimum of one toilet, and one washbasin, shall be provided by every massage establishment; provided, however, that if male and female patrons are to be served simultaneously at the establishment, separate bathing, a separate massage room, or rooms, separate dressing and separate toilet facilities shall be provided for male and for female patrons. 
(9)  All walls, ceiling, floors, pools, showers, bathtubs, steam rooms, and all other physical facilities for the establishment must be in good repair and maintained in a clean and sanitary condition. Wet and dry heat rooms, steam or vapor rooms, or steam or vapor cabinets, shower compartments, and toilet rooms shall be thoroughly cleaned each day the business is in operation. Bathtubs shall be thoroughly cleaned after each use. 
(10)  Clean and sanitary towels and linens shall be provided for each patron of the establishment or each patron receiving massage services. No common use of towels or linens shall be permitted. 
(11)  A minimum of one separate washbasin shall be provided in each massage establishment for the use of employees of any such establishment, which basin shall provide soap or detergent and hot and cold running water at all times and shall be located within or as close as practicable to the area devoted to the performing of massage services. In addition, there shall be provided at each washbasin, sanitary towels placed in permanently installed dispensers. 
(12)  Proof of compliance with all applicable provisions of this Code shall be provided. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 6, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-271. - Investigation; issuance. 
(a)  Any applicant for a permit pursuant to the provisions of this division shall present to the police department the application containing the aforementioned and described information. The chief of police shall have a reasonable time in which to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Based on such investigation, the chief of police, or his representative, shall render a recommendation as to the approval or denial of the permit to the city manager. 
(b)  The building inspector, the fire department and the city health officer shall inspect the premises proposed to be devoted to the massage establishment and shall make separate recommendations to the city manager concerning compliance with this article. 
(c)  The city manager, or his designee, after receiving the aforementioned and described recommendations, shall grant a permit to the establishment if all requirements for a massage establishment described herein are met, and shall issue a permit to all persons who have applied to perform massage services unless it appears that any such person has deliberately falsified the application or unless it appears that the record of any such person reveals a conviction of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude. The city manager may recommend to the city commission that an individual business establishment shall be subject to a public hearing and city commissioners approval, when in his judgment any such business establishment has an effect upon the public health, safety, or welfare of the community. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 7, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-272. - Denial; action by commission. 
    Any person denied a permit by the city manager or his designee pursuant to these provisions may appeal to the city commission in writing, stating reasons why the permit should be granted. The city commission may grant or deny the permit and such decision shall be final upon the applicant. Also, the city commission may elect on its own motion to review any determination of the city manager granting or denying a permit. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 7, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-273. - Nontransferable. 
    All permits issued under this division are nontransferable; provided, however, a change of location of a massage establishment may be permitted pursuant to the provisions herein. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 7, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-274. - Display. 
    Every person to whom a permit shall have been granted under this division shall display such permit in a conspicuous place so that the same may be readily seen by persons entering the premises where the massage, bath, or treatment is given. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 8, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-275. - Change of location. 
    A change of location of any of the aforementioned and described premises may be approved by the chief of police and city building inspector, provided all ordinances and regulations of the city are complied with and the change of location fee of $10.00 is deposited with the city. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 9, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-276. - Sale or transfer. 
(a)  Upon the sale or transfer of any interest in a massage establishment, the permit and license shall be null and void. A new application shall be made by any person desiring to own or operate the massage establishment. A fee of $10.00 shall be payable for each such application involving sale or other transfer of any interest in an existing massage establishment. The provisions of section 13-269 shall apply to any person, firm, or entity applying for a massage establishment permit for premises previously used as such establishment. 
(b)  Any sale or transfer of any interest in an existing massage establishment or any application for an extension or expansion of the building or other place of business of the massage establishment shall require inspection and shall require compliance with section 13-270. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 16, 9-18-1974) 
Sec. 13-277. - Revocation and suspension. 
(a)  No permit or license shall be revoked until after a hearing shall have been held before the city commission to determine just cause for such revocation; provided, however, the city manager or his designee may order any permits suspended pending such hearing, and it shall be unlawful for any person to carry on the business of a massage technician or to operate as a massage establishment, depending upon the particular type of permit which has been suspended, until the suspended permit has been reinstated by the city commission. Notice of such hearing shall be given in writing and served at least five days prior to the date of the hearing thereon. The notice shall state the ground of the complaint against the holder of such permit, or against the business carried on by the permittee at the massage establishment, and shall state the time and place where such hearing will be had. 
(b)  Such notice shall be served upon the permit holder by delivering the same to such person or by leaving such notice at the place of business or residence of the permit holder in the custody of a person of suitable age and discretion. If the permit holder cannot be found, and the service of such notice cannot be made in the manner herein provided, a copy of such notice shall be mailed, postage fully prepaid, addressed to the permit holder at his place of business or residence at least five days prior to the date of such hearing. 
(Ord. No. 674, art. 15, 9-18-1974) 
Secs. 13-278-13-300. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IX. - PARKING LOTS[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Cross reference- Stopping, standing and parking, § 14-61 et seq. 

Sec. 13-301. - Compliance required. 
    All persons engaged in the city in the business carried on for the accommodation of the public in providing parking and specialized service facilities for automobiles, trucks and other self-propelled vehicles for short periods of time in an open-air or roofed location on private property, for which service or facilities a charge is made, shall comply with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1953, § 25.1) 
Sec. 13-302. - License fee. 
    Each owner or operator of parking lots regulated by this article shall pay to the city the license fee now or hereafter provided for in article II of this chapter. 
(Code 1953, § 25.2) 
Sec. 13-303. - Schedule of charges and fees to be posted. 
    There shall be posted in a conspicuous place on each parking lot a schedule of charges and fees for the facilities or services provided. Such schedule shall be lettered and posted in such manner as to be legible to patrons of such business. 
(Code 1953, § 25.3) 
Sec. 13-304. - Solicitation of patrons; solicitation stands and areas. 
    Solicitation of patrons by the owners, operators, agents and employees of such parking lots is hereby prohibited on the streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks and other public property of the city, except in such areas or stands as may be designated by the police department of the city. In any one such designated solicitation area or stand, no single parking lot business shall have at any one time more than two employees, agents and solicitors. Such agents, employees, owners, operators and solicitors are prohibited from engaging in loud or boisterous talk or argument while on or about such solicitation areas or stands. The police department shall not create a solicitation stand in front of any place of business where the abutting property owners object to the same or where such stand would tend to create a traffic hazard. 
(Code 1953, § 25.4) 
Sec. 13-305. - City-owned parking lots. 
(a)  The city manager is granted the power, authority, right, responsibility and duty to prescribe rules and regulations relating to the parking of vehicles on property within the city owned, leased or held by the city or other governmental agency or authority when requested in writing so to do by the commissioners or the proper and legal person or officer or official of a governmental agency or authority. Upon such request being made, and approved by the city commission, the city manager, after prescribing such rules and regulations for the parking of vehicles on such governmental owned property shall post on said property designated as a parking area a clearly visible sign upon which shall be written the rules and regulations and penalties under which vehicles may be parked, including but not limited to, hours of parking, length of time that vehicles may be parked, speed limits within said parking area, removal of vehicles from parking lot when parked over time allowed, stripping of parking areas, designation of stop signs, reservation of areas for employees and other persons, stripping and designation of walkways, and any other regulation which shall promote the safety and efficiency of the parking of such vehicles. 
(b)  The city manager shall also have the power and authority to place and install parking meters in such parking lot or rent spaces to parking customers and prescribe payment for such space. 
(Ord. No. 553, § 1, 1-19-1968) 
Secs. 13-306-13-325. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE X. - PRECIOUS METAL DEALERS[6] 
Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate and license dealers in precious metals, O.C.G.A. § 43-37-5. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-326. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Buyer of precious metals or gem stones means any person, whether as owner, agent or employee and whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in the business of purchasing precious metals or gem stones or articles containing any precious metal or gem stone from members of the general public other than for resale to the general public in a retail jewelry or antique business conducted at the same location or as a pawnbroker. 
    Gem stones means diamonds, rubies, emeralds or sapphires. 
    Precious metals means gold, silver or platinum or any metal containing gold, silver or platinum. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 2, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-327. - Records-Required. 
    Every buyer of precious metals and gem stones shall maintain a daily record in which shall be entered in legible English at the time of each transaction the following information: 
(1)  The date and time of day of the transaction. 
(2)  The name of the person conducting the transaction. 
(3)  The name, age, address and race of the seller, a description of the general appearance and estimated height and weight of the seller; and the distinctive number from the seller's driver's license or other similar identification card. 
(4)  A full identification and description of the article or articles including kind, style, material, color, design and kind and number of stones in jewelry, if any, and all identifying marks and numbers inscribed thereon. 
(5)  The price paid for each item. 
(6)  The number of the check issued for the purchase price if payment is made by check. 
(7)  The signature of the customer. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 8, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-328. - Same-Entries. 
    Entries in the records required by section 13-327 shall appear in chronological order in ink. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 9, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-329. - Same-Filing with city; inspection. 
    The complete daily record of each day's transactions shall be filed on or before the following day in the office of the city marshal and shall, prior to filing, be open to the inspection of any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 10, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-330. - Minimum retention period. 
    Every buyer of precious metals or gem stones shall retain possession of each article or item purchased in the city for at least ten days following each purchase. It shall be unlawful for any buyer of precious metals or gem stones to alter in any manner, or to transfer possession of, any article or item purchased in the city within a period of ten days or less after purchase. In the event that any article or item so purchased shall be removed from the city limits within a period of ten days after purchase, the buyer of precious metals or gem stones shall notify the city marshal, in writing, prior to such removal, of the precise location and address to which the article or item shall be removed and shall consent to inspection of the same by the city marshal or any duly authorized law enforcement officer, at such location. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 11, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-331. - Unlawful acts. 
    It shall be unlawful for any buyer of precious metals or gem stones to commit any of the following acts: 
(1)  Fail to make an entry of any material matter in his daily record. 
(2)  Make any false entry therein. 
(3)  Falsify, obliterate or destroy such daily record or remove the same from his place of business except to file the same in the office of the city marshal. 
(4)  Refuse to allow any duly authorized law enforcement officer to inspect such daily record or any goods in his possession, during the ordinary hours of business or at any reasonable time. 
(5)  Fail to file his daily record in the office of the city marshal. 
(6)  Fail to comply with this article in any other particular. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 13, 10-1-1980) 
Secs. 13-332-13-345. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 13-346. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for a buyer of precious metals and gem stones to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this division. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 1, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-347. - Application. 
    The applicants for a license pursuant to this division shall file with the city marshal a written application under oath, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation and showing as follows: 
(1)  The name or names of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time that it is proposed that it will be carried on within the city; the local address or addresses of such person while engaged in such business; the permanent address or addresses of such person or persons; the capacity in which such person will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, the name of the state in which the same is incorporated. 
(2)  The place or places within the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business and the length of time during which it is proposed that such business will be conducted. 
(3)  Credentials from the person for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as representative. 
(4)  Such other reasonable information as to the identity and character of the person or persons having the management or supervision of the business and the manner of doing business as the city marshal may deem proper in order to fulfill the purpose of this article in the protection of the public interest. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 3, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-348. - Bond. 
    Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this division, the applicant shall file with the city marshal a bond binding the applicant to the city in the full sum of $10,000.00, executed by the applicant as principal and by a surety approved by the city marshal, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state governing the conduct of such business and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of such ordinances or statutes and all judgments that may be recovered against the applicant by any person or persons for damages arising out of the conduct of such business. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city in its own behalf or for the use of any aggrieved person. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 4, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-349. - Agent for service of process. 
    Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this division, the applicant shall file with the city marshal an instrument appointing the secretary of the city commission as his true and lawful agent for service of process upon the applicant in any suit or legal proceeding arising out of the business transacted pursuant to the license applied for or for the performance of the conditions of the required bond or for any breach thereof. Immediately upon service of process upon the secretary of the commission as herein provided, the secretary shall send to the licensee at his last-known address, by registered mail, a copy of such process. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 5, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-350. - Display; separate licenses for separate places of business. 
    The license issued pursuant to this division shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that the applicant shall desire to do business in more than one place within the city, separate licenses shall be purchased and issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 6, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-351. - License fees. 
    Licensees under this division shall pay a license fee of $300.00 for each calendar year or portion thereof in which the licensee shall engage in business within the city. For each business location in addition to one, the licensee shall pay an additional license fee of $75.00 for each calendar year or portion of year in which the licensee conducts business at such additional location or locations. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 7, 10-1-1980) 
Sec. 13-352. - Revocation. 
(a)  The license issued pursuant to this division may be revoked by the city commission, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with any purchase transaction. 
(3)  Failure to maintain the daily record required by this article. 
(4)  Any other violation of this article. 
(5)  Conducting the business licensed under this article in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be served on the licensee by handing the same personally to the person in charge of the licensee's business, or by mailing the same, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last-known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  The giving of such notice shall suspend the license pending the outcome of the hearing, and business operations under the license shall cease. 
(Ord. No. 764, § 12, 10-1-1980) 
Secs. 13-353-13-430. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XI. - RESERVED[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 919, § 1, adopted Dec. 24, 1994, repealed former art. XI of this chapter in its entirety. Former art. XI, §§ 13-431-13-436, pertained to professionals and derived from Ord. No. 774, §§ 1-5, 7, 8, adopted Oct. 21, 1981. 

Secs. 13-431-13-455. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XII. - PUBLIC DANCE HALLS 

Sec. 13-456. - Definition. 
    The term "public dance hall," as used in this article, shall include any dance hall where a dance is held to which admission may be gained by the general public, where an orchestra furnishes the music, but shall not include any dance hall wherein a dance is held to which admission is restricted to invited guests. 
(Code 1953, § 13.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-457. - License required. 
    No person shall conduct any public dance hall without first obtaining the license required by article II of this chapter, and complying with all of the terms of such article. 
(Code 1953, § 13.2) 
Sec. 13-458. - Prerequisite to issuance of license. 
    No license required by section 13-457 shall be issued where the dance hall is situated within the first fire district unless a petition shall be first presented to the city commission duly approved and signed by at least three-fourths of the residents living within 450 feet of the location of such hall. 
(Code 1953, § 13.3) 
Sec. 13-459. - Revocation of license. 
    The city commission shall have the right to revoke the license granted to any person for the operation of a public dance hall if there has been any boisterous, riotous or disorderly conduct or if the maintenance of such public dance hall or place for dancing shall disturb the public peace. Before revoking any such license, the commission shall allow the holder of such license a hearing. Five days' notice of such hearing shall be given to the holder in writing, together with a brief statement of the grounds upon which the commission proposes to revoke such license. If at such hearing the holder fails to appear or fails to show any good and sufficient reason in the judgment of the commission why his license should not be revoked, the commission shall revoke and cancel such license. It shall thereafter be unlawful for the holder of any such license to operate such public dance hall. 
(Code 1953, § 13.4) 
Secs. 13-460-13-480. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIII. - TELEPHONE COMPANIES 

Sec. 13-481. - Authority for tax. 
    The Georgia Public Service Commission, through an order dated February 18, 1971, provides for local service revenues as a base for occupational tax as it relates to telephone companies doing business within the city. 
(Ord. No. 616, § 1, 7-7-1971) 
Sec. 13-482. - Tax levied. 
    The telephone company doing business in the city is to remit to the city finance director payment equal to three percent of the local service revenues in two installments, one on or before May 1, and the other on or before September 1, in each given year. 
(Ord. No. 616, § 2, 7-7-1971) 
Sec. 13-483. - Application to franchisee. 
    The franchise agreement now in effect with Southern Bell Telephone Company is in no way affected by this change in rate method or manner of the payment of this occupational tax, and any franchise fees are to be paid along with this occupational tax at the time of remittance. 
(Ord. No. 616, § 3, 7-7-1971) 
Secs. 13-484-13-505. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XIV. - TRANSIENT MERCHANTS[8] 
Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 947, § 1, adopted Jan. 16, 2002, change the title of art. XIV of this chapter from "transient merchants, itinerant merchants and itinerant vendors" to "transient merchants." 
State Law reference- Peddlers and itinerant trades, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-506. - Definition. 
(a)  For the purpose of this article, a "transient merchant," "itinerant merchant" or "itinerant vendor" is defined as any person, whether as owner, agent, consignee or employee, and whether a resident of the city or not, who engages in a business of selling goods, wares, merchandise or services temporarily within the city and who, in furtherance of such purpose, hires, leases, uses or occupies any building, structure, shop, apartment or room in a hotel, motel or lodging house, tent, motor vehicle or railroad car, or any street, alley or other place within the city, for the exhibition for sale of such goods, wares and merchandise or performance of such services, either privately, publicly or at auction. The person so engaged shall not be relieved from complying with the provisions of this article by reason of associating temporarily with any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer, or by conducting such transient business in connection with or in the name of any local dealer, trader, merchant or auctioneer. 
(b)  The definition set forth in this section shall not be deemed to include any person who, while occupying such temporary location, merely takes orders for the sale of goods for future delivery or exhibits samples for the purpose of securing orders only for future delivery. Such definition shall be deemed to include any person engaged in the performance of any service such as fitting, measuring, planning, designing, photographing or any other service of similar kind, notwithstanding that such service may contemplate the future delivery of tangible property. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, §§ 2, 3, 6-21-1978) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-507. - Use of streets, parks, etc. 
(a)  No transient merchant shall conduct, in whole or part, a business upon any public sidewalk, street, alley, park, right-of-way or other public lands of the city without first obtaining the consent of the city commission after furnishing proof satisfactory to the commission that the location and conduct of such business with neither obstruct such public ways and places, nor interfere with the orderly regulation of traffic, nor interfere with the right of the general public to the use of such public ways and places; provided, however, that the market at Mary Ross Waterfront Park and such other places as the commission may from time to time designate may be used for transient merchant business subject to any terms, fees and conditions as may be provided for by the city manager or such other person or persons as the commission may place in charge of management of the facility. 
(b)  No transient merchant shall conduct a business upon any privately owned property without first providing the deputy city marshal with written authorization for such use of the property, identifying the owner thereof and signed by the owner. 
(c)  No transient merchant shall locate any business in any residential-zoned area. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 9, 6-21-1978; Ord. No. 947, § 2, 1-16-2002) 
Sec. 13-508. - Report of sales subject to sales tax. 
    It shall be the duty of each transient merchant, itinerant merchant, or itinerant vendor, after having engaged in business within the city, to report to the deputy city marshal the amount of gross sales made within the city during the period while the license was in effect and to furnish proof that all taxes due to the commissioner of revenue of the state upon such sales, including the local option sales tax, have been remitted to the commissioner of revenue as required by state law. Such report of gross sales and proof of tax payment thereon shall be filed with the deputy city marshal at the time payment is due to the commissioner of revenue. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 12, 6-21-1978) 
Sec. 13-509. - Violations. 
    Failure to comply with the licensing, application and other requirements of this article XIV shall be deemed a violation of the City Code punishable as provided for in chapter 15 of the City Code. 
(Ord. No. 947, § 4, 1-16-2002) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 947, § 4, adopted Jan. 16, 2002, added new provisions to this article as § 13-530 of div. 2. As such provisions pertained to art. IV as a whole, said provisions have been redesignated as § 13-509 by the editor for purposes of classification. 
Secs. 13-510-13-520. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - LICENSE 

Sec. 13-521. - Required. 
    It shall be unlawful for a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor to engage in such business within the city without first obtaining a license therefor in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 1, 6-21-1978) 
Sec. 13-522. - Application. 
    Applicants for a license under this division shall file with the deputy city marshal a written application under oath, signed by the applicant if an individual, by all partners if a partnership, and by the president if a corporation, and showing as follows: 
(1)  The name of the person having the management or supervision of the applicant's business during the time it is proposed that it will be carried on within the city; the local address of such person while engaged in such business; the permanent address of such person; the capacity in which such person will act (that is, whether as proprietor, agent or otherwise); the name and address of the person for whose account the business will be carried on, if any; and if a corporation, the state of the incorporation. 
(2)  The place or places within the city where it is proposed to carry on the applicant's business and the length of time during which it is proposed that such business will be conducted at each location. Where the transient business will be conducted upon privately owned property, the signed, written documentation of owner permission as required by section 13-507(b) shall be appended to the application. 
(3)  The place or places other than the permanent place of business of the applicant where the applicant conducted a transient business within the six-month period next preceding the date of application, stating the nature of each such business and giving the post office and street address of the location at which the business was conducted and identifying the local licensing entity for each. 
(4)  A statement of the nature, character, quality and quantity of the goods, produce, wares, merchandise or services to be sold or offered by the applicant within the city; whether the same are proposed to be sold from stock in possession, by sample, at auction, by direct sale, by taking orders for future delivery or any combination of the foregoing; where the goods or products to be sold are manufactured or produced and where the goods or products are located at the time of application. Where the applicant proposes to sell goods, wares and merchandise from stock in possession, there shall be appended to the application a complete and itemized list of the articles to be sold, which shall be signed by the applicant and verified under oath. 
(5)  Written documentation or credentials from the person or company for which the applicant proposes to do business, authorizing the applicant to act as a representative. 
(6)  A list of the full and correct names of all persons who will or may be employed in the transient business. 
(7)  A listing of any prior periods when the applicant has carried on a transient business with the city. 
(8)  An acknowledgement that applicant has been furnished with a copy of article XIV, chapter 13 of the City Code and will abide by all city ordinances in conducting the proposed transient business. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 4, 6-21-1978; Ord. No. 947, § 3, 1-16-2002) 
Sec. 13-523. - Sales tax number required. 
    Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this division, the applicant shall file with the deputy city marshal proof satisfactory to the deputy city marshal that the applicant or the business proposed to be conducted pursuant to the license possesses a valid state sales tax number issued by the commissioner of revenue of the state. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 5, 6-21-1978) 
Sec. 13-524. - Bond. 
    Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this division, the applicant shall file with the deputy city marshal a bond binding the applicant to the city in the full sum of $10,000.00, executed by the applicant as principal and by a surety approved by the deputy city marshal, conditioned that the applicant shall comply fully with the ordinances of the city and the statutes of the state governing the conduct of such business and will pay all judgments rendered against the applicant for any violation of such ordinances or statutes and all judgments that may be recovered against the applicant by any person or persons for damages growing out of any misrepresentation, deception or breach of warranty in the conduct of such business. Action on the bond may be brought in the name of the city for the use of any aggrieved person. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 6, 6-21-1978) 
Sec. 13-525. - Agent for service of process. 
    Before any license shall be issued pursuant to this division, the applicant shall file with the deputy city marshal an instrument appointing the secretary of the city commission as his true and lawful agent for service of process upon the applicant in any suit or legal proceeding arising out of the business transacted pursuant to the license applied for or for the performance of the conditions of the aforesaid bond or for any breach thereof. Immediately upon service of process upon the secretary of the city commission, the secretary shall send to the licensee at his last-known address, by registered mail, a copy of such process. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 7, 6-21-1978) 
Sec. 13-526. - Display; separate licenses for separate places of business. 
    The license issued pursuant to this division shall be posted conspicuously in the place of business named therein. In the event that the applicant shall desire to do business in more than one place within the city, separate licenses shall be purchased and issued for each place of business, and shall be posted conspicuously in each place of business. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 8, 6-21-1978) 
Sec. 13-527. - Activity restricted. 
    No license issued pursuant to this division shall carry with it the privilege of making a house-to-house canvass of residences and offering for sale and delivery goods or services of any character if such canvass shall be otherwise regulated by the city. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 8, 6-21-1978) 
Sec. 13-528. - Fee, occupational tax. 
(a)  Licensees under this division shall pay an initial minimum license fee at the time of issuance of the license, equal to $25.00 for each day upon which business will be conducted pursuant to the license. 
(b)  At the time of filing the report of gross sales required by section 13-508, the licensee shall pay a gross receipts license tax equivalent to the amount which the licensee would have paid pursuant to article II of this chapter if licensed under article II of this chapter less a credit for the initial minimum license fee paid at the time of issuance of the license. 
(c)  In computing the taxes to be paid pursuant to subsection (b) of this section, all gross receipts derived in the city during a calendar year shall be cumulative, it being the intent of this section to require transient or itinerant merchants and vendors to pay license fees and occupational taxes not less than those paid by businesses having permanent locations within the city. 
(d)  Failure to comply with section 13-508 or with subsections (b) and (c) of this section shall constitute ground to refuse the issuance of a subsequent license to a transient or itinerant merchant or vendor. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 10, 6-21-1978; Ord. No. 823, § 1, 9-14-1985) 
Sec. 13-529. - Revocation. 
(a)  The licenses issued pursuant to this division may be revoked by the board of city commissioners, after notice and hearing, for any of the following causes: 
(1)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement contained in the application for license. 
(2)  Any fraud, misrepresentation or false statement made in connection with the selling of goods, wares, merchandise or services. 
(3)  Any violation of this article. 
(4)  Conducting the business licensed under this division in an unlawful manner or in such a manner as to constitute a breach of the peace or to constitute a menace to the health, safety or general welfare of the public. 
(b)  Notice of hearing for revocation of a license shall be given in writing, setting forth specifically the grounds of the complaint and the time and place of the hearing. The notice shall be served on the licensee by handing the same personally to the person in charge of the license's business, or by mailing the same, postage prepaid, to the licensee at his last-known address at least five days prior to the date set for the hearing. 
(c)  The giving of such notice shall suspend the license pending the outcome of the hearing, and business operations under the license shall cease. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 11, 6-21-1978) 
Sec. 13-530. - Liability for payment of taxes due. 
    No license shall be issued to a transient merchant, itinerant merchant or itinerant vendor pursuant to this division unless the records on file in the office of the deputy city marshal show that the applicant has paid all taxes due upon any prior sales made within the city. 
(Ord. No. 7351/2, § 13, 6-21-1978) 
Secs. 13-531-13-555. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XV. - WRECKERS[9] 
Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Cross reference- Ambulances, § 13-71 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 14; taxicabs, ch. 21. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 13-556. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as "the wrecker ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 832, § 1, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-557. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in this article shall be as follows: 
    Chief means the chief of the police department of the city or any officer specifically designated by him to administer and carry out the provisions of this article. 
    Disabled means a motor vehicle disabled on a public way or other public place in such a manner as to obstruct vehicular or pedestrian travel or access to public or private property. 
    Operator means and includes all persons owning or operating wreckers within a wrecker service in the city and all officers, agents and employees of such persons who are engaged in the business of the wrecker service. 
    Wrecker means an automotive vehicle equipped and used for the purpose of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled automobiles or other vehicles. 
    Wrecker service means any person regularly engaged in the business of towing or hauling wrecked or disabled motor vehicles for hire within the city whether or not such wrecker service maintains an office within the city limits. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 2, 2-19-1986) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 13-558. - Administration and enforcement. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief to administer and carry out the provisions of this article. All law enforcement officers of the city shall have authority to prosecute violations of this article. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 3, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-559. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions or sections of this article, shall be punished upon conviction in the municipal court in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 26, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-560. - Compliance required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any wrecker service or operator to tow or haul any motor vehicle which has been wrecked, abandoned or disabled on a public way or other public place within the jurisdiction of the city from the scene of the wreck, abandonment or disablement except in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 4, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-561. - Removal of debris. 
    The removal of broken glass and other debris from the scene of an accident shall be part of the wrecker service's obligation pursuant to this article. When two or more different wrecker services are assigned to one accident, each shall be equally responsible for cleaning the wreck area. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 9, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-562. - Use of emergency light. 
    A wrecker operator shall not display the amber emergency light except upon arrival at the scene where a call originated and when leaving the scene with a vehicle in tow. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 10, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-563. - Obedience to traffic laws. 
    Each wrecker operator shall abide by all applicable traffic regulations. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 10, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-564. - Responsibility for violations. 
    Each wrecker operator shall be responsible for any violation of any applicable law, rule or regulation incurred in the process of responding to a call. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 10, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-565. - Storage area. 
(a)  Each wrecker service shall maintain an area for storage of towed vehicles either within or without the city, sufficient to provide storage in a manner not inconsistent with applicable zoning ordinances and other laws. If outside the city, the storage area shall be no more than three miles from the city limits by the shortest route of vehicular travel. 
(b)  The storage area shall be enclosed or fenced, shall be securely locked at all times when unattended, shall be lighted during night time, and shall be used for temporary storage only. 
(c)  Towed or hauled vehicles shall not be parked or left standing on any city right-of-way at any time or under any circumstances. 
(d)  Stored vehicles shall be subject to reclamation 24 hours a day. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 11, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 837, § 2, 5-7-1986) 
Sec. 13-566. - Comprehensive liability insurance coverage. 
    In addition to the motor vehicle liability insurance required by state law, each wrecker service shall maintain general comprehensive liability insurance on business operations providing a minimum of $25,000.00 single-limit coverage per occurrence. The chief may require each wrecker service to furnish copies of its insurance certificates showing the amounts of coverage and expiration of the policies required by this article and other laws. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 12, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-567. - Identification of vehicles. 
    Each wrecker shall have the name, address and telephone number of its business displayed on both sides of the vehicle. Such information shall be permanently painted onto the side of the vehicle in block letters of contrasting color not less than 21/2 inches in height. Attachment to the vehicle of removable signs for this purpose is strictly prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 13, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-568. - Solicitation of business prohibited. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any wrecker operator, wrecker service or other person to solicit business at the scene of a motor vehicle accident or other vehicular disablement, whether such solicitation be conducted from a wrecker vehicle, private automobile, other vehicle or on foot. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 17, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-569. - Removal of vehicles restricted. 
    No vehicle shall be removed from the scene of a wreck, abandonment or disablement until it is released by the investigating officers. The chief or other officers of the city police department may direct that a vehicle to be removed shall be impounded and towed or hauled to the city's impound lot, and in such event it shall be a violation of this article for any wrecker operator to remove a vehicle to any other location. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 19, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-570. - Records. 
    After towing or hauling a wrecked or disabled vehicle, a wrecker service shall immediately make a written record of the following information, which shall be maintained for a period of one year and which shall be made available for inspection and copying by the chief at all reasonable business hours: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the vehicle; 
(2)  The make, model and serial number of the vehicle; 
(3)  The date and time towed or hauled; 
(4)  The location of the wreck or disablement; 
(5)  The place where such vehicle was stored or other disposition of the vehicle; and 
(6)  An itemization of the charges made by the wrecker service for towing the vehicle and the charges made or accruing for storage of the same. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 20, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 928, § 3, 11-20-1996) 
Secs. 13-571-13-585. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - ROTATION LIST 

Sec. 13-586. - Use required; exceptions. 
    At all times when necessary for the police department to remove any motor vehicle for any cause from any place within the jurisdiction of the city, no wrecker shall be used to tow or haul such vehicle unless that wrecker is on the city's rotation system; provided, however, that this article shall not be construed to prohibit the police department from using a wrecker owned by the city to tow or haul an abandoned vehicle or a vehicle to be impounded in connection with a criminal investigation or to prohibit the use of a wrecker not on the rotation system under circumstances where police jurisdiction is not involved. For purposes of this section, police jurisdiction shall be deemed to exist in all cases of vehicular wreck or collision, all cases in which a criminal offense is under investigation, all cases in which a vehicular disablement results in obstruction of use of or travel on a public place or way, and all cases of abandonment of a vehicle on a public place or way. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 5, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 837, § 1, 5-7-1986) 
Sec. 13-587. - Application for placement. 
    In order to be placed on the rotation system, the owner or operator of a wrecker shall file an application with the chief, supplying the following information: 
(a)  Title certificate number of the wrecker and date issued and the name, home and business address and telephone number(s) of the owner or owners of the wrecker. 
(b)  Complete home and business address and telephone numbers of the principal operator of the wrecker. 
(c)  Description of the wrecker to be registered, including the make, model, manufacturer's serial number and capacities. 
(d)  Names of the wrecker service operating the wrecker and all persons having a financial interest therein. 
(e)  Persons, including all agents and employees, authorized to operate the wrecker and class of driver's license held by each operator. 
(f)  A current three-year certified Motor Vehicle Report (MVR) from the Georgia Department of Driver Services (DDS) for each driver who will be operating a wrecker or tow truck. 
(g)  The location and telephone number of the office or garage to and from which the wrecker is operator. 
(h)  The name and address of the insurance company or companies providing motor vehicle liability coverage for the wrecker and wrecker service and general comprehensive liability coverage for business operations, the policy number of each insurance policy, and the policy limits provided by each policy. 
(i)  Proof of a minimum of six months pre-paid insurance coverage or a certificate of insurance. 
(j)  A copy of the company's current City of Brunswick business license. 
(k)  A copy of the motor vehicle registration for the wrecker. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 6, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
Sec. 13-588. - Inspection of vehicles. 
    All wreckers shall undergo annual safety compliance inspections in compliance with the department of transportation's motor carrier compliance division. Proof of the annual safety inspections shall be submitted to the chief before approving the application for placement on the rotation system. Thereafter, the chief shall inspect each wrecker's pertinent documents annually. Each wrecker owner may provide multiple wrecker units so long as each vehicle is inspected in accordance with this article. Provided however, that a wrecker owner or company shall only be afforded one slot on the wrecker list. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 7, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 928, § 2, 11-20-1996; Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
Sec. 13-589. - Minimum specifications, equipment. 
    The following items and equipment must be maintained on all wreckers and tow trucks: 
(a)  Each vehicle must be permanently marked on both sides of the body or cab of the vehicle, in letters and figures in sharp color contrast to the background and legible from a distance of 50 feet during daylight hours while the vehicle is stationary, with: 
(1)  The name of the motor carrier (wrecker company) city of address, and telephone number; and 
(2)  The carrier's state or federal USDOT number; 
(b)  Valid registration tag and revalidation decal; 
(c)  Valid emergency light permit issued by DPS; 
(d)  Flashing or revolving amber light with 360-degree visibility; 
(e)  Battery jumper cables; 
(f)  Fire extinguisher; 
(g)  Sweeping broom; 
(h)  Flat shovel; 
(i)  Container for debris; 
(j)  Motorcycle straps (4); and 
(k)  Tow away lamps (tail, stop and turn signal lights for vehicles being towed); and 
(l)  Stopped vehicle warning devices (e.g. three bi-directional reflective triangles). 
(Ord. No. 832, § 8, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
Sec. 13-590. - Preparation of call list. 
    It shall be the duty of the chief or his/her designee to prepare and maintain a rotational call list of wreckers which meet the qualifications, standards, and requirements enumerated in this article. Each wrecker company shall be afforded one slot on the wrecker list. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 14, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
Sec. 13-591. - Use of call list-Generally. 
(a)  At all times when necessary for the police department to remove any vehicle for any cause, the police radio operator, or such other person as may be designated by the chief, shall engage the services of those on the rotational call list by calling them in alphabetical order and in rotation, provided, however, that deviation from the alphabetical order shall be permitted if: 
(1)  The next wrecker service on rotation does not have a wrecker available with sufficient capacity to handle the call, or 
(2)  The owner or person in possession of a vehicle or person in possession of a vehicle about to be removed designates a wrecker service of his preference. In the event such person designates a wrecker service of his preference, that wrecker service shall be called whether or not it is next on the rotational call list, and such designation shall not interfere with such wrecker service's position on the call list. 
(b)  If it is necessary to skip over one or more wrecker services because they do not have a wrecker with sufficient capacity to handle a particular call, the wrecker service or services skipped over shall not lose position on the rotation list, but the wrecker service which handles the call shall lose position. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 15, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 837, § 3, 5-7-1986) 
Sec. 13-592. - Same-Unauthorized. 
    All calls to wrecker services shall be made by the police radio operator, or such other person as may be designated by the chief, and in no event shall an investigating officer undertake to call directly for a wrecker service. Police officers are strictly forbidden from recommending any particular wrecker service to any person, and any police officer violating this provision shall be subject to appropriate disciplinary action. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 16, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-593. - Call of wrecker to scene. 
    It shall be a violation of this article for any wrecker operator to proceed to the scene of an accident or vehicular disablement unless called as provided hereinabove. Upon being so called, a wrecker operator shall not block traffic and shall maintain his vehicle in such position as not to impede emergency vehicles and normal vehicular traffic. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 18, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-594. - Fees. 
    A wrecker service shall pay an annual fee of $50.00 for placement on the rotation system and an application fee of $50.00. Such fees shall be paid to the City of Brunswick Finance Department for administrative costs associated with the enforcement of this article. There shall be no gross receipts tax or other license fees for wrecker operations, but such tax may apply to other business activities of a wrecker service. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 21, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
Sec. 13-595. - Charges. 
(a)  The mayor and city commission shall set forth an appropriate fee schedule to be binding on the wrecker services included on the rotational list. This fee schedule may be reviewed not more than once annually. 
(b)  As approved in paragraph (a) of this section, no wrecker service shall charge more than the following fees for services provided when responding to a call received from the rotational call list: 
(1)  Attaching and towing or hauling a vehicle ..... $125.00 
(2)  Storage per day, starting at 12:01 a.m. of the next calendar date following the tow date, per day ..... $15.00 
(3)  Outdoor storage, per day ..... $10.00 
(4)  All other services performed within a reasonable time, including but not limited to, righting an overturned vehicle, removing vehicle from marsh, cleaning accident scene, etc., to be prorated, per hour ..... $30.00 
(5)  Righting an overturned vehicle or winching, when recovery is more than 20 feet from edge of roadway or is in water or marsh, per hour ..... $35.00 
(Ord. No. 832, § 22, 2-19-1986; Ord. No. 837, § 4, 5-7-1986; Ord. No. 928, § 1, 11-20-1996; Ord. No. 1045, § 1, 9-21-2016) 
Sec. 13-596. - When suspension authorized. 
    The chief may suspend the wreckers of any wrecker service from the rotation system upon any of the following grounds: 
(1)  Charging fees in excess of those approved by the commission. 
(2)  Failure of a wrecker to pass inspection. 
(3)  Any violation of the provisions of this article or other law. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 23, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-597. - Mandatory suspension. 
    A court conviction of violation of section 13-568 or section 13-593 shall result in mandatory suspension of the wrecker service for a period of one year. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 24, 2-19-1986) 
Sec. 13-598. - Notice of suspension. 
    Any wrecker service suspended from the rotation list by the chief shall be notified in writing of the suspension to take effect within ten days after notice, the reasons therefor in writing, the witnesses relied upon by the chief, and that the wrecker service shall be granted a hearing upon request before the city manager within such ten-day period. 
(Ord. No. 832, § 25, 2-19-1986) 
Secs. 13-599, 13-600. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE XVI. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[10] 

Footnotes: 
--- (10) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 934, § 2, adopted July 15, 1998, repealed former art. XVI of this chapter in its entirety and added new provisions as art. XVI as herein set out. Former art. XVI, §§ 13-601-13-615, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 930, § 2, adopted July 24, 1997. 

Sec. 13-601. - Title. 
    This article shall be known and cited as "the adult entertainment ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-602. - Definitions 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Adult arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein, for any form of consideration, coin-operated or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically operated still- or motion-picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time, and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by the depicting or describing of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
    Adult bookstore, adult video store, or adult novelty shop means a commercial establishment that, as one of its principal business purposes, offers for sale or rental for any form of consideration any one or more of the following: 
(1)  Books, magazines, periodicals or other printed matter, or photographs, films, motion pictures, video cassettes or video reproductions which depict or describe specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas; or 
(2)  Instruments, devices or paraphernalia that are designed for use in connection with specified sexual activities. 
A commercial establishment shall be categorized as an "adult bookstore," "adult video store" or "adult novelty store" notwithstanding that it may have other principal business purposes if 50 percent or more of its floor space is utilized for the sale or rental of any of the foregoing items or if 50 percent of its inventory consists of the foregoing items. 
    Adult cabaret or adult nightclub means a nightclub, bar, restaurant or similar commercial establishment, whether or not alcoholic beverages are served, that regularly features any of the following: 
(1)  Persons who appear nude or in a state of semi-nudity; 
(2)  Live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities"; 
(3)  Films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities"; 
    Adult entertainment means entertainment of the specific kinds included in the definitions herein of the several kinds of adult entertainment establishments, provided however, that the term "adult entertainment" shall not be construed to include, and this article shall not be construed to regulate, performances that are not distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on the depiction, description, display or featuring of "specified anatomical areas" or "specified sexual activities" in that such depiction, description, display or featuring of such areas or activities, if any, is only incidental to the primary purpose of the performance. 
    Adult entertainment establishment means: (1) an adult arcade, an adult retail store, (3) adult cabaret or adult nightclub, (4) adult motel, (5) adult motion picture theater, (6) adult theater or (7) sexual encounter establishment as defined in this article. 
    Adult motel means a motel, hotel or similar commercial establishment that offers accommodation to the public for any form of consideration and provides patrons with closed-circuit television transmissions, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or other photographic reproductions that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas" and advertises by any means the availability of such sexually oriented material. 
    Adult motion picture theater means a commercial establishment where, for any form of consideration, films, motion pictures, video cassettes, slides or similar photographic reproductions are regularly shown that are characterized by the depiction or description of "specified sexual activities" or "specified anatomical areas". 
    Adult theater means a theater, concert hail, auditorium or similar commercial establishment that, for any form of consideration, regularly features persons who appear in a state of nudity or live performances that are characterized by the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or by "specified sexual activities". 
    Minor , for the purposes of this article, means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
    Sexual encounter establishment means a business or commercial establishment, that as one of its primary business purposes, offers for any form of consideration, a place where two or more persons may congregate, associate, or consort for the purpose of "specified sexual activities" or the exposure of "specified anatomical areas" or activities when one or more of the persons is in a state of nudity or semi-nude. The definition of sexually oriented businesses shall not include an establishment where a medical practitioner, psychologist, psychiatrist, or similar professional person licensed by the state engages in medically approved and recognized sexual therapy. 
    Specified anatomical areas means any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, anus, cleft of the buttocks, or the female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola, or any portion of the areola; 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and shall include any of the following: 
(1)  The fondling or other erotic touching of human genitals, pubic region, buttocks, anus or female breasts; 
(2)  Sex acts, normal or perverted, actual or simulated, including intercourse, oral copulation or sodomy; 
(3)  Masturbation, actual or simulated; 
(4)  The displaying of the male or female pubic hair, anus, vulva or genitalia; or 
(5)  Excretory functions as part of or in connection with any of the activities set forth in (1) through (4) above. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-603. - General regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall operate, attempt to operate or advertise an adult entertainment establishment as defined in this article without a valid adult entertainment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of three years a record of the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed by the establishment. 
(c)  No minor shall be permitted to enter into an adult entertainment establishment unless accompanied by a parent or guardian, and the participation or employment of minors as defined in this article in the business of an adult entertainment establishment is strictly prohibited. 
(d)  No more than one of the seven categories of adult entertainment establishments as defined in this article shall be permitted at any single business location. 
(e)  No employee of an adult entertainment establishment shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall be allowed to fondle or caress any employee. 
(f)  All live performances at any adult entertainment establishment shall be presented on a stage or platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet above the level of the floor. 
(g)  No live performances shall be presented closer than four feet to any patron, and performers shall not be allowed to commingle in the audience while performing. 
(h)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall allow or permit an employee or any other person on the premises to engage in obscene live conduct as defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80. 
(i)  No dancers or performers at an adult entertainment establishment shall solicit or accept any pay or gratuity from a patron, and no patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity or provide for any pay or gratuity to any dancer or performer. 
(j)  All interior areas of an establishment, as well as all walkways, parking areas and approaches to such establishment, licensed hereunder shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 foot candles per square foot for the interior spaces and 1.5 foot candles per square foot for exterior areas. 
(k)  No adult entertainment establishment shall serve, sell, distribute or allow the consumption of any alcoholic beverages upon the premises of the licensee. This subsection shall not apply to any adult entertainment establishment which was in business and held a license to serve alcoholic beverages prior to July 25, 1997, provided, however, that this exclusion shall only apply to present operators of such establishments, and shall only apply so long as the nature of the adult entertainment at such establishments does not change (for example, a change from adult motel to adult cabaret, or a change from "topless" dancing to nude dancing at a cabaret, would nullify this exclusion). This exclusion as to subsection (k) shall not excuse such establishments from compliance with the remaining provisions of this article or from other alcoholic beverage license provision of the City Code of ordinances. 
(l)  An adult entertainment establishment shall conspicuously display the licenses required by this article. 
(m)  No adult entertainment establishment except an adult motel shall be open for business between the hours of 2:00 a.m. and 8:00 a.m. or at anytime on Sundays or Christmas day. 
(n)  No booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any adult entertainment business so as to prevent a clear, unobstructed view throughout the interior of the premises, except for separate offices, kitchens, rest rooms or areas not frequented by patrons. 
(o)  No premises for an adult entertainment business shall have any interior connections or doors which make any other place of business accessible to customers or patrons. 
(p)  The interior of an adult entertainment establishment shall be enclosed from public view so that the activity therein is not visible from the exterior. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-604. - Sales to minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor as defined in this article any services, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult entertainment establishment as defined herein which clearly depicts any "specified anatomical area" or promotes, instructs, or assists in the conduct of any "specified sexual activities". 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-605. - Location. 
(a)  Adult entertainment establishments shall not be permitted in any zoning districts within the city except districts zoned for general commercial and industrial uses. 
(b)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which any establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located or upon which another establishment regulated or defined hereunder is located. 
(c)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any parcel of land zoned for residential use. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, cemetery, shrine, chapel of a mortuary, or other place used exclusively for religious services or meditation is located. 
(e)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any school or any regular stop or shelter where a bus used for the transportation of school students boards or discharges minors. 
(f)  No adult, entertainment establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a licensed day care center, hospital or nursing home is located. 
(g)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a public park or playground is located. 
(h)  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located within 500 feet of any parcel of land upon which a governmental building, library, or civic center is located, except where such building is located within the boundaries of a district zoned for general commercial or industrial uses. 
(i)  Where applicable distances specified herein shall be measured by airline from property line to property line. 
(j)  This section regarding location shall not apply to existing adult entertainment establishments in business prior to the effective date of this revised article. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-606. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed adult entertainment premises for a period of ten years from the date of such conviction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime. 
(b)  Before any person may work on a licensed adult entertainment premises, he shall file an application notice with the city marshal of his intended employment on forms supplied by the marshal and shall receive approval (a "permit") of such application prior to commencing work from the marshal. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the marshal requires, including but not limited to, full legal name, Social Security number, proof of age and a set of fingerprints. The marshal shall issue an approval, or a written notice denying the application, within ten days of submission of the application. Grounds for denial are: material misrepresentation or omission in the application; conviction, guilty plea, or nolo contendere plea to a felony (or misdemeanor involving moral turpitude) charge within five years preceding the date of application; or lack of reasonable proof, by driver's license, birth certificate or other similarly reliable means, that the applicant is 18 years of age or older. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of said denial, apply, in writing, to the marshal for a hearing, which shall be held within seven days of applicant's request. The written decision of the marshal shall be issued within ten days after said hearing, and may be appealed to the city commission, which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $25.00 shall accompany the application for an employment permit. 
(c)  Violation of the provisions of this article, or violation of the ordinances of the city or laws and regulations of the state, or of the United States shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of his permit for employment in an adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-607. - License application. 
(a)  Application for a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall be made on a form to be furnished by the city and shall be made under oath. the full name(including prior legal names and aliases), date of birth, the complete current residential and other residential addresses for the past five years, the applicant's occupation(s) for the past five years, and the Social Security number of each applicant (including all persons referred to in subsection (b) below) shall be furnished together with such further information as the commission may by its application form require. Any knowingly untrue, misleading or omitted statement or information of a material nature shall be cause for denial and, if a license has been granted, shall be cause for revocation. Each application shall be filed together with a certified check or cashier's check in payment of the license fee and, if an initial application, the investigation fee required by section 13-608(b). 
(b)  An application shall be made in the name of all the owners of the business, if the owners are natural persons, in the name of each and every partner if the owner is a partnership, and in the name of all managerial employees. If the owner is a corporation, application shall be made in the name of all corporate shareholders, in the name of all officers who will be directly concerned in the operation of the business and in the name of all managerial employees. All such persons must meet the requirements of this article, and all must sign the application along with a statement acknowledging that he/she is familiar with the requirements of this article and will abide by them. 
(c)  The license application shall require the disclosure of any conviction or nolo contendere plea or guilty plea of each applicant for any violation of federal, state, or local law involving alcoholic beverages, controlled substances, gambling, taxes, obscenity, prostitution, sexual activity, or moral turpitude within the ten-year period preceding the date of application, as well as the details of any revocation, suspension, denial or non-renewal of any alcoholic beverage or adult entertainment license held by any of the applicants. 
(d)  An accurate sketch or diagram drawn to scale shall accompany an initial application, showing the fixed and permanent location of the building, the area thereof to be used, and the property lines of the real property where the applicant proposes to carry on the adult entertainment business. The diagram shall also show the location of any properties used for purposes referred to in section 13-605 and the distances between property lines relevant under that section, measured directly from property line to property line. 
(e)  The license application shall contain a statement as to whether any applicant holds any other license for the operation of an adult entertainment establishment and the location thereof. 
(f)  If the proposed licensed premises require construction or substantial renovation, the applicant shall submit a detailed set of plans and specifications showing the exact location of the proposed licensed premises, the construction proposed to be carried out by the applicant and the anticipated time for completion of construction. The construction or renovation must be done in compliance with all applicable building, safety, fire and health codes. 
(g)  As a prerequisite to the issuance of any license, each applicant shall furnish a complete set of fingerprints. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-608. - Processing application. 
(a)  After investigation by the police department of the fitness of the applicant and the proposed location, all license applications shall be approved or disapproved by the city commission at a public meeting within 15 days following the date of application or at the next regular public meeting of the commission after the passage of such 15-day period. In cases where applications are disapproved, the finance department shall return the amount of the license fee submitted with the application, excluding the investigation fee in the case of a new application. In cases where such applications are approved by the city commission, the commission shall issue a proper license to the applicant authorizing the applicant to engage in the particular business and at the particular location applied for. If the decision is to deny the application, then reasons for the denial will be provided to applicant, in writing. Such decision will be provided to applicant, who may ask for a public hearing pursuant to section 13-612 for review of the denial. 
(b)  All new applications for a license to operate and adult entertainment establishment shall include a nonrefundable fee of $100.00 to cover the cost of investigation. 
(c)  The city commission shall have full power to determine whether the applicant for a license is qualified to hold such a license for the proposed adult entertainment establishment and to operate the type of business involved and whether the location of such business is proper under this article. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-609. - Annual license fee. 
(a)  Before a license to operate an adult entertainment establishment shall be granted, the applicant shall pay a license fee of $1,000.00 per annum. 
(b)  The fee for a new adult entertainment license for a portion of the year shall be prorated from the first day of the month in which the license is granted. Any holder of a license issued pursuant to the provisions of this article who discontinues the operation of his business may apply for a refund of a portion of the unearned license fee previously paid, and the license fee shall be prorated on a monthly basis as of the last day of the month in which the business discontinued operations. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-610. - Expiration and renewal. 
    All licenses granted under this article shall expire on June 30 of each license year. A licensee who desires to renew his license shall file application, together with the requisite fee, on the form provided for renewal of a license for the ensuing year. Applications for renewal shall be filed on or before May 1 of each year. A decision on the renewal application shall be made within 30 days of the date of application, and written notice of the decision will be provided to the applicant. In the event the decision is to deny a renewal, the written notice shall include a statement of the reasons for non-renewal. Such a denial will be subject to the review hearing process set forth in section 13-612. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-611. - Denial, suspension or revocation. 
    The city commission may deny, suspend, revoke, or refuse to renew any license required under this article if: 
(1)  The license application is not filed in good faith or is filed by some person as a subterfuge for any other person; 
(2)  Any applicant for a license or any licensee under this chapter willfully fails to comply with any provision of this article or with rules and regulations adopted by the city commission; 
(3)  Any person to whom a license has been issued no longer qualifies as a licensee under this article; 
(4)  Any applicant is found to have, within the ten years preceding the initial application or at any time subsequent thereto, been convicted of, pled guilty to, or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any felony violation of federal law, Georgia law, or the law of any other state. 
(5)  Any licensee or operator or employee denies access of law enforcement or fire department personnel or building inspectors to any portion of the licensed premises. 
(6)  Any licensee or operator hires or permits the employment of any person at the adult entertainment establishment who does not have a valid employee permit as provided for by this article. 
(7)  A licensee permits the licensed premises to be operated contrary to the terms of this article, or the laws of Georgia, so as to constitute a public nuisance after: 
a.  The licensee has been advised in writing by the chief of police of the unsatisfactory manner in which the business is being operated; and 
b.  The licensee has been given a reasonable opportunity to cure such deficiencies. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-612. - Notice and hearing. 
    All decisions denying, suspending or revoking adult entertainment licenses shall be in writing, with the reasons therefor stated, and mailed or delivered to the applicant personally. Within 15 days of any such decision, any applicant or license holder aggrieved by the decision of the city commission regarding a license may request a hearing on the decision, and upon such request shall be afforded a public hearing with an opportunity to present evidence and cross examine opposing witnesses. Such hearing shall be conducted within 30 days of the written request, and shall be followed, within ten days, by a written decision either upholding, reversing, or modifying the prior decision. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-613. - Revocation hearing. 
(a)  Upon violation of any provision of this article the commission, at a regular or special called meeting, after reasonable written notice of the pending violations to the licensee and after the licensee has been afforded an opportunity to be heard as to the proposed grounds for revocation, may revoke or suspend the license. When a license is revoked or suspended, no portion of the license fee shall be refundable. 
(b)  Upon the recommendation of the city marshal, the city commission may temporarily suspend any license to operate an adult entertainment establishment, if the manner of operation poses a serious safety or health hazard, for a period not to exceed 30 days from the date of suspension pending a hearing and final action by the commission. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-614. - Penalties. 
    Any person convicted of violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 15-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
Sec. 13-615. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated in violation of the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which shall be abated as such. 
(Ord. No. 934, § 2, 7-15-1998) 
ARTICLE XVII. - PAWNBROKERS AND SECONDHAND DEALERS 

Sec. 13-616. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "City of Brunswick Pawnbroker and Secondhand Dealer Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-617. - Findings and intent. 
    This article is adopted to address the interest of public safety, health and the welfare of the community and to aid and assist in the recovery of stolen property, and to aid and assist local law enforcement in fulfilling their public safety functions. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-618. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section or shall have the same meaning as set forth in the O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130, should those definitions differ: 
    Employee means any person who works in a pawn shop, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not. 
    Georgia Applicant Processing Service (GAPS). An electronic fingerprint service authorized by The Georgia Bureau of Investigation to provide electronic fingerprint submission services for applicants in the State of Georgia. The service decreases the need for agencies/businesses to submit hardcopy fingerprint cards. GAPS provide the ability for applicants to have fingerprint backgrounds checks processed electronically in a non-criminal justice environment. 
    LeadsOnline This is an on-line program in which businesses input pawn transactions. Law Enforcement uses LeadsOnline to automatically collect transaction records from reporting businesses, enabling criminal investigators to instantly access cross-jurisdictional information and help solve cases of various kinds. 
    Month means that period of time from one date in a calendar month to the corresponding date in the following calendar month, but if there is no such corresponding date, then the last day of such following month. 
    Pawnbroker means any person engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged goods, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the business activities described in this paragraph. 
    Pawn transaction means any loan on the security of pledged goods or any purchase of pledged goods on the condition that the pledged goods may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledger or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. 
    Person means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
    Pledged goods means tangible personal property, including, without limitation, all types of motor vehicles or any motor vehicle certificate of title, which property is purchased by, deposited with, or otherwise actually delivered into the possession of a pawnbroker in connection with a pawn transaction. However, for purposes of this Code section, possession of any motor vehicle certificate of title which has come into the possession of a pawnbroker through a pawn transaction made in accordance with law shall be conclusively deemed to be possession of the motor vehicle, and the pawnbroker shall retain physical possession of the motor vehicle certificate of title for the entire length of the pawn transaction but shall not be required in any way to retain physical possession of the motor vehicle at any time. 'Pledged goods' shall not include, securities, or printed evidences of indebtedness. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-619. - Enforcement. 
    Enforcement of this article shall be the responsibility of the City of Brunswick Police Chief or his/her designee. Any person(s) authorized to enforce this article shall be empowered to enter any property, upon reasonable cause, at reasonable times in order to inspect the records provided for herein and by state statute and to inspect any and all property pledged, received, traded, bartered, bought or otherwise acquired by the pawnbroker to ensure compliance with this article and all applicable local and state regulations regarding the operation of such business. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-620. - General policies and purposes. 
(a)  Pawnbrokers may operate only after the issuance of a license for such operation by City of Brunswick and only in the manner permitted by such license. Pawn transactions may only occur through a licensee who complies with the rules and regulations of this article and with the licensing, regulatory and revenue requirements of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  All licenses are a mere grant or privilege subject to all terms and conditions imposed by this article and State law and subject to being revoked by the City of Brunswick. 
(c)  Each licensee of the city shall display the license issued under this article prominently at all times at the outlet for which the license is issued. A separate license must be issued for each outlet of sale and a separate application must be made for each outlet. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-621. - Qualifications for issuance of license. 
    Any person who desires to obtain a license for the operation of a pawn shop must meet the minimum qualifications set forth in this section. If the applicant is a partnership, each partner must meet the qualifications of any individual license and must make sworn statements of these qualifications as part of the applications process. If the applicant is a corporation, the majority stockholder and each principle officer of the corporation must meet the qualifications as part of the applications process. 
(a)  No owner, employee, pawnbroker or any person connected with a pawn shop for which a license is sought, shall have been convicted of a crime involving "moral turpitude" or shall have been convicted of any crime involving felony theft, burglary, robbery, or any violation of the "Family Violence Act." 
(b)  No license shall be granted to an applicant who is under the age of 18 years of age. 
(c)  All persons filing an application for a pawn shop license must provide one set of completed fingerprint cards and submit to a criminal history background check, as part of the licensing application. Fees for fingerprinting and background check are separate from any licensing fee. 
(d)  No license shall be granted where the applicant has had any pawn shop license issued by any county, municipality, or other governmental subdivision suspended or revoked. 
(e)  No license shall be granted for a location that is not in compliance with any federal, state, or local regulation including, but not limited to, a state certificate of occupancy, or a City of Brunswick certificate of occupancy. 
(f)  No license shall be issued where the applicant has supplied false information in the license application or where any required fee has not been paid by such applicant, including any fees or assessments owed to other departments of the City of Brunswick. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-622. - Annual license. 
    Before operating a pawn shop, the owner or local manager must first file an application with the City of Brunswick Police Department for a license to operate or to be employed as a manager in the pawn shop, pursuant to the following: 
(a)  The application shall be made on an annual basis. Background and fingerprint checks however are required anytime a manager is appointed by making application to the deputy city marshal; 
(b)  No license shall be issued until a fee in an amount established by action of the mayor and city commission, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, is paid to the city; 
(c)  The application shall contain at a minimum, the owner or pawnbroker's full name, date of birth, social security number, photo copy of Georgia Driver's License or Georgia Identification Card, mailing address, phone number, facsimile number, e-mail address, and physical address of the pawn shop; 
(d)  The chief of police or his/her designee shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report to the city commission whether such applicant is a person of good character and has not been convicted of a criminal offense an indicated in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-623. - Application for license. 
(a)  All applications required in section 13-622, annual license, shall be in writing and on forms provided by the City of Brunswick. 
(b)  All applications shall be completed by the applicant and sworn to and signed by the applicant in the presence of a notary public or other officer authorized to administer oaths. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information and records requested of them, and failure to furnish such data, information, and records within 30 days from the date of such request shall automatically serve as grounds to deny the application. An applicant, by filing an application, agrees to produce for questioning any person(s) who are considered relevant to the ascertainment of facts relative to such license, as may be requested by the city commission, City of Brunswick Police Department, or other official designated by the city commission. The failure to produce such persons within 30 days after being requested to do so may result in denial of the application. 
(d)  Each applicant shall certify on the application that they have read this article and, if the license is granted, each licensee shall maintain a copy of this article on the premises. 
(e)  Once an application, accompanying documents, and the required investigative and license fees are filed with the City of Brunswick Police Department, the police department shall conduct a criminal investigation of the applicant and prepare a written criminal investigation report detailing all information relating to fingerprinting, criminal history, arrest data, and other matters pertinent to law enforcement. Upon completion of the criminal investigation report, the City of Brunswick Police Department shall assemble the tendered application forms and accompanying documents relating to investigation and processing of the application If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant meets the requirements set by this article and all other requirements of this article are satisfied, then the police chief or designee shall schedule the application for hearing at the next regularly scheduled public commission meeting before the mayor and city commission and shall so inform the applicant of this fact before such meeting. If the criminal investigation report shows that the applicant fails to meet the requirements set by this article, or if the applicant fails to meet all other requirements outlined by this article, then the police chief or designee shall inform the applicant, in writing, that the application has been denied, and shall set forth in reasonable detail the reasons for the denial and shall notify the applicant of his right to appeal. Such appeal shall be before the city commission through the city clerk's office at City Hall. If an applicant desires to appeal a denial, the applicant must file a written request for an appeal with the city clerk within ten business days of the date of the written notice informing the applicant of the denial of the license. 
(f)  At that public commission meeting, the applicant and any person opposed to such application has the right to present to the city commission any information that the city commission determines is relevant to the licensing decision. In making its determination on whether to approve or deny the application, the city commission shall look to the qualifications set forth in this article and consider the public interest and welfare of the citizens of the city. The commission shall have the discretion to grant or deny the application based on the information presented. A decision by the city commission shall be made within 30 days from the date of the public hearing, unless the decision is postponed for purposes of obtaining additional information deemed necessary for consideration of the application. All decisions by the city commission will be final. 
(g)  In all instances in which an application is denied, the applicant may not reapply for the same type of license for at least one year from the date of denial. 
(h)  Upon the issuance of a license, the licensee must have and continuously maintain in the city, a registered agent upon whom any process, notice, or demand required or permitted by law or under this article may be served. This person must be an individual. The licensee shall submit the name of such agent, along with the written consent of such agent, to the chief of police or his/her designee. The identity of the agent may also be submitted contemporaneous to filing the license application. 
(i)  Upon approval by the city commission of the application for a license, the city manager or his /her designee shall issue a license in accordance with the approved application. If the applicant is an individual, the license shall be issued in the name of the individual. If the application is a corporation, the license shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation. If the application is a partnership, the license shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners. All licenses issued shall be granted for the full calendar year or for the number of months remaining in the calendar year. Any applicant granted a license before July 1 shall pay the full license fee without proration. License fees for licenses granted on or after July 1 shall be one-half the annual license fee. License fees are not refundable once the license is granted by the City of Brunswick. Investigatory fees incurred by the City of Brunswick Police Department for fingerprinting and background checks associated with the licensing process are not refundable. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-624. - Commencement and forfeiture. 
(a)  All holders of licenses under this article must, within six months after the issuance of the license, open for business the establishment referred to in the license, unless such period is extended by the city manager. Failure to open the licensed establishment as referred to in this subsection within the six-month period shall serve as an automatic forfeiture and cancellation of the license, and no refund of license fees shall be made to the license holder. 
(b)  Any holders of a license under this article who shall begin the operation of the business as authorized in the license, but who shall for a period of three consecutive months thereafter cease to operate the business as authorized in the license, shall automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of such failure to operate, be canceled without the necessity for any further action by the city manager or the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-625. - Renewals and transfers. 
(a)  Any license holder subject to this article shall apply for yearly renewal of any existing license and shall pay the annual license fee no later than October 15 of the previous calendar year in order to do business during the upcoming year. Upon the issuance of the initial license, and each year thereafter, the licensee shall be provided with a decal to be placed on the front door of the business to show that the business license is current. Any business that fails to submit the required renewal paperwork by the stated date, will not be issued a license to operate in the upcoming year. 
(b)  No license granted for a pawn shop shall be transferable except upon application to the City of Brunswick Police Department in the same form and manner, and subject to the same requirements with respect to the transferee as are applicable in an original application. Any such license may be transferred only to another applicant doing the same business at the same place as the license holder to whom the license was originally issued. When permission for transfer has been granted, the original licensee or transferee shall cause the license to be delivered to the city manager who shall record such transfer, and the transferee shall pay a fee therefore as a condition precedent to engaging in operations under the license. The fee for such transfer shall be established from time-to-time by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-626. - Disposal of articles. 
    Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawn shop who makes a loan on pledged goods, or buys pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said goods, shall hold said goods for at least 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Non-pledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least seven calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-627. - Minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawn shop to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person under 18 years of age. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-628. - Hours of operation. 
    All holders of licenses under this division shall operate only during the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 8:00 p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-629. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating or employed by a pawnbroker's license or permit, to report to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent any article or goods sold or pawned to him if he shall have a reason to believe that the article or goods was stolen or lost when presented by seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any pawnbroker or employee of a pawn shop becomes aware that such items have had the identification removed, defaced or destroyed, such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent shall be done upon demand. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-630. - Suspension and revocation of license. 
    Immediate suspension, revocation, or forfeiture of an issued license by the city commission shall occur only after notice and opportunity for a hearing before the city commission consistent with the procedures set forth in section 13-633, appeal procedure, and only upon the following occurrences: 
(a)  Any license issued under this article for the operation of a pawn shop shall be immediately revoked in the case of bankruptcy, receivership or levy of legal process upon the licensed outlet or property therein. 
(b)  Except as provided in the transfers section 13-625, renewals and transfers, any change in the ownership of any entity owning a licensed outlet shall be grounds for the city commission to revoke any license issued under this article. 
(c)  A license shall be immediately suspended or revoked by the city commission upon learning that a licensee furnished fraudulent or untruthful information in the application for a license, or omits information required in the application for a license, or fails to pay all fees, taxes, or other charges imposed under the provisions of this article. 
(d)  The city commission shall immediately suspend or revoke the license of any licensee who does not meet the qualifications set forth in this article at any time such information becomes known to the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-631. - Record of transactions. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawn shop shall be entered or transmitted to the LeadsOnline electronic automated reporting system. (LeadsOnline software and support is available free of charge from www.leadsonline.com) Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawn shop and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of the property. 
(2)  The full name, street address and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale. 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. 
(4)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.). 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought. 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned. 
(7)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn. 
(8)  A digital or web camera photograph of the person pledging, trading, pawning, exchanging or selling the property. The photograph shall clearly show a frontal view of the subjects' face along with the pawnbroker's ticket transaction number and a photograph of the item being pledged, traded, pawned, exchanged or sold. Images should be labeled, at a minimum, with the pawn ticket number and date of transaction, and stored in such a manner that they are safe from corruption, readily identifiable and readily available for review. 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(b)  Every pawn shop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch file of all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. 
(c)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any pawnbroker's electronic records at the pawnbroker's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-632. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawn shop to violate any of the provisions of this article, whether or not such person or employee is the holder of a current valid permit issued according to the terms of this article. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article or other rules, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the city commission for conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall upon conviction, have the license to conduct business revoked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawn shop to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by the terms of this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker. 
(c)  Any person, firm or corporation who violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, upon conviction shall be punished in the City of Brunswick Municipal Court by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $1,000.00 or up to 60 days imprisonment or both. Each day the violation continues shall be a separate offense. However, this section shall not preclude the city from choosing to seek civil redress in a court of competent jurisdiction in addition to the criminal prosecution, in being the intent of the city to have both the civil and criminal rights of prosecution in this area. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Sec. 13-633. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  Upon receipt of a timely appeal of an administrative denial, or upon alleged violation of those items in section 13-630, suspension and revocation of license, the chief of police or his/her designee shall schedule a hearing before the city commission and provide written notice to the adverse party of the time, place and date of the scheduled hearing. The chief of police shall also state in the written notice the basis for the administrative denial or the violation or occurrence alleged that forms the basis for the denial or potential suspension or revocation. After notice of hearing, matters scheduled for hearing may only be continued by agreement of the city attorney and the adverse party and/or counsel for the adverse party. 
(b)  The city commission shall have the duty of conducting hearings concerning the denial, revocation, or suspension of a license. The standard of proof on all issues in the hearing shall be a preponderance of the evidence and a determination will be made on the basis of the evidence presented at the hearing. 
(c)  At the hearing, after presentation of the case against the adverse party, the adverse party will have an opportunity to present his case, to rebut the allegations made against him, and present whatever defenses he has. The adverse party shall have the right to be represented by an attorney, at the expense of the adverse party, and to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. An opportunity for rebuttal shall be provided. 
(d)  At the conclusion of the hearing, the findings and conclusions of the city commission shall be forwarded to the city manager and it shall be the duty of the city manager to provide written notification via certified mail to the adverse party of the decision of the city commission. 
(e)  The decision of the city commission shall be final unless appealed to the Superior Court of Glynn County within 30 days of receipt of the city manager's written notification to the adverse party of the commission's decision. 
(Ord. No. 1046, § 1, 12-7-2016) 
Chapter 14 - MOTOR VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Ambulances, § 13-71 et seq.; wreckers, § 13-556; taxicabs, ch. 21. 
State Law reference- Motor vehicles and traffic generally, O.C.G.A. tit. 40; municipal authority to regulate traffic on streets and highways under its jurisdiction, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 14-1. - Definitions adopted. 
    Unless otherwise indicated, words and phrases used in this chapter, which are defined in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 shall have the meanings ascribed to them in such section. 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 by reference, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; future amendments or repeal of adopted provisions of state law effective in city without action of board of city commissioners, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-373. 
Sec. 14-2. - Enforcement of chapter. 
    It shall be the duty of the officers of the police department or such officers as are assigned by the marshal to enforce this chapter and all other traffic laws of the city and all of the state vehicle laws applicable to street traffic in the city. 
(Code 1953, § 22.2) 
Sec. 14-3. - Emergency and experimental regulations. 
    The marshal, by and with the approval of the city manager, is hereby empowered to make regulations necessary to make effective the provisions of this chapter and other traffic ordinances of the city and to make and enforce temporary or experimental regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions. No such temporary or experimental regulation shall remain in effect for more than 90 days. 
(Code 1953, § 22.3) 
Sec. 14-4. - Direction of traffic by police and firefighters. 
    Officers of the police department, or such officers as are assigned by the marshal, are hereby authorized to direct all traffic by voice, hand or signal in conformity with traffic laws; provided, that in the event of a fire or other emergency or to expedite traffic or to safeguard pedestrians, officers of the police department may direct traffic as conditions may require notwithstanding the provisions of the traffic laws. Officers of the fire department, when at the scene of a fire, may direct or assist the police in directing traffic thereat or in the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1953, § 22.4) 
Sec. 14-5. - Obedience to police. 
    No person shall willfully fail or refuse to comply with any lawful order, signal or direction of a police officer. 
(Code 1953, § 22.5) 
Sec. 14-6. - Persons propelling pushcarts, riding bicycles or animals or driving animals subject to chapter. 
    Every person propelling any pushcart or riding a bicycle or an animal upon a roadway, and every person driving any animal shall be subject to the provisions of this chapter applicable to the driver of any vehicle, except those provisions of this chapter which by their very nature can have no application. 
(Code 1953, § 22.6) 
Sec. 14-7. - Public employees to obey traffic regulations. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the driver of any vehicle owned by or used in the service of the United States government, or any state, county or city, and it shall be unlawful for any such driver to violate any of the provisions of this chapter, except as otherwise permitted in this chapter or by state statute. 
(Code 1953, § 22.7) 
Sec. 14-8. - Authorized emergency vehicles. 
(a)  The provisions of this chapter regulating the movement, parking and standing of vehicles shall not apply to any authorized emergency vehicle while the operator of such vehicle is operating the same in an emergency in the necessary performance of public duties. 
(b)  When responding to an emergency call, the operator of any authorized emergency vehicle, upon approaching a red or stop signal or any stop sign, shall slow down as necessary for safety, but he may proceed cautiously past such red or stop sign or signal. At all other times operators of authorized emergency vehicles shall stop in obedience to a stop sign or signal. 
(c)  No operator of any authorized emergency vehicle shall assume any special privilege under this section except when such vehicle is operated in response to an emergency call, and this exemption shall not protect the operator of any such vehicle from the consequences of a reckless disregard of the safety of others. 
(Code 1953, § 22.8) 
Cross reference- Ambulances, § 13-71 et seq. 
Sec. 14-9. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 960, § 1, adopted Mar. 3, 2004, repealed § 14-9 in its entirety. Former § 14-9 pertained to permits required for parades and processions and derived from Code 1953, § 22.9. 
Sec. 14-10. - Use of skateboards, skates, coasters, and similar devices restricted. 
    This section shall apply to use of roller skates, skateboards, inline skates, roller blades, bicycles, and any other human-powered vehicle, whether intended for recreation, transportation or otherwise (referred to in this section as "non-motorized devices") and to any go-cart, motorcycle, moped, scooter, mini-bike, golf cart, or other vehicle powered by any motor or engine ("motorized device"). It shall not apply to use of shopping carts, hand trucks and similar devices when intended for (and actually used for) the purpose of moving groceries, furniture, appliances, containers and similar items over a short distance (not exceeding two city blocks). It shall not apply to use of a motorized wheelchair or similar device by any disabled or handicapped person. It shall not apply to any baby stroller or other similar device designed for (and actually used for) transporting infants five years of age or younger if propelled by and under the control of a parent or legal guardian or other person authorized by a parent or legal guardian to do so. 
(a)  No person shall use or operate any non-motorized device on or upon any sidewalk in any general commercial core (GC Core) zoning district, or at any place where signage is posted to prohibit such use or operation. 
(b)  No person shall use or operate any motorized device on or upon any sidewalk. 
(c)  No person shall use or operate any motorized or non-motorized device upon any publicly-owned stairway, handrail, handicapped access ramp, fence, bench, monument or any concrete or brick coping, retaining wall or similar architectural feature. 
(d)  No person shall use or operate a motorized or non-motorized device in a reckless, disruptive or unsafe manner so as to impede, obstruct or endanger any person making use of a sidewalk or other pubic property, or so as to damage any public property or landscaping. 
(e)  No person shall, while riding or using any motorized or non-motorized device covered under this section, grab hold of, hang onto, or cling to any other such device or to any motor vehicle, or to any rope, line or handle attached in any way to such other device or vehicle so long as either device or vehicle is in motion. 
(f)  Use of any non-motorized device on any sidewalk where such use is permitted under this section shall be subject to the requirement that the operator of the non-motorized device shall yield and give way to pedestrians using the sidewalk. 
(g)  In the event a person seventeen years of age or younger commits an act in violation of this section, any officer of the Brunswick Police Department may take possession of and secure the device used in the violation until such time as the minor's parent or legal guardian shall appear at the Brunswick Police Department headquarters to obtain possession of the device. In the event of a second or subsequent violation of this section by a person under seventeen, the device shall be retained by the police until the violation is resolved by court appearance or otherwise. 
(Code 1953, § 22.10; Ord. No. 977, § 1, 3-1-2006) 
Sec. 14-11. - Riding on portion of vehicles not intended for passengers. 
    No person shall ride on any vehicle upon any portion thereof not designed or intended for the use of passengers. This provision shall not apply to an employee engaged in the necessary discharge of a duty, or to persons riding within truck bodies in space intended for merchandise. 
(Code 1953, § 22.13) 
Sec. 14-12. - Discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable or junked motor vehicles. 
(a)  The city manager shall be authorized in his discretion to cause the removal and disposal of any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable or junked motor vehicles or parts thereof without further authorization when such motor vehicles are located on any property owned or leased by the city and when such motor vehicles or parts thereof are in such condition that they constitute a health hazard or unsightly nuisance. 
(1)  "Discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable or junked motor vehicle or parts thereof" means any motor vehicle and/or parts to or from any motor vehicle which are no longer operative as a motorized vehicle and/or has no current license tag, no current state certificate of registration, or no current city certificate of restoration permit; is missing some critical part such as, but not limited to, wheels, engine, transmission, chassis, windshields or headlights; has flat tires; overgrown with vegetation; unknown ownership. 
(2)  For the purposes of this section "inoperable" shall mean any motor vehicle from which the engine, wheels or other parts have been removed, or on which the engine, wheels or other parts have been altered, damaged or otherwise so treated that the vehicle is incapable of being driven under its own motor power. "Inoperable motor vehicle" shall not include: (i) a motor vehicle which has been rendered temporarily incapable of being driven under its own motor power in order to perform ordinary service or repair operations not in violation of other provisions of this section; (ii) any motor vehicle that is kept within a building when not in use; (iii) to operate historic vehicles over 25 years of age and have a valid certificate of restoration permit under subsection (h); (iv) to a motor vehicle on the premises of a place of business engaged in the wrecking or junking of motor vehicles; (v) any motor vehicle that is exempted from status as inoperable by this section. 
(b)  A motor vehicle may be deemed to be discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable or junked within the meaning of subsection (a) of this section whenever the city has sent notice to the owner of record at his last-known address via certified or registered mail or via hand delivery indicating that the city is requiring the owner to remove such motor vehicle and the owner fails to remove it within a period of 15 business days, whether or not such notice was actually received by the owner. 
(c)  In order to carry out and effectuate the purposes of subsection (a) of this section, the city manager shall be authorized to sell such motor vehicles or parts thereof and to enter into such contracts as he may deem necessary with private individuals and firms for the removal and disposal of the vehicles or parts. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having proper custody of any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable or junked motor vehicle to leave or store such vehicle upon any street, other city property, or any property that is not owned, leased, or otherwise legally occupied by said person owning or having proper custody of said motor vehicle. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having custody of any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable or junked motor vehicle or parts thereof to store or permit any such vehicle or parts to remain on any private property including, but not limited to, private property owned, leased, or otherwise legally occupied by said person within the city for a period of more than 15 business days after the receipt of a notice requiring removal of such vehicles or parts. This paragraph shall apply to automobile service stations and accessory sales stores but shall not apply to motor vehicles or parts stored in an enclosed building or to auto repair or body shops or licensed motor vehicle salvage dealers. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person, after notification to remove any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable or junked motor vehicle or parts thereof has been given, to move such vehicle or parts to any other private property including, but not limited to, private properties other than the private property for which notification was issued owned, leased, or otherwise legally occupied by said person within the city upon which storage is not permitted. 
(g)  The open storage of discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable, or junked motor vehicles or parts thereof on private property as prohibited in this section is hereby declared to be a public nuisance which may be abated pursuant to chapter 12, article IV of this Code. 
(1)  "Open storage" shall be defined as the storage of any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable or junked motor vehicle or parts thereof not within an enclosed building or garage, or other similar enclosure, or not covered by a tarpaulin (tarp) or other similar large cloth like/plastic material which would prevent the aforementioned motor vehicle and parts thereof from being viewed and seen from the general public. 
(h)  Certificate of restoration permit. 
(1)  Any person owning or having proper custody of any discarded, dismantled, wrecked, scrapped, ruined, inoperable or junked motor vehicles or parts thereof may apply with the city manager or his designee for a certificate of restoration permit for a fee of $40.00. Any person who has received notice requiring removal of said vehicle or parts may file for a certificate of restoration permit within a 15 business day period of receiving notice if they are otherwise qualified, but there is no guarantee that a permit will be issued to said person. 
(2)  In order to qualify for said restoration permit said person must agree in writing to keep the restoration limited to one motor vehicle per property, to not openly store the motor vehicle during the restoration process, to provide a vehicle identification number (VIN) for the vehicle to the city manager or his designee, and to allow the city manager or his designee to enter the property to inspect the restoration process with proper notice. 
(3)  The certificate of restoration permit shall be valid for a period of six months from the date of issue and may be renewed one time for a period of three months for an additional fee of $25.00. After the allowed time period has expired the motor vehicle and/or parts will be deemed junked within the meaning of the ordinance if the restoration is incomplete or the motor vehicle or parts are not stored in an enclosed building, at a licensed auto repair or body shop, or at a licensed motor vehicle salvage dealer. There is no guarantee that the three-month renewal period will be granted and the city manager or his designee will have the ability to inspect the work progress during any application period. 
(4)  If the person owning or having proper custody of the motor vehicle fails to abide by the certificate of restoration permit the city manager or his designee reserves the right to revoke the restoration permit with no return of the permit fee. 
(Ord. No. 910, § 1, 2-3-1993; Ord. No. 997, § 1, 1-2-2008) 
Secs. 14-13-14-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OPERATION OF VEHICLES 

Sec. 14-31. - Adoption of Uniform Rules of the Road by reference. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372 through 40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, excluding O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-393 and 40-6-394, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in this article. 
(Ord. No. 727, 3-1-1978; Ord. No. 758, 2-6-1980) 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to adopt O.C.G.A. tit., ch. 6 by reference, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-372; future amendments or repeal of adopted provisions of state law effective in city without action by board of city commissioners, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-373. 
Sec. 14-32. - Alteration of speed limits. 
    It is hereby determined and declared that the reasonable and safe maximum vehicle speed limits shall be as set forth herein on the portions of streets and highways which are identified hereinafter. (Certain abbreviations herein, SR, ML, MPH, and Cwy, shall mean, respectively, state route, mile log, miles per hour, and causeway.): 
STREETS AND HIGHWAYS ON STATE SYSTEM 
SR From ML To ML Length 
in Miles Speed 
Limit 
(mph) 25 (US 17) S. city limit 9.67 Fourth Ave. 11.09 1.42 50 Fourth Ave. 11.09 Gloucester St. 12.40 1.31 45 Gloucester St. 12.4 N. city limit 14.28 1.88 40 (school zone) Kaiser St. 13.63 Wildwood Dr. 13.90 0.27 25 (From 7:30 to 8:30 a.m and 2:30 to 3:30 p.m. on school days only) 25 Connector Bay St. 0.0 Lee St. 0.66 0.66 30 (Gloucester St.) Lee St. 0.66 SR 25 (US 17) 1.11 0.45 35 25 Spur S. city limit 0. 4 N. city limit 0.71 0.31 45 S. city limit 1.07 N. city limit 1.42 0.35 45 27 (US 341) N. city limit 18.88 "H" St. 20.62 0.35 45 "H" St. 20.62 Prince St. 21.55 0.93 40 Prince St. 21.55 Newcastle St. 21.67 0.12 35 Newcastle St. 21.67 Lanier Blvd. 22.27 0.60 35 Lanier Blvd. 22.27 SR 25 (US 17) 22.93 0.66 35 303 N. city limit 7.78 S. city limit 8.45 0.67 45  
OFF-SYSTEM STREETS AND HIGHWAYS 
Road Name From To Length in 
Miles Speed 
Limit 
(mph) Albany St. First St. "L" St. 0.86 30 "L" St. Mansfield St. 0.86 25 Mansfield St. First Ave. 0.68 25 First Ave. Fourth Ave. 0.30 25 Altama Ave. First St. Fourth St. 0.35 35 Fourth St. N. city limit 0.50 45 First St. Norwich St. Altama Ave. 0.50 35 Fourth St. Norwich St. Altama Ave. 0.65 25 Altama Ave. Dolphin St. 1.00 35 F J Torras Cwy. SR 25 (US 17) ML 9.61 1.00 50 ML 9.61 ML 9.36 0.25 45 ML 9.36 ML 9.11 (toll plaza) 0.25 35 ML 9.11 (toll plaza) E. city limit 0.32 50 (Foregoing speed limits on Cwy. apply to eastbound lanes only.) E. city limit SR 25 (US 17) 1.82 50 (Foregoing speed limit on Cwy. applies to westbound lanes only.) "G" St. Newcastle St. Kay Ave. 0.80 25 Goodyear Ave. "L" St. "G" St. 0.52 25 Habersham St. S. city limit Peachtree St. 0.40 35 Peachtree St. N. city limit 0.55 45 Kay Ave. "G" St. "L" St. 0.50 25 "L" St. Reynolds St. Stacy St. 1.26 25 Lanier Blvd. Fourth Ave. Ash Ave. 1.01 35 Ash Ave. Gloucester St. 0.31 25 Lee St. "G" St. "L" St. 0.48 25 "L" St. "O" St. 0.28 25 Newcastle St. First Ave. Hanover Park 0.30 30 Parkwood Dr. Altama Ave. Hampton Ave. 0.30 25 Hampton Ave. SR 25 (US 17) 0.52 35 Prince St. Albany St. Lanier Blvd. 0.49 30 Reynolds St. "G" St. Second St. 1.45 25 Stonewall St. "G" St. "L" St. 0.48 25 "L" St. "Q" St. 0.38 25  
(Ord. No. 909, § 2, 1-20-1993; Ord. No. 911, § 2, 2-17-1993; Ord. No. 932, § 2, 1-7-1998) 
Sec. 14-33. - Driving in excess of altered speed limit. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a motor vehicle on any portion of street or highway specified in section 14-31 of this Code at a speed in excess of the maximum vehicle speed limit established in said section for such portion of street or highway, when appropriate signs giving notice of the speed limit are erected upon the street or highway. Speed-limit signs on streets and highways on the state system shall be erected by the state department of transportation, and speed-limit signs on off-system streets and highways shall be erected by the city. 
(Ord. No. 909, § 2, 1-20-1993; Ord. No. 911, § 2, 2-17-1993; Ord. No. 932, § 2, 1-7-1998) 
Sec. 14-34. - Limitations on operation of trucks and trailers on various city streets. 
(a)  For purposes of this section, the word "truck" shall mean any motor vehicle, or combination of motor vehicle and trailer, which either weighs more than 6,000 pounds, or has more than six wheels, or has a height greater than nine feet measured from the road surface. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a truck upon any street, road, or alley within the city other than designated truck routes except the following: 
(1)  Trucks making deliveries or picking up freight or passengers at a location which is not on a designated truck route, so long as such trucks use designated truck routes to the extent possible and make a reasonable effort to limit their travel on other streets or ways to the most direct route practicable. 
(2)  This limitation shall not prohibit operation of any police, fire, emergency medical or other public safety vehicle on any street or way within the city. 
(3)  This section shall not prohibit operation of any vehicle owned or operated by any federal, state, local or other governmental entity. 
(4)  This section shall not prohibit operation of any truck operated by any private person or entity which is using the vehicle while in the course of performing any work or service under contract with any governmental entity. 
(5)  This section shall not prohibit operation of any vehicle in a parade for which a written permit has been issued by the city manager. 
(6)  This section shall not prohibit operation of any school bus or any tour or charter bus which is carrying passengers for sightseeing purposes. 
(c)  The following roads are approved for use as designated truck routes: 
(1)  U.S. Highway 17. 
(2)  U.S. Highway 341. 
(3)  Fernando Torras Causeway. 
(4)  Community Road. 
(5)  Cypress Mill Road. 
(6)  L Street. 
(7)  Gloucester Street. 
(8)  Bay Street. 
(9)  Norwich Street north of Gloucester. 
(10)  Fourth Street. 
(11)  Fourth Avenue. 
(12)  King and Prince Boulevard. 
(13)  Newcastle Street north of G Street. 
(14)  Altama Avenue. 
(15)  Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard north of Gloucester Street. 
(16)  Cook Street. 
(17)  Prince Avenue east of Martin Luther King Jr. Boulevard. 
(18)  Mansfield Street west of Reynolds Street. 
(d)  The list of designated truck routes may be modified at any time by resolution of the city commission. 
(e)  The city manager and the public works director are hereby authorized to place reasonable signage which warns motorists in general terms of the provisions of this Code section. 
(Ord. No. 908, §§ 1-4, 11-18-1992; Ord. No. 958, § 1, 12-17-2003) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 908, §§ 1-4, adopted Nov. 18, 1992, did not specifically amend this Code; hence, inclusion of its provisions as § 14-34 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 14-35. - Mobile telephone as a contributing factor to a collision. 
    If a driver improperly uses a mobile telephone while he or she operates a moving motor vehicle and it is proven that the mobile telephone's improper usage distracted the driver from safe operation of such a vehicle and was a contributing factor in any collision resulting in death, physical injury, and/or property damage; then the court is authorized to impose an additional fine not exceeding $500.00 in addition to any other penalty or punishment imposed by the court for the violation of the underlying traffic offense. The total fine amount shall not exceed the maximum fine amount allowed by section 15-8 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 986, § 1, 3-21-2007) 
Secs. 14-36-14-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Parking lots, § 13-301 et seq. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to regulate stopping, standing and parking, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(1). 

Sec. 14-61. - Manner of parking generally. 
    In parking any vehicle at the curb the right hand front wheel must be nearest the curb, and at an angle of 45 degrees with the curb, in areas marked for this purpose. Areas where parking is parallel, the right hand side of the vehicle shall be not more than one foot from the curb and parallel thereto. Parking on one-way streets shall be allowed with the flow of traffic in spaces as provided for parking. 
(Code 1953, § 22.77; Ord. No. 715, § 1, 6-15-1977) 
Sec. 14-62. - Parking not to obstruct traffic. 
    No person shall park any vehicle upon a street, other than an alley, in such manner or under such conditions as to leave available less than ten feet of the width of the roadway for free movement of vehicular traffic. 
(Code 1953, § 22.78) 
Sec. 14-63. - Permit for loading or unloading at an angle to the curb. 
    The city manager and marshal are authorized to issue special permits to permit the backing of a vehicle to the curb for the purpose of loading or unloading merchandise or materials subject to the terms and conditions of such permit. Such permits may be issued either to the owner or lessee of real property or to the owner of the vehicle and shall grant to such person the privilege as therein stated and authorized herein, and it shall be unlawful for any permittee or other person to violate any of the special terms or conditions of any such permit. 
(Code 1953, § 22.79) 
Sec. 14-64. - Motor vehicles left unattended; brakes to be set and engine stopped. 
    No person having control or charge of a motor vehicle shall allow such vehicle to stand on any street unattended without first setting the brakes thereon and stopping the motor of such vehicle and, when standing upon a perceptible grade, without turning the wheels of such vehicle to the curb or the side of the street or highway. 
(Code 1953, § 22.81) 
Sec. 14-65. - Stopping, standing or parking near hazardous or congested places. 
(a)  The city manager and marshal are hereby authorized to determine and designate by proper signs places not exceeding 100 feet in length in which the stopping, standing or parking of vehicles would create an especially hazardous condition or would cause unusual delay to traffic. 
(b)  When official signs are erected at hazardous or congested places, as authorized herein, no person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1953, § 22.83) 
Sec. 14-66. - Parking prohibited on narrow streets. 
(a)  The city manager and marshal are hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon any street when the width of the roadway does not exceed 20 feet, or upon one side of a street as indicated by such signs when the width of the roadway does not exceed 30 feet. 
(b)  When official signs prohibiting parking are erected upon narrow streets, as authorized herein, no person shall park a vehicle upon any such street in violation of any such sign. 
(Code 1953, § 22.84) 
Sec. 14-67. - Standing or parking on one-way streets. 
(a)  The city manager and marshal are authorized to erect signs upon either side of any one-way street to prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles, and when such signs are in place, no person shall stand or park a vehicle upon such street in violation of any such signs. 
(b)  Unless prohibitive signs are erected on one-way streets, vehicles may also park on the left-hand side headed in direction of traffic, with the left-hand wheels of the vehicle within six inches of the curb or edge of the roadway. 
(Code 1953, § 22.85) 
Sec. 14-68. - Parking adjacent to schools. 
(a)  The city manager and marshal are hereby authorized to erect signs indicating no parking upon that side of any street adjacent to any school property when such parking would, in their opinion, interfere with traffic or create a hazardous situation. 
(b)  When official signs are erected indicating no parking upon that side of a street adjacent to any school property, no person shall park a vehicle in any such designated place. 
(Code 1953, § 22.86) 
Sec. 14-69. - Stopping and parking prohibited on certain streets. 
    When not inconsistent with this chapter or any ordinance, the city manger and marshal are authorized to prohibit parking or stopping of vehicles on any street or portion of a street when traffic and engineering surveys indicate that such stopping or parking may impede the free flow of traffic on such street. 
(Code 1953, § 22.87) 
Sec. 14-70. - Parking prohibited during certain hours. 
    When prohibited by ordinance or by order of the city manager and marshal, no person shall park a vehicle during the hours prohibited at places so indicated by official sign. 
(Code 1953, § 22.88) 
Sec. 14-71. - Parking time limited on certain streets. 
    The city manager and the marshal are hereby authorized to designate the time limit for parking on any street or portion of a street. They shall cause to be placed the time limit signs in these areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to park a vehicle of any description for a period longer than the time designated by the city manager and the marshal. 
(Code 1953, § 22.89) 
Sec. 14-72. - Signs indicating prohibited or limited parking to be erected. 
    When, by any ordinance or order of the city manager and marshal, any parking time limit is imposed or parking is prohibited on designated streets, it shall be the duty of the city manager and marshal to erect appropriate signs giving notice thereof, and no such regulations shall be effective unless such signs are erected and in place at the time of any alleged offense. At least one sign shall be erected in each block on each side of the street where parking is either prohibited or restricted. 
(Code 1953, § 22.91) 
Sec. 14-73. - Parking in squares, parks, etc. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to park any vehicle, team or animal in or on any of the squares, public parks or places in the city except upon the driveways. 
(Code 1953, § 22.92) 
Sec. 14-74. - Parking for certain purposes prohibited. 
    No person shall park a vehicle upon any roadway for: 
(1)  Displaying such vehicle for sale. 
(2)  Washing, greasing, storing or repairing such vehicle except repairs necessitated by a sudden emergency, and in such emergency such vehicle shall be moved or towed away with all due haste. 
(3)  For displaying advertising. 
(Code 1953, § 22.93) 
Sec. 14-75. - Stopping within intersection or on crosswalk. 
    It shall be unlawful for any vehicle to stop within an intersection or on a crosswalk for the purpose of receiving or discharging passengers. 
(Code 1953, § 22.94) 
Sec. 14-76. - Continuous parking in same location. 
    Any vehicle that shall remain parked continuously in the same location on any street in the city for the period of 72 hours or more shall be presumed to be abandoned and may be impounded by the police department. 
(Code 1953, § 22.95) 
Sec. 14-77. - Loading zones-Designation; erection of signs. 
    The city manager and marshal are hereby authorized to determine the location of loading zones and shall place and maintain appropriate signs indicating the same and stating the hours during which the provisions of section 14-78 are applicable. 
(Code 1953, § 22.96) 
Sec. 14-78. - Same-Use of zones by trucks; other vehicles prohibited. 
    No person shall stop, stand or park a truck for any purpose or length of time other than for the expeditious unloading and delivery or pick-up and loading of materials in any place marked as a loading zone during hours when provisions applicable to such zones are in effect; nor shall any person stop, stand or park any other vehicle for such unloading of materials. 
(Code 1953, § 22.97) 
Sec. 14-79. - Taxicab stands-Designation; erection of signs. 
    The city manager and marshal are hereby authorized to create and abolish the creation of taxicab stands on such public streets, in such places and in such number as they shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such taxicab stand shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1953, § 22.98) 
Cross reference- Taxicabs, ch. 21. 
Sec. 14-80. - Same-Other vehicles prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a taxicab in a taxicab stand. 
(Code 1953, § 22.99) 
Sec. 14-81. - Bus stops-Designation; erection of signs. 
    The city manager and marshal are hereby authorized to create and abolish the location of bus stops on such public streets, in such places and in such number as they shall determine to be of the greatest benefit and convenience to the public. Every such bus stop shall be designated by appropriate signs. 
(Code 1953, § 22.100) 
Sec. 14-82. - Same-Use by busses; other vehicles prohibited. 
    The driver of a bus shall not park upon any street in any business district at any place other than at a bus stop, except for making emergency repairs. No person shall stop, stand or park a vehicle other than a bus in a bus stop. 
(Code 1953, § 22.101) 
Chapter 15 - MUNICIPAL COURT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 15-1. - Established. 
    There is hereby established a municipal court which shall be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Brunswick, pursuant to general law of the state. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 1, 2-20-1991) 
Sec. 15-2. - Judge, term, service agreement. 
(a)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge of the municipal court unless he or she shall be in compliance with the requirements of state law on qualifications to serve in such office, including but not limited to compliance with all applicable training requirements. 
(b)  The judge shall be appointed by the city commission for a term of two calendar years and shall serve until his successor is appointed. The current judge of the court shall serve out the remainder of his unexpired term. 
(c)  All judges of the municipal court for the Municipal Court of Brunswick shall be appointed by the city commission that adopts or approves a service agreement with the judge. The service agreement shall be approved by the city attorney as accurately describing the obligations of the judge and the independence of the court, and it shall identify obligations of the judge and of the city for oversight and management of court staff and court service providers. Unless the judge has been removed from office in the middle of the term as described below, the service agreement shall renew automatically for a subsequent term unless the city commission, by resolution, appoints a successor judge to serve at the expiration of the then-current term. 
(d)  The judge is responsible for notifying the city commission and the city attorney of any resources or process changes that are required or appropriate in order for the court to operate in accordance with applicable law. 
(e)  Unless prohibited by the service agreement, the municipal court judge may engage in the private practice of law; provided, however, a judge may not appear and represent a client before the court. 
(f)  Before entering on duties of his or her office for the first time, an appointed judge shall take the following oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state: 
"I swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as judge of the Municipal Court for the City of Brunswick, and will take only my lawful compensation. I do further swear (or affirm) that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this State, or any political subdivision or authority thereof; that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I am prohibited from holding by the laws of the State of Georgia; and that I am otherwise qualified to hold said office, according to the Constitution and Laws of Georgia; and that I will support the Constitutions of the United States and of this State." 
The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council, and the judge's name, contact information for business correspondence, and term of office shall be provided to the administrative office of the courts. 
(g)  A judge of the municipal court shall serve for the designated term in the service agreement but may be removed from the position, and the service agreement terminated during the term, by a two-thirds vote of the entire membership of the city council or upon action taken by the state judicial qualifications commission for: 
(1)  Willful misconduct in office; 
(2)  Willful and persistent failure to perform duties; 
(3)  Habitual intemperance; 
(4)  Conduct prejudicial to the administration of justice which brings the judicial office into disrepute; or 
(5)  Disability seriously interfering with the performance of duties, which is, or is likely to become, of a permanent character. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 2, 2-20-1991; Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 15-3. - Judge pro tempore, term. 
(a)  Pursuant to the terms of the service agreement set forth in section 15-2(c), the judge may appoint, from time to time, a judge pro tempore to hold and preside over the municipal court in the absence of the judge. While presiding in the court, the judge pro tempore shall have the same power, authority and jurisdiction as is conferred upon the judge by this chapter or by general law. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge pro tem of the municipal court unless he or she shall be in compliance with the requirements of state law on qualifications to serve in such office, including but not limited to compliance with all applicable training requirements. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 8, 2-20-1991; Ord. No. 1056, § 1, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 15-4. - Clerk. 
    There shall be a clerk of the municipal court, who may be an employee of the court or of the police department and who shall be appointed subject to approval of the judge. It shall be the responsibility of the clerk to attend all sessions of the court and keep the records thereof. A clerk pro tempore may be designated, to serve in the temporary absence of the clerk, subject to the approval of the judge. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 9, 2-20-1991) 
Sec. 15-5. - Compensation for officers. 
    The officers of the municipal court shall receive for their services such compensation as well be provided by the city commission in the annual budget for the city. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 10, 2-20-1991) 
Sec. 15-6. - Sessions. 
    The judge of the municipal court shall schedule such regular times for holding sessions of court as may be appropriate for the expeditious disposition of the business of the court, and he shall be authorized to promulgate rules for the orderly conduct of proceedings before the court. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 7, 2-20-1991) 
Sec. 15-7. - Jurisdiction. 
    The judge of the municipal court shall have jurisdiction and authority to adjudicate offenses against the laws and ordinances of the city and offenses against the general laws of the state where jurisdiction is conferred by general law. He shall have jurisdiction to abate nuisances and such other jurisdiction as he may exercise under the general laws of this state, and he shall have and is given the same powers and authority as magistrates in the matter of and pertaining to criminal cases of whatever nature in the several courts of this state. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 3, 2-20-1991) 
Sec. 15-8. - Punishment authority. 
    The judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to impose any punishment up to the maximum specified by general state law. Notwithstanding any provision of any other ordinance heretofore providing for the maximum punishment for any violation of an ordinance of the city, the judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to impose, for violation of any ordinance of this city, a sentence of confinement up to six months, a fine up to $1,000.00 or both or such alternative punishment as permitted by law. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 4, 2-20-1991) 
Sec. 15-9. - Contempt. 
    The judge of the municipal court shall have jurisdiction to impose punishment for contempt of court by fine not exceeding $200.00 or by imprisonment not exceeding ten days or both. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 5, 2-20-1991) 
Sec. 15-10. - Bond forfeitures. 
    The judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to forfeit bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the court and to collect the bond from the principal and sureties of such bonds by judgment, execution and sale. 
(Ord. No. 899, § 6, 2-20-1991) 
ARTICLE II. - OFFICE OF PROSECUTING ATTORNEY 

Sec. 15-11. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "City of Brunswick Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-19-2012) 
Sec. 15-12. - Findings and intent. 
    This ordinance is adopted to address requirements made under Georgia law for the city to pass an ordinance or resolution creating the Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court should the city choose to hire or have a prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. Under state law, in order to have a municipal court prosecutor, the city must pass this ordinance or resolution and provide to the Prosecuting Attorneys' Council of the State of Georgia a copy of the same. The city is also required to submit the name of the person appointed to be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court within 30 days of such appointment in order to maintain the Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court. It is therefore the intent of the city to comply with O.C.G.A. § 5-18-5, and to enact this article. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-19-2012) 
Sec. 15-13. - Establishment of office. 
    The Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Brunswick in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-19-2012) 
Sec. 15-14. - Qualifications. 
    Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the Municipal Court of the City of Brunswick shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-19-2012) 
Sec. 15-15. - Oath. 
    The Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Brunswick shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
'I swear (or affirm) that I will well, faithfully, and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Brunswick.' 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-19-2012) 
Sec. 15-16. - Term of office. 
    Unless otherwise provided by the Charter for the City of Brunswick, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office of one year. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-19-2012; Ord. No. 1033, § 1, 12-18-2013) 
Sec. 15-17. - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
    The Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Brunswick shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the City Charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-19-2012) 
Sec. 15-18. - Assistant prosecuting attorney. 
    The Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court may appoint one or more assistant prosecuting attorneys whose appointment shall be ratified by the city commission before becoming an assistant prosecuting attorney for the municipal court. Such assistant prosecuting attorney shall be a member in good standing of the State Bar of Georgia or satisfy the provisions of the Third Year Practice Act, found in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-22. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-19-2012) 
Sec. 15-19. - Ratification. 
    This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the Office of the Prosecuting Attorney for the Municipal Court to date as authorized by the mayor and his commission. 
(Ord. No. 1026, § 1, 9-19-2012) 
Chapter 16 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference- Crimes and offenses, O.C.G.A. tit. 16. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 16-1. - Begging. 
    It shall be a nuisance and unlawful for any person to beg, ask or solicit from house to house any money, wares, clothing, food or other articles of or from any person in the city, without first having written permission from the city manager to do so. 
(Code 1953, § 24.3) 
Sec. 16-2. - Private use of parks, squares and public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to use any square, park or public place in the city for any private use. 
(Code 1953, § 24.35) 
Sec. 16-3. - Camping. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to camp anywhere in the city except at such places as may be designated by the commission for that purpose. 
(Code 1953, § 24.5) 
Sec. 16-4. - Throwing or slinging missiles. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to throw or shoot, either by hand or with any sling, flip or other instrument, any shot, bullet, stone or other missile into or upon any street, square, alley or sidewalk or into or upon any private lot. 
(Code 1953, § 24.27) 
Sec. 16-5. - Loitering or prowling. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant reasonable concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(b)  The following circumstances may be considered in determining whether concern is warranted: 
(1)  The fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a policeman, 
(2)  The fact that the person refuses to identify himself, 
(3)  The fact that the person fails or refuses to give a reasonable and truthful explanation of his presence and conduct, or 
(4)  The fact that the person endeavors to conceal himself or any object. 
(c)  Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a police officer, prior to any arrest under this section, shall afford the person an opportunity to dispel any concern which otherwise would be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if an arrest was not authorized under this subsection. 
(Ord. No. 903, § 1, 6-5-1991; Ord. No. 913, § 1, 8-18-1993) 
Sec. 16-6. - Loitering. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he idles, loafs or loiters in, on, upon, about or around any street, highway, sidewalk, alley or other public right-of-way or any public building or other building or premises open to the general public so as to interfere with the use thereof or free passage by other persons. 
(b)  a person commits the offense of loitering when he remains in, on, upon, about or around any public building or place or other building or premises open to the public or any lounge or barroom for the purpose of procuring others to engage in any sexual acts for hire. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of loitering when he assembles or congregates with others in the parking area of any commercial business, shopping center or shopping mall for any purpose other than working, shopping or doing business related to the goods or services available at the commercial business, shopping center or shopping mall, without specific license from any person authorized to grant permission to use the premises for such assembly or congregation. 
(Ord. No. 903, § 2, 6-5-1991; Ord. No. 913, § 2, 8-18-1993) 
Sec. 16-7. - Littering and dumping. 
    Violations of this Code section shall be governed by the provisions of the City of Brunswick Clean Community Ordinance codified as chapter 24 in the Code of Ordinances of the City of Brunswick. 
(Ord. No. 903, § 5, 6-5-1991; Ord. No. 913, § 3, 8-18-1993; Ord. No. 1047, § 2, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 16-8. - Unlawful use of services, injury to, interference with property of utilities. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to: 
(1)  Intentionally without authority and permission from the owner thereof, to alter, injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, pole, lamp, manhole cover, fire plug, or any accessories thereto, belonging to the city or any other public or private utility (hereinafter referred to as "utility owner") engaged in the manufacture, sale, distribution or furnishing of electricity, gas, water, telephone, sanitary sewer or other public utility services, including, to the extent consistent with federal law, cable television utilities, without the intent to pay the fair cost of repair or replacement thereof. 
(2)  Intentionally without authority and permission from the utility owner utilize any such service or consume any such product with intent not to pay the regular charge therefor to the utility owner, but with intent to deprive the owner of such charge. 
(3)  Intentionally and without authority prevent a meter from registering the quantity of such service or product supplied with the intent to deprive the owner of its regular charge therefor. 
(4)  In any way interfere with the proper action of such owner with intent to divert any service or product so as to deprive the owner of the regular charge therefor. 
(5)  Otherwise intentionally and without authority use or cause to be used, without the utility owner's consent, any product or service furnished, manufactured, sold or distributed by such owner with intent to deprive such owner of its regular charge therefor. 
(b)  Proof that a person performed any of the acts set forth in subsection (a) above, or proof that a person knowingly received the benefits of such acts, or proof that any of the acts specified in subsection (a) above were done on the premises in possession of a person, with that person's knowledge, shall be prima facie evidence that such person is responsible for such prohibited acts. 
(c)  Violations of this section may be punished in the municipal court in accordance with the provisions of chapter 15 of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 968, § 1, 1-19-2005) 
Sec. 16-9. - Curfew for minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any minor 16 years of age or younger to loiter, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such places, between the hours of 9:30 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays, the effective hours are between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and provided, that the provisions of this section shall not apply in the following instances: 
(1)  When a minor is supervised and accompanied (i.e. in the physical presence of) by his or her parent, guardian, or an adult authorized and approved by a parent of such minor to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. 
(2)  When a minor is upon an emergency errand by his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor. 
(3)  When a minor is returning home by a direct route (without any unnecessary detours or stops) from and within 30 minutes of the termination of a school activity or an activity of a religious or other voluntary association, or a place of public entertainment, such as a movie, play or sporting event. 
(4)  When a minor is returning home by a direct route (without any unnecessary detours or stops) from and within 30 minutes of leaving lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time. 
(5)  When a minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly, provided that the exercise of such right is clearly evidenced by the minor's conduct. 
(6)  When a minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent and engaged in bona fide interstate movement through the city. This also exempts interstate travel beginning or ending in the city. 
(7)  When a minor is on the sidewalk of the place where such minor resides, or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor who has not communicated an objection to the police. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor to knowingly permit or by inefficient control to allow a violation of this section by a minor in his or her custody. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
(c)  Penalty. Any minor violating the provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor violating subsection (b) of this section shall be charged with such violation, tried in municipal court, and upon being found guilty shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 15-8. 
(Ord. No. 993, § 1, 9-20-2007) 
Sec. 16-10. - Discharging weapons and firearms within the city limits. 
    Except as otherwise provided by law, it shall be unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm, pistol, gun or other weapon likely to produce injury to person or property, except in defense of person or property; provided that nothing herein shall apply to nor be construed to apply to an authorized safely controlled firing range or other authorized activity or to any person authorized by law to use firearms in the course of his duty. 
(Ord. No. 998, § 1(16-8), 3-5-2008) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 998, § 1, adopted Mar. 5, 2008, supplied provisions to be added to ch. 16 as § 16-8. In order to maintain the numbering system of the Code and the ease of supplementation, these provisions have been redesignated as § 16-10 to read as set out herein. 
Secs. 16-11-16-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST THE PUBLIC PEACE 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 16-21. - Disturbing the peace of a public school. 
(a)  The offense of disturbing the peace of a public school is hereby defined as follows: 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person on a public right of way adjacent to any public school campus within the city to commit, recklessly or knowingly, any act which may reasonably be expected to disrupt a lawful gathering, assembly or procession of students of the school. 
(2)  It shall be unlawful for any person on a public school campus within the city without authority, to commit, recklessly or knowingly, any act which may reasonably be expected to disrupt a lawful gathering, assembly or procession of students of the school. 
(3)  It shall be unlawful for any person to commit, recklessly or knowingly, any act which may reasonably be expected to disrupt any lawful school activity or to prevent any student or faculty member of a public school within the city from engaging in his lawful activity as a student or faculty member, respectively, of such school. 
(4)  It shall be unlawful for any person on a public school campus within the city without authority to refuse to depart after having received notice from a member of the school faculty to do so. 
(b)  Any person convicted of disturbing the peace of a public school may be punished by a fine not exceeding $500.00 or imprisonment not exceeding 90 days, or both. 
(Ord. No. 757, §§ 1, 2, 1-2-1980) 
Sec. 16-22. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person or any property whereby any person is placed in fear of his safety or property is placed danger. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he remains in any place where there is disagreement being expressed between persons for the purpose of causing, provoking, or engaging in a fight or brawl. 
(c)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he commits any violent act which interferes with another person's pursuit of a lawful activity or occupation. 
(d)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he jostles, roughly crowds or pushes another or others in a public place. 
(e)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another whereby the property of any person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed. 
(f)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he commits any violent act or remains in any place where there is disagreement being expressed between persons for the purpose of disrupting a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(g)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he commits actions which cause a breach of the peace of undisturbed activities of any house of worship, hospital, medical center, outpatient center, school, home for the elderly, or assisted living facilities. 
(h)  A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when he interferes, through acts of physical obstruction and/or a disagreement being expressed, another's pursuit of a lawful occupation. 
(Ord. No. 903, § 4, 6-5-1991; Ord. No. 913, § 4, 8-18-1993; Ord. No. 1018, § 1, 8-4-2010) 
Sec. 16-23. - Indecent exposure. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to perform any of the following acts in a public place, or in view of the public: 
(1)  To be found in the state of nudity, which shall mean exposure of one's genitals, buttocks, of one's breasts, if female, any other lewd exposure of the sexual organs, or any lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity. 
(2)  To perform any act, or simulated act, of sexual intercourse, including the touching or fondling of the genitals, or the breast of a female, or any other lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person. 
(3)  To appear wearing pants or skirts more than three inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium) exposing the skin or undergarments. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section only, "public place" shall include, but not be limited to, all public sidewalks, public streets, public buildings, public parks, parking lots, vacant lots, public piers, schools, libraries, and public squares. 
(c)  A citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to a penalty of $25.00 for violating subsection 16-23(a)(3). Violators of subsection 16-23(a)(3) shall not be subject to arrest or imprisonment for violation of this section. However, the municipal court shall have the same authority as the superior court to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences. 
(Ord. No. 995, § 1, 11-20-2007; Ord. No. 1025, § 1, 9-19-2012) 
Secs. 16-24-16-40. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOUND TRUCKS 

Sec. 16-41. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Sound amplifying equipment means any machine or device for the amplification of the human voice, music or any other sound. "Sound amplifying equipment," as used herein, shall not be construed as including standard automobile radios when used and heard only by occupants of the vehicle in which installed or warning devices on authorized emergency vehicles or horns or other warning devices on other vehicles used only for traffic safety purposes. 
    Sound truck means any vehicle having mounted thereon, or attached thereto, any sound amplifier equipment. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 24.30-1, 10-23-1957) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-42. - Registration-Required. 
    No person shall use, or cause to be used, a sound truck with sound amplifying equipment in operation for noncommercial purposes in the city before filing a registration statement with the secretary of the city commission in writing. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 24.30-2(a), 10-23-1957) 
Sec. 16-43. - Same-Contents. 
    The registration statement required by this division shall be filed in duplicate and shall state the following: 
(1)  Name and home address of the applicant. 
(2)  Address of place of business of applicant. 
(3)  License number and motor number of the sound truck to be used by applicant. 
(4)  Name and address of person who owns the sound truck. 
(5)  Name and address of person having direct charge of the sound truck. 
(6)  Names and addresses of all persons who will use or operate the sound truck. 
(7)  The purpose for which the sound truck will be used. 
(8)  The general statement as to the section or sections of the city in which the sound truck will be used. 
(9)  The proposed hours of operation of the sound truck. 
(10)  The number of days of proposed operation of the sound truck. 
(11)  A general description of the sound amplifying equipment which is to be used. 
(12)  The maximum sound producing power of the sound amplifying equipment to be used in or on the sound truck, stating the following: 
a.  The wattage to be used, and 
b.  The volume in decibels of the sound which will be produced, and 
c.  The approximate maximum distance for which sound will be thrown from the sound truck. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 24.30-2, 10-23-1957) 
Sec. 16-44. - Same-Amendment. 
    All persons using, or causing to be used, sound trucks for noncommercial purposes shall amend any registration statement filed pursuant to this division within 48 hours after any change in the information therein furnished. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 24.30-2(b), 10-23-1957) 
Sec. 16-45. - Same-Issuance, identification. 
(a)  The secretary of the city commission shall return to each applicant under this division one copy of such registration statement duly certified by the secretary as a correct copy of the application. 
(b)  Such certified copy of the application shall be in the possession of any person operating the sound truck at all times while the sound truck's sound amplifying equipment is in operation and such copy shall be promptly displayed and shown to any police officer of the city upon request. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 24.30-2(c), 10-23-1957) 
Sec. 16-46. - Regulations for use. 
    Noncommercial use of sound trucks in the city with sound amplifying equipment in operation shall be subject to the following regulations: 
(1)  The only sounds permitted are music or human speech. 
(2)  Operations are permitted for four hours each day, except on Sundays and legal holidays when no operation shall be authorized. The permitted four operational hours shall be between the hours of 11:30 a.m., and 1:30 p.m., and between hours of 4:30 p.m. and 6:30 p.m. 
(3)  Sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated unless the sound truck upon which such equipment is mounted is operated at a speed of at least ten miles per hour except when such truck is stopped or impeded by traffic. Where stopped by traffic, the sound amplifying equipment shall not be operated for longer than one minute at each such stop. 
(4)  Sound shall not be issued within 100 yards of hospitals, schools, churches, or courthouses. 
(5)  The human speech and music amplified shall not be profane, lewd, indecent or slanderous. 
(6)  The volume of sound shall be controlled so that it will not be audible for a distance in excess of 100 feet from the sound truck and so that such volume is not unreasonably loud, raucous, jarring, disturbing or a nuisance to persons within the area of audibility. 
(7)  No sound amplifying equipment shall be operated within an excess of 15 watts power in the last stage of amplification. 
(Ord. No. 409, § 24.30-2(d), 10-23-1957) 
Sec. 16-47. - Operation of sound trucks, etc. prohibited after sunset. 
    No person shall operate or cause to be operated any vehicle with a ringing bell or similar noise-making device in use, nor any sound truck, i.e., any vehicle using sound amplifying equipment, in the incorporated area of the city after the time of sunset each day as that time is determined according to publicly available information from the National Weather Service and National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. 
(Ord. No. 952, § 1, 6-19-2002) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 952, § 1, adopted June 19, 2002, deleted former § 16-47 of the Code and enacted new provisions as § 16-47 as herein set out. Former § 16-47 prohibited sound trucks for commercial sound advertising purposes and derived from Ord. No. 409, § 24.30-3, adopted Oct. 23, 1957. 
Secs. 16-48-16-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOISE CONTROL 

Sec. 16-51. - Title. 
    This division will be known and may be cited as the "City of Brunswick Noise Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 890, § I, 5-2-1990) 
Sec. 16-52. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this division, unless otherwise specifically stated. The definitions of technical terms used which are not herein defined shall be obtained from publications of acoustical terminology issued by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) or its successor body. 
    A-weighted sound level shall mean the sound pressure level as measured in decibels on a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The level is designated dB(A) or dBA. 
    Construction means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration or similar action, for or on public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    Decibel means a logarithmic and dimensionless unit of measure used in describing the relative loudness or level of sound. 
    Emergency means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical or psychological trauma or property damage which demands immediate action. 
    Emergency work is work made necessary to restore property to a safe condition following a public calamity or work required to protect persons or property from an imminent exposure to danger. 
    Industrial district means a basic industrial district or a general industrial district as defined in the zoning ordinance. 
    Motor vehicle means any motor-operated vehicle licensed for use on the public highways. 
    Noise means any sound which disturbs humans or which causes or tends to cause an adverse psychological or physiological effect on humans. 
    Noise disturbance means any sound which endangers or injures the welfare, safety or health of human beings, or disturbs a reasonable person of normal sensitivities, or devalues or injures personal or real property. 
    Noise-sensitive activities means any activities which should be conducted under conditions of exceptional quiet, including but not limited to operation of schools, libraries open to the public, churches, hospitals and nursing homes. 
    Noise-sensitive area means any area designated for the purpose of ensuring exceptional quiet and clearly posted with "Noise-Sensitive Area" signs, because of the noise-sensitive activities conducted therein. 
    Plainly audible means a sound which can be heard at a distance of 100 feet from the source where the sound emanates. 
    Public right-of-way means any street, avenue, highway, lane or similar place which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Public space means any real property including any structure thereon which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    Real property boundary means an imaginary line along the ground surface, and its vertical extension, which separates the real property owned by one person from that owned by another person, but not including intra-building real property divisions. 
    Receiving land use means the use or occupancy of the real property which receives the transmission of sound. 
    Sound level means the quantity in decibels measured with an instrument satisfying requirements of American National Standards Specifications for Type II sound level meters. Slow times averaging and A-frequency weighting shall be used. 
    Times means Eastern Standard Time or daylight saving time as observed in the state. 
    Zoning districts means those districts established by the zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 890, § II, 5-2-1990) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 16-53. - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this division shall not apply to the following: 
(1)  Emission of sound for the purpose of alerting people to the existence of danger; 
(2)  Emission of sound in the performance of emergency work; 
(3)  Rail and air transportation and/or public transportation vehicles; 
(4)  Church or clock carillons, bells or chimes; 
(5)  Fireworks or fireworks displays for which a permit has been issued by the city; 
(6)  Burglar alarms when properly maintained in accordance with rules and regulations to be promulgated by the police department and approved by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 890, § II, 5-2-1990) 
Sec. 16-54. - Noise disturbance prohibited. 
(a)  No person shall make, continue or cause to be made or continued any noise disturbance or noise in excess of the limits for such noise established in this section. 
(b)  With the exception of sound levels elsewhere specifically authorized by this division, table I sets forth the maximum permissible sound levels allowed at or within the real property boundary of a receiving land use. Any activity or use that produces a sound in excess of such noise levels for the receiving land use shall be deemed a "noise disturbance" and in violation of this division. 
(c)  The measurement of sound or noise shall be made with a sound level meter meeting the standards prescribed by ANSI or its successor body. The measurement of all sound levels shall be made as close to the property line of the receiving land as is practical. The measurement period shall not be less than five minutes, and the sound level measured shall not exceed the sound levels set forth in table I more than ten percent of the time during any measurement period. A calibration check shall be made of the system before and after any noise measurement is made. The chief of police shall formulate, in accordance with recognized sound testing standards, rules and regulations describing how measurement of sound levels will be made. 
Zoning Category of 
Receiving Land Use Time Sound Level Limit 
dBA Residential  7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 70 10:00 p.m.- 7:00 a.m. 60 Nonresidential 11:30 p.m.- 6:30 a.m. 75  
(d)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the operation of the following domestic power tools or equipment between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 9:00 p.m.: 
(1)  Electrical power tools; 
(2)  Motor-powered, muffler-equipped lawn, garden and tree trimming equipment. 
(Ord. No. 890, § IV, 5-2-1990) 
Sec. 16-55. - Specific activities prohibited. 
(a)  Sales by hawking or barking. No person shall offer for sale or sell anything by shouting or outcry within any residential area. 
(b)  Loading and unloading. No person shall load, unload, open, close or handle boxes, crates, containers, building material, refuse, garbage cans, dumpsters, motor vehicles, or similar objects between the hours of 8:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. the following day as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary line. 
(c)  Vehicle or motor boat repair and testing. No person shall repair, rebuild, modify or test any motor vehicle, motorcycle or motorboat in such a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary or within a noise sensitive zone. 
(d)  Power model vehicles. No person shall operate or permit the operation of a powered model vehicle in a public or private space out-of-doors within 150 feet of a residential real property boundary or during the hours from 9:00 p.m. to 8:00 a.m. 
(e)  Musical instruments and similar devices. No person shall operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any drum, musical instrument or similar device which produces sound in a manner as to create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary, subject to the provisions of section 16-54(b) and section 16-59. 
(Ord. No. 890, § V, 5-2-1990) 
Sec. 16-56. - Regulation of sound equipment and sound amplifying equipment. 
(a)  Except for activities for which a permit has been issued by the city under this section, no person shall so operate, play or permit the operation or playing of any radio, television, tape player, compact disc player or phonograph or similar device so as to: 
(1)  Create a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary line. Bars, taverns, lounges, nightclubs, dance halls, game-rooms and similar activities which produce a noise that is plainly audible beyond the premises shall be deemed a noise disturbance in violation of this division. 
(2)  Create a noise which is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet from a private motor vehicle, when such device is operated in or on a private motor vehicle on a public right-of-way or public space. 
(3)  Create a noise which is plainly audible at a distance of 25 feet in or on any public space. 
(b)  Sound equipment permitted. Except as hereafter provided, no person shall use, operate, or cause to be used or operated any radio, record player, tape deck or player, loudspeaker, amplifier, sound track or other device for producing, reproducing or amplifying sounds, hereinafter referred to as "sound equipment" upon the public streets or upon any private or public premises so as to produce a noise disturbance. However, noise emanating from activities upon public property from which the city has issued any necessary permit or in which the city is a sponsor shall be exempt. 
(c)  Commercial advertising, sound equipment prohibited. No sound equipment shall be permitted to be used on public streets or public places, or in any building or upon any premises if the sound therefrom may be plainly audible from any public street or public place when any such use is for commercial advertising purposes or for any purpose of attracting attention of the public to any structure or building for monetary gain. 
(Ord. No. 890, § VI, 5-2-1990; Ord. No. 1007, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 16-57. - Construction work. 
(a)  No person shall operate or permit the operation of any tools or equipment in construction, demolition or maintenance work: 
(1)  Between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. in any manner which creates a noise disturbance across a residential real property boundary. 
(2)  At any other time in any member which creates a noise disturbance across a real property boundary; for the purpose of this subsection, a sound level at or across the real property boundary in excess of 85 dBA shall be deemed a noise disturbance. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to: 
(1)  Emergency work or repair work performed by or for governmental entities or public service utilities. 
(2)  The use of domestic power tools or equipment as set forth in section 16-54. 
(3)  Construction equipment that has attached in good operative condition the best noise-attenuating device as recommended by the manufacturer. 
(Ord. No. 890, § VII, 5-2-1990) 
Sec. 16-58. - Variances. 
(a)  Variance permit. A variance permit to cause or create a noise at sound levels which would otherwise be in violation of this division may be granted by the city commissioners upon recommendation by the chief of police if: 
(1)  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity in order to comply with the provisions of this division; or 
(2)  The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this division; and 
(3)  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
(b)  Conditions. Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain therein all conditions placed upon the holder of the permit as conditions to the permit being granted, including but not limited to the effective date, time of day, location, sound level limit or equipment limitation. Application for such a permit shall be made in writing in such form as is acceptable to the city through the city manager's office. 
(Ord. No. 890, § VIII, 5-2-1990) 
Sec. 16-59. - Administration, appeals and penalties. 
(a)  The chief of police shall implement, administer and enforce the provisions of this division and shall issue orders requiring the abatement of all violations and the revocation of permits issued. 
(b)  Any person aggrieved by a decision or order rendered by the chief of police, after exhausting all administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal to the municipal court of the city. 
(c)  Any person in violation of this division, upon conviction, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and shall be subject to such penalties as are permitted by the Charter or general law. Each and every day a violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 890, § IX, 5-2-1990) 
Secs. 16-60-16-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SUBSTANCE ABUSE 

Sec. 16-66. - Consumption, possession of intoxicating beverages. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to consume or drink any beer, wine, alcoholic liquor or other intoxicating beverages in or upon any public place within the corporate limits of the city whether or not in a motor vehicle in or upon such public place. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have in his possession any beer, wine, alcoholic liquor or other intoxicating beverages in an open container in or upon any public place within the city, whether or not in a motor vehicle in or upon such public place. 
(c)  The phrase "public place" as used in this section is defined as meaning any public street, sidewalk, alley, park, playground, athletic field, recreation center, or public school campus, or any public building owned by the city, within the city, except any such place for which the city issued a retail license for the sale or consumption of alcoholic, vinous or malt beverages. As used in this section, "public place" is also defined to include and mean any parking lot open to the general public, whether or not privately owned, and any portion of premises of a retail licensee for the sale or consumption of alcoholic, vinous or malt beverages lying outside the building for which such license was issued. 
(Ord. No. 761, §§ 1-4, 9-17-1980) 
Sec. 16-67. - Public drunkenness. 
    A person commits the offense of public drunkenness by being in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, in an intoxicated condition caused by alcohol or any other mood-altering drug, substance or combination thereof, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Ord. No. 903, § 3, 6-5-1991; Ord. No. 913, § 5, 8-18-1993) 
Secs. 16-68-16-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PUBLIC CONDUCT 

Sec. 16-81. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "Public Conduct Ordinance of the City of Brunswick". 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1, 3-3-2004) 
Sec. 16-82. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to promote and regulate the use of public spaces and facilities within the city and any other public space or facility owned by the city, consistent with the dedicated uses and maintenance of such public properties, the preservation of public safety, lawful commerce, and rights of access and traverse, the preservation of both the natural and historic environments, and the protection of the well-being, peace, privacy, and good order necessary to the free enjoyment by citizens of the rights to private property and personal pursuits. Furthermore, it is the specific intent of the city in enacting this article to regulate only the time, place, and manner of events and not the content or message of any speech or expressive conduct. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004) 
Sec. 16-83. - Application review. 
(a)  A city staff person shall be designated by the city manager as the permitting officer for public property uses (hereinafter the "permitting officer"), who shall be vested with the responsibility of receiving applications for and acceding to or denying permits for conduct in public spaces and facilities (hereinafter referred to as the "event") in the city. 
(b)  The permitting officer, shall determine, with consultation of affected public safety and other city departments, whether to permit or to refuse to permit any such events in or about public spaces solely on the basis of the factors or combination of factors set out hereinafter, and in light of a presumption that all events not inconsistent with the goals of this article hereinbefore enumerated shall be permitted at all reasonable times and places. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004) 
Sec. 16-84. - Use of public spaces and facilities. 
    No person shall, without first being permitted by the permitting officer after application made according to the requirements set out hereinafter: 
(a)  Conduct a public assembly, meeting, march, parade, demonstration, or other like event, either fixed or processional. 
(1)  In any city park or square involving 100 or more attendees or participants, or 
(2)  Utilizing any city building or structure, or 
(3)  Utilizing any city baseball/softball field or tennis court, or 
(4)  Utilizing any city property in a manner which has the effect, intent, purpose or substantial likelihood of obstructing motor vehicle or pedestrian traffic; or 
(b)  Circulate or distribute any leaflets, handbills, notices, pamphlets, books, documents, or papers of any kind in any indoor public facility of the city, except during those events regulated or sponsored by the city or in such areas as will be designated by posted signage as approved for distribution of literature (such area will be designated by the city manager for the city hall facility at 700 Gloucester Street within 20 days of adoption of this article), such distribution not to occur inside any room during a meeting nor at any time so as to impede ingress to or egress from any interior space; or 
(c)  Bring, land or cause to ascend or descend or alight any airplane, helicopter, flying machine, balloon, parachute, or other apparatus for aviation on, over, or upon the public properties of the city, or facilities thereon; or 
(d)  Bring any non-domestic (e.g., any of the following would be considered non-domestic: poisonous, exotic, dangerous, feral, or farm animals) on, over, or upon the public properties of the city, or facilities thereon; or 
(e)  Station or erect any building, stand, bandstand, stage, tower, scaffold, sound stage, platform, rostrum or other structure on, over or upon the public properties of the city; or 
(f)  Create or emit any electronically amplified sound (except from a radio, recorder or other device which is possessed and used by an individual for his/her own enjoyment and is operated in such a manner so as to not interfere with the use and enjoyment by any other person); or 
(g)  Conduct any exhibit, fair, or circus over, or upon the public properties of the city; or station or use any electrical or electronic device or equipment that would require outdoor auxiliary power. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004; Ord. No. 962, § 1, 5-20-2004) 
Sec. 16-85. - Application. 
(a)  Within no less than five days prior to an event, the person or persons associated in fact, whether or not a legally recognized entity, who wish to conduct an event requiring a permit, as set forth herein, shall apply to the permitting officer for such permit. Such application shall at a minimum include: 
(1)  The name, mailing and street address, gender, birth date and Social Security number of the applicant. If the application is made by or for an association of persons or other organization, the application shall set forth as to each such entity, the legal form of the entity (e.g., corporation, unincorporated association, LLP, etc.); the name of said entity, if named; the registered or recognized address of the entity, if any; the federal tax identification number of the entity; the name, mailing and street address, date of birth, and Social Security number of the person making the application on behalf of or as a representative of said entity; such person's relationship to said entity; and some demonstration or recitation of the authority of the person making the application to act on behalf of the entity. 
(2)  A plan to be reviewed by the permitting officer, which plan will include: 
a)  Anticipated number of persons participating in the event; 
b)  Date or dates of the event; 
c)  Hours of each day the event will be conducted; 
d)  Exact location of said event, or, if the event is processional or mobile, the specific route of the event; 
e)  Whether sound amplification equipment will be employed, and, if so, a description of what equipment will be used sufficient to allow the permitting officer to evaluate the plan; 
f)  Whether artificial lighting will be employed and, if so, a description of what equipment will be used sufficient to allow the permitting officer to evaluate the plan; 
g)  Whether temporary static structures such as stages, bleachers, canopies, stands, towers, scaffolds, platforms, rostrums, podiums, portable toilets or other temporary static structures will be constructed or employed, whether vehicles will be employed, and if so, a description of same sufficient to permit the permitting officer to evaluate the plan; 
h)  A description of the anticipated need for safety, police, medical, sanitation, and other required personnel and equipment, with the anticipated needed numbers and suggested posting by location and time of such personnel and equipment, along with a listing of what such personnel and equipment will be provided by applicant; 
i)  A description of provisions necessary to the safety and welfare of the participants in the event and members of the public in the area where the event will be conducted and routes of access thereto and therefrom; 
j)  Whether the event will require that the public spaces or facilities to be used or burdened, or the routes and means of access thereto and therefrom, be temporarily diverted from their dedicated or customary uses, or the public or private users thereof be diverted or excluded from, or limited in their use or enjoyment of, or their access to or through, said spaces or facilities, before, during, or after the event; 
k)  Whether any sign, display, flag, placard, or banner larger than two feet by three feet or using any wooden, metal, or hard plastic material, support or other component will be used; and 
l)  The name, permanent street and mailing addresses, telephone numbers where the persons responsible for each of the following matters may be reached before, during and after the proposed event, and fax number and e-mail address if available: general communication with public safety and other city staff, security, peacekeeping, sanitary and toilet facilities, medical and healthcare, and trash clean-up. 
(3)  A disclosure as to whether the applicant or any entity for whom the application is being made is or has been a party to (whether or not then operating under the same or any other name) as defendant or other responding party, any legal action, civil, criminal, or administrative, arising out of any event of a nature substantially similar to the one proposed in the application, and, if so, identifying information as called for in the application; 
(4)  A disclosure as to whether the applicant or any entity for whom the application is being made has failed to satisfy or is in violation or contempt of or in arrears as to any civil, criminal, or administrative fine, penalty, judgment, order, or award (whether or not then operating under the same name) as a result of participation in any prior events(s) of a substantially similar nature to that which is the subject of the instant application, and if so, a description of said fine, penalty, award, judgment or order and an explanation for non-compliance. 
(b)  Untimely permit applications will be considered and may be granted if reasonably practicable and if appropriate under other provisions of this article, but in such case the time limits for appeal of a denial, shall remain the same. 
(c)  Where an event conducted on, over, upon, or burdening public properties, or employing the facilities thereon, which is also to substantially involve or take place partly or wholly upon private property with the consent of the owner(s) thereof, such owner(s) or their authorized representatives must be identified in the application and proof of such consent provided for the event. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004; Ord. No. 962, § 1, 5-20-2004) 
Sec. 16-86. - Review by the permitting officer. 
(a)  Within five working days of the receipt of a fully completed executed, and filed application, the permitting officer shall review the application in light of all of the contents thereof and the goals, intentions, and presumptions of this article as set out hereinbefore, and render a decision and communicate same to applicant either permitting the event as planned or denying a permit for same. If the permit is denied, the permitting officer shall provide the applicant in writing a statement of the reasons why the application is not granted. [First class mail to the address provided by applicant, postmarked no more than five days after receipt of the fully completed, executed, and filed application, shall be sufficient for this purpose, though not the exclusive means of notice.] 
(b)  Nothing in this process shall prevent the permitting officer, at its sole option and within the five-day period for approval or denial, from conferring with applicant with respect to modifications of applicant's plan for the event, and amend the application to reflect such modifications if agreed to by applicant. However, applicant may neither supplement nor amend its application within said five-day period except at the invitation of the permitting officer. Any attempt to do so sua sponte shall require a separate and new application. 
(c)  The permitting officer may deny the application for permit upon any of the following reasons or combination of reasons. 
(1)  The application does not contain all required information or materials, or the information set out in the application is so incomplete, vague, or ambiguous as to prevent full and proper review by the permitting officer. 
(2)  The application contains material omissions, falsehoods, or misrepresentations; 
(3)  The applicant, or any entity for which the permit is sought, is incompetent to contract, sue, or be sued; 
(4)  The person applying lacks authority to represent the entity for which the application is made; 
(5)  The applicant or any entity for which the permit is sought has on prior occasions damaged public property, or has not paid in full for such damages, or is in arrears as to any judgment (civil, criminal, or administrative) rendered against the applicant or entity, or is in violation of any injunction or restraining order entered against the applicant or entity, whether under the same name or another; 
(6)  The applicant or any entity for which the permit is sought has on prior occasions violated permitting ordinances in connection with events of a substantially similar nature; 
(7)  The plan of the event as proposed is likely to present an unreasonable danger to the health or safety of participants in the event or other members of the public (though not through the agency of any predicted reaction by onlookers or members of the public); 
(8)  The plan of the event as proposed is likely to substantially restrict and/or congest traffic (vehicular or pedestrian) on any of the public roads, right-of-ways, sidewalks, or waterways in the immediate vicinity of such event; 
(9)  The plan of the event as proposed is likely to cause a substantial disturbance of the peace as defined in state law, or is likely to intrude upon the privacy or property of citizens in the area of the proposed event in a manner violative of state law, or is likely to burden commerce in the area of the event by obstructing entrances or exits to any retail, wholesale, manufacturing, transportation, storage, office, or professional or personal service establishment, or by obstructing parking areas, loading docks, driveways, walkways or other methods of ingress or egress to any such establishment; 
(10)  The plan of the event as proposed includes activities which are prohibited by laws of the United States, the State of Georgia, or ordinances of the city, or activities which constitute nuisance or tortuous conduct with respect to public or private property or person; 
(11)  The plan of the event as proposed would conflict with previously planned programs or events organized and conducted by the city and previously scheduled for the same time and place; 
(12)  The plan of the event as proposed is prohibited by or is inconsistent with the zoning classifications and uses of the proposed or desired location; or 
(13)  A fully executed prior application for permit has been or will be granted to a prior applicant authorizing uses or activities which do not reasonably permit multiple occupancy of that particular space; 
(d)  Signs, flags, placards, banners or displays (other than puppets) which exceed two feet by three feet in size or which include any wooden, hard plastic, or metal material, support, or other component shall not be used or carried in the event unless the item is approved by the police department prior to commencement of the event (provided that evaluation of a sign may be based only upon its potential to endanger public safety, and may not be based upon content of the sign's message). No person may use or carry any firearm, spear, pointed or edged weapon, slingshot, club, bat, hammer, edged tool, or any piece of metal or hard plastic rod, pipe or tubing, or any piece of wood which is pointed or which is larger than two inches by two inches in cross section or longer than six feet regardless of cross sectional dimension, in any event for which a permit is required under this article. No flag, sign, display, banner, rope, cable, wire, chain, or structure may be draped or affixed to any city property, including, but not limited to, the streets, sidewalks, trees, buildings or other properties of the city. 
(e)  It is the specific intent of the city in enacting this ordinance to regulate only the time, place and manner of events and not to regulate the content or message of any speech or expressive conduct. The factors enumerated above, which we find express and support the substantial and compelling interests of this governing body in the preservation of the rights and liberties of its citizens and the safety, health, and good order of its society, are the only bases upon which the permitting officer shall decide to issue or deny a permit applied for hereunder and no such decision shall be made or justified based upon the anticipated or predicted content of the speech or expressive conduct of any applicant. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004; Ord. No. 962, § 1, 5-20-2004) 
Sec. 16-87. - Revocation. 
(a)  For events that have been granted a permit or events that do not require a permit, the city police department shall have the authority to terminate an event at any time, or prevent its initiation, should traffic, weather, or other conditions develop which present an imminent danger to those participating in the event or to the public at large, or if an evacuation is ordered or a curfew or state of emergency or disaster is lawfully declared. If an event is permitted and is terminated pursuant to this subsection, the permit shall be revoked for that day only except that the termination shall extend any such evacuation, curfew or state of disaster or emergency. 
(b)  The city police department shall have the authority to terminate the event at any time or prevent its initiation should any consideration or combination of considerations enumerated herein as a ground for denial of a permit arise or first become apparent to the city police department after the grant of a permit. If an event is terminated pursuant to this subsection, the permit shall be permanently revoked. 
(c)  If in preparation for or after the start of an event for which a permit has been issued, participants in said event violate the terms of the permit, or deviate in material fashion from the plan submitted in application for the permit, or violate any laws of the United States, State of Georgia or the city, the police department shall have the authority to terminate the event at any time or prevent its initiation. If an event is terminated pursuant to this subsection, the permit shall be permanently revoked. For purpose of this subsection (c), exceeding the number of projected attendees/participants shall not be considered a material deviation unless the number present exceeds the stated life safety or fire related capacity for an interior space or the maximum number of persons allowed for an exterior space as stated in the permit. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate the terms of the permit or to deviate from the plan submitted in the application for the permit. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person or group of persons who have been permitted to conduct an event to remain on the permitted location or facility, after an event, permitted or otherwise, has been terminated pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004; Ord. No. 962, § 1, 5-20-2004) 
Sec. 16-88. - Appeals. 
(a)  Upon receipt of any decision by the permitting officer denying an application, an applicant may, within five business days, file an appeal of said denial with the city manager, which appeal shall be in writing and sent to the city manager by certified mail or hand delivery. 
(b)  The written appeal must state succinctly the grounds upon which it is asserted that the determination should be modified or reversed and shall be accompanied by copies of the application for permit, the written notice of determination to which appeal is being made, and any other papers relevant to the denial. The written appeal shall set forth an address and day and night telephone numbers where Applicant can be reached regarding the appeal, including for notification of a hearing on the appeal. 
(c)  Within three business days of the receipt of a written appeal, the city manager shall schedule a hearing, which shall be set for a date and time certain not later than five business days following the mailing of the notice. The city manager shall cause notice of the hearing to be served upon the applicant by certified U.S. mail directed to the address provided by applicant in the appeal notice. Such notice shall include the date, time, and location of the hearing. Telephonic notice of the hearing setting may also be given and will suffice if the written notice is mailed as required. 
(d)  At the hearing, all parties shall be provided a fair and impartial hearing and shall be allowed to produce any and all evidence concerning the appeal. 
(e)  Within five business days after the conclusion of the hearing the city manager shall make a written decision on the appeal, which shall affirm, modify, or reverse the decision being appealed. The notice of the decision shall be sent to the applicant at the address set forth on the application for permit by certified U. S. mail and shall set forth the reasons for the decision. 
(f)  The decision of the city manager shall be binding on all parties, subject to the right of appeal as provided by O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1, et seq. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004; Ord. No. 962, § 1, 5-20-2004) 
Sec. 16-89. - Time allotment. 
(a)  In order to promote the public safety and other concerns provided for in section 16-82 of this article, and to coordinate multiple uses of limited space and to enlarge, rather than reduce, the utility of public spaces and facilities as a forum for events, permitted events shall be limited as follows: outdoor events may not commence before 8:00 a.m. or continue past 8:00 p.m.; parades or processions on streets may only be held during daylight between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 11:30 a.m., or between 1:00 p.m. and 4:30 p.m., or between 5:30 p.m. and 8:00 p.m.; parades or processions shall not block any street or intersection for more than one hour; ballfields, interior spaces and park or square spaces may not be used earlier or later in the day than such hours of operation as may be established by the city commission by written resolution. Issuance of a city permit for an activity involving use of or presence upon any state or federally owned or regulated roadway or property for which state or federal permit or authorization is required is not intended to constitute such state or federal authorization in any way or at any hour of the day. 
(b)  At or prior to the expiration of the time allotted and permitted for an event, the permitted person or persons shall have completely vacated the permitted location or facility. 
(c)  Certain city-owned or operated facilities are subject to reasonable usage fees which shall be charged only in accordance with rate schedules established in writing and which shall be made available to an applicant at the time an application form is obtained under this article. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004; Ord. No. 962, § 1, 5-20-2004) 
Sec. 16-90. - Violations. 
    Whenever in this article any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever herein the doing of an act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, the violation of such provision shall be an ordinance violation punishable by a fine of at least $500.00, not to exceed $1,000.00, or by imprisonment of at least 24 hours, not to exceed 60 days, or both. Any person who violates this article may be subject to immediate arrest. The imposition of a penalty under the provision of this section shall not prevent the revocation of any permit issued pursuant to this article. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004) 
Sec. 16-91. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to any of the following: 
(a)  A governmental agency, including its employees or officials, acting within the scope of its functions or conducting official governmental business; 
(b)  Uses, activities, or events being conducted on the public properties of the city, or the facilities thereon, that do not have the effect, intent, purpose, or propensity to attract the notice of people who are not a part of such use, activity, or event; 
(c)  Events that are sponsored by the city within the scope of its functions; 
(d)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational activities, provided that such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; and 
(e)  Funeral processions. 
(Ord. No. 960, § 1 3-3-2004) 
Chapter 17 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 927, § 1, adopted Aug. 21, 1996, repealed provisions formerly set out as ch. 17 of the Code, which pertained to soil erosion and sedimentation control and derived from Ord. No. 889, §§ I-VIII, adopted Mar. 26, 1990. Section 2 of Ord. No. 927 enacted a new ch. 17 to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; flood damage prevention, ch. 11; housing, ch. 12; zoning, ch. 23; subdivision regulations, app. B. 
State Law reference- Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; control of soil erosion and sedimentation, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-3 et seq. 

Sec. 17-1. - Title. 
    This chapter will be known as the "City of Brunswick Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 927, § 2, 8-21-1996) 
Sec. 17-2. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation of this chapter, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    Board means the board of natural resources. 
    Buffer means an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed natural condition. 
    Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
    Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface; also known as excavation. 
    Department means the department of natural resources. 
    Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    District means the Satilla Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
    Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from land-disturbing activity; also known as the "plan." 
    Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
    Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Issuing authority means the office of the building official of the city, which has been certified by the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources as an issuing authority, pursuant to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, as amended, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq., or the division in those instances where an application for a permit is submitted to the division. 
    Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in subsection 17-3(5). 
    Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to measure the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
    Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
    Person means the individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Roadway drainage structure means a device such as a bridge, culvert or ditch composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been removed from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Satilla Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    Structural erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown, or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. 
    Vegetative erosion and sediment control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 2, 8-21-1996) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 17-3. - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs and maintenance work and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such are constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy or the construction of single-family residences not a part of a larger project and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 and that such requirements shall be enforced by the city; 
(5)  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(6)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(7)  Any project involving 1 1/10 acres or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves 1 1/10 acres or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsections (1)-(6), (8), or (9) of this section; 
(8)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the Georgia Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by the city or county; provided, however, that such projects shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in subsection 17-4(b); 
(9)  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, provided that any such land-disturbing activity shall conform to the minimum requirements set forth in subsection 17-4(b); 
(10)  Where this section requires compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in subsection 17-4(b), issuing authorities shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements as if a permit had been issued and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 2, 8-21-1996) 
Sec. 17-4. - Minimum requirements. 
(a)  General provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsection 17-4(b) of this chapter. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements enumerated. The property owner and/or his agents shall follow sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resulting sedimentation consistent with the following requirements: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum. 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
(14)  Erosion and sedimentation control plans shall include provisions for treatment to control any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent streams beyond the levels specified in subsection (17) of this section. 
(15)  Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 25 feet of the banks of any state waters, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented; provided, however, that buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. title shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph; and 
(16)  Land-disturbing activities shall not be conducted within 100 horizontal feet, as measured from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, of the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-29 unless a variance for such activity is granted by the director except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. 
(17)  a.  1. 
Discharges of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas shall be controlled to the extent that turbidity of the stormwater runoff shall not exceed 100 nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) higher than the turbidity level of the receiving stream immediately upstream from the stormwater runoff discharge at the time of such discharge; provided, however, that for trout streams, such maximum allowable turbidity level shall be 50 nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) higher than the turbidity level of such stream immediately upstream from the stormwater runoff discharge at the time of such discharge. Due to the various soils and hydrological and water conditions throughout the state, the division shall have the discretion to vary from the aforesaid nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). 
2.  On or after July 1, 1994, the board of natural resources shall be authorized to establish the maximum allowable turbidity levels at higher or lower levels or establish an equivalent method of determining the amount of sedimentation with corresponding standards by rule or regulation, but only after the board has considered the results of a study of nephelometric turbidity unit levels and alternative stands done under the auspices of the board of regents. Upon the adoption of such rule or regulation, the provisions of subsection 1. of this subsection a. shall be superseded by the provisions of this subsection 2. 
b.  Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent an issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection 17-4(b). 
1.  If during a ten-year rainfall event or a rainfall event of greater magnitude, stormwater runoff turbidity exceeds the levels provided for in subsection 17-4(b)(17) or other turbidity requirements adopted by an issuing authority, such exceeding of such levels shall not constitute a violation of the requirements provided for or authorized under this Code section of all such requirements other than those relating to turbidity have been met. 
2.  This subsection shall cease to apply upon the adoption of a rule or regulation as provided for in subsection 17-4(b)(17). 
(Ord. No. 927, § 2, 8-21-1996) 
Sec. 17-5. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, subdivision regulations, flood damage prevention ordinance, this chapter, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the property owner is the only party that can obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the building official to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the issuing authority and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection 17-5(c). Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of subsection 17-4(b). Application for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by two copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. 
(3)  A fee, in an amount of $150.00 shall be charged for each acre of the project area or fraction thereof. 
(4)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by subsections 17-4(b)(16) and (17) and bonding, if required as per subsection 17-5(b)(5), have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(5)  a.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of the filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
b.  The issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this chapter or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements. 
(1)  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in subsection 17-4(b) of this chapter. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of designed criteria in the current issue of the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide, or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this chapter. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan: 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information: Notes or narrative to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes; 
b.  Description of existing land use at the project site and description of proposed project; 
c.  Name, address, and phone number of the property owner; 
d.  Name and phone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sediment controls; 
e.  Size of project or phase under construction, in acres; 
f.  Activity schedule showing the anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters that: "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land-disturbing activities"; 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems-storage capacity, hydrologic study and calculations, including off-site drainage areas; 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative practices, including species, planting dates and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for year-round seeding; 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia; 
j.  Maintenance statement - "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. Additional erosion and sedimentation control measures will be installed if deemed necessary by onsite inspection." 
(3)  Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sedimentation control. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north; 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets; 
c.  Boundary line survey; 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary; 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 
Map Scale Ground Slope 
(percent) Contour Interval 
(feet) 1 inch = 100 ft. or larger scale Flat (0-2) 0.5 or 1 Rolling (2-8) 1 or 2 Steep (8+) 2 or 5  
f.  Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan; 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas; 
h.  Delineate the 25-foot buffer adjacent to state waters and the 35-foot buffer in MRPA areas; 
i.  Delineate the 100-foot horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable; 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices, using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, chapter 6. 
(4)  Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by subsections 17-4(b)(16) and (17) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 17-5, are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(5)  No permit shall be issued unless the applicant provides a statement by the finance director certifying that all ad valorem taxes levied against the property and due and owing have been paid. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 2, 8-21-96) 
Sec. 17-6. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The building official will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter. 
(b)  The building official shall have the power to conduct such investigations as he may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this chapter, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the conservation commission, the district or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 2, 8-21-1996) 
Sec. 17-7. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land-disturbing activity. If a person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining the permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop work orders. Upon notice from the issuing authority, work on any project that is being done contrary to the provisions of this chapter or in a dangerous or unsafe manner shall be immediately stopped. Such notice shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, his authorized agent or the person or persons in charge of the activity on the property, and shall state the conditions under which work may be resumed. Where an emergency exists, no written notice shall be required. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this chapter and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of subsection 17-5(b)(5). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. Any person violating any provision of this chapter, permitting conditions, or stop-work order shall be liable for a monetary penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day, by a sentence of imprisonment not exceeding 60 days in jail or both fine and jail or work alternative. Each day during which the violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(e)  EPD enforcement action. Upon written request made by this issuing authority, the director may determine that the public interest requires the initiation of an enforcement action by the division. Such request shall be accompanied by documentation that demonstrates to the director's satisfaction that local remedy has been exhausted and that compliance with local ordinances or resolutions has not been achieved. Where such a determination is made and this issuing authority has failed to secure compliance, the director may implement the board's rules and seek compliance under provision of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-12 through § 12-7-15. For the purposes of this subsection, enforcement actions taken by the division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-12 through § 12-7-15 shall not require prior revocation of certification of this issuing authority. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 2, 8-21-1996) 
Sec. 17-8. - Administrative appeal; judicial review; and liability. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the city manager within ten days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the superior court of the county. 
(c)  Liability. 
(1)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter, nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(2)  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. No. 927, § 2, 8-21-1996) 
Chapter 18 - SOLID WASTE MANAGEMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1010, § 1, adopted Feb. 18, 2009, deleted Ch. 18 and enacted a new Ch. 18 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 18 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 650, §§ 1-9, adopted June 6, 1973; Ord. No. 686, § 1, adopted Aug. 6, 1975; Ord. No. 854, § 2, adopted Sept. 2, 1987; and Ord. No. 857, § 1, adopted Sept. 16, 1987. 
Cross reference- Sidewalks to be kept clean, § 19-12; utilities, ch. 22. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § 2, ¶ III(a)(2); Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; litter control, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter the following words and phrases shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section: 
    Brown goods means electrical consumer goods such as, but not limited to, televisions, computers, and audio equipment that are mainly used for home entertainment. 
    Collector means a person who under formal agreements, verbal or written, with or without remuneration, does the work of collecting and hauling solid wastes. 
    Curbside means the placing of garbage in a proper container as hereinafter set forth at the edge of the street or adjacent alley for collection on prescribed days. 
    Disposal area means a site, location, tract of land or facility used or intended to be used for the final disposal of solid wastes, garbage, putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except that it shall not include the land or facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling on which the owner, occupant or lessee of such land or facility resides. 
    Dwelling unit means a building or portion of a building designed, occupied, or intended for occupancy as separate living quarters, with cooking, sleeping, and sanitary facilities provided therein. The term dwelling unit shall not be deemed to include individual rooms or suites in a hotel, motel, rooming house or hospital. 
    Federal Poverty Guidelines means the Federal Poverty Guidelines for the year in which an exception is sought as issued from time to time by the United States Department of Health and Human Services. 
    Garbage means food waste, including waste accumulation of animal or vegetable matter used for or intended for food or that attends the preparation, use, cooking, dealing in or storing of meat, fish, fowl, fruits or vegetables. 
    Hazardous waste means material in a solid or semi-solid state resulting from the manufacture or use of pesticides or drugs (other than normal household use), pathological wastes, chemical wastes, flammable or explosive materials, and similar waste material in a solid or semi-solid state, which the city manager may consider a likely hazard to the public health or safety, except radioactive waste materials, as provided in rules of the state department of natural resources. 
    Industrial waste or industrial solid waste means the solid waste materials from factories, processing plants and manufacturing enterprises, and includes food processing wastes, meat and poultry processing waste, hatchery waste, construction and demolition waste, condemned food, ashes and cinders from power plants, agriculture products waste, land clearance waste and similar wastes. 
    Junk means items which are too large for 95-gallon containers and typically consist of, but is not limited to, household items such as lawn equipment, furniture, mattresses and box springs, large pieces of glass and mirrors, automotive parts, flooring materials and other similar items. 
    Mobile home park means an undivided parcel of land under single management which is used or intended to be used for rental or lease of spaces or lots and the provision of services for two or more mobile homes. 
    Premises means land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, watercraft or parts thereof, upon or in which solid waste is stored. 
    Private solid waste collector means a person, not under the employ of the City of Brunswick, who under formal agreements, verbal or written, with or without remuneration, does the work of collecting and hauling solid wastes. 
    Roll-off container means a bulk solid waste receptacle placed temporarily in the yard or driveway of a lot used to handle solid waste disposal related to temporary activities such as, but not limited to, moving, remodeling, or other construction at a site. The container is hauled away when it is full and is emptied by mechanical means. Hazardous waste is not allowed to be placed in roll-off containers. Hazardous waste is not allowed in roll-off containers. 
    Rubbish means a variety of combustible and noncombustible waste materials not subject to rapid decomposition derived from places of residence, commercial areas and institutions which shall include paper, rags, plastics, cartons, boxes, tree and yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, minerals, cans, bottles, glass, crockery, excelsior, beddings, rubber, discarded clothing and similar materials. 
    Scavenge means uncontrolled picking from discarded solid waste materials. 
    Solid waste means putrescible and nonputrescible waste, except human body waste, and shall include garbage, rubbish, paper, cartons, boxes, wood, tree branches, yard trimmings, furniture, appliances, metals, tin cans, glass, crockery, dunnage, ashes, street refuse, dead animals, waste materials generated in industrial operations, residue incineration, food processing wastes, demolition wastes, construction wastes and any other wastes in a solid or semisolid state not otherwise defined in this section. 
    Waste means unwanted or discarded material, except human body waste. 
(Ord. No. 1044, § 1, 11-4-2015) 
Sec. 18-2. - Penalties for violations. 
    Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter and is convicted therefore shall be punished in accordance with section 1-6 of this Code. Certain conduct described in this section shall be deemed a violation of this Code and violations of this Code shall be subject to minimum fines as follows: 
(a)  Any person who dumps or places or discards any trash, garbage or other solid waste on property not owned by that person shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00, along with any other and additional penalties imposed by the court. 
(b)  Any person who dumps or places or discards any trash, garbage or other solid waste in or upon any city street, right-of-way, sidewalk, ditch, park, square or other property of the city shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00, along with any other and additional penalties imposed by the court. 
(c)  Any person who dumps or places or discards any motor vehicle tire or any refrigerator, air conditioner, freezer, stove, dishwasher, clothes washer or dryer, ice maker, television, computer visual monitor, or other appliance on property not owned by that person, including any property owned by the city shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter and shall be punished by a fine of not less than $750.00 along with any other and additional penalties imposed by the court. 
(d)  Each occurrence of dumping as described above in this section shall be deemed a separate violation and shall be punished as such. 
(e)  Every violation occurring subsequent to the first conviction under this section shall be punished by a fine not less than $1,000.00, along with such other and additional penalties as may be imposed by the court. 
(f)  It is intended that the foregoing shall constitute minimum penalties and the court is encouraged to impose such additional penalties and remedies as are within the jurisdiction of the court; the minimum penalties set forth herein are not the exclusive penalties applicable to such violations. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009; Ord. No. 1013, § 1, 10-21-2009) 
Sec. 18-3. - Responsibility for administration. 
    The city commission, in order to protect the health and safety of the people of the city authorizes and directs its city manager, by implementing and enforcing the provisions of this chapter, to control the storage, collection and disposal of solid waste in the incorporated areas of the city. He or she shall plan, organize, procure equipment and personnel, and manage a publicly-owned and operated solid waste collection and disposal service and/or establish criteria for evaluation of private collection and disposal services, make recommendations to the commission regarding contracts for solid waste collection and/or disposal between the commission and private collectors and/or disposal site owners and/or operators, and shall regulate the establishment, maintenance and operation of public or private solid waste collection and/or disposal systems, methods and sites. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-4. - Functions of city manager. 
    Collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste shall be under the supervision and control of the city manager. He or she shall have authority to establish routes and days of collection, types and locations of solid waste containers, and such other matters pertaining to collection, transportation and disposal of solid waste as he may find necessary and to change and modify the same after notice as required by law, provided such measures are not contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-5. - Industrial solid waste. 
    The rules and regulations contained in this chapter shall not prohibit the producers of industrial waste or the owner of premises upon which industrial solid waste has accumulated from collecting, transporting and disposing of such waste, subject to laws and regulations pertinent thereto, if such service is not provided by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-6. - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved by a requirement of, or fee charged by, the city manager shall have the right of appeal to the city commission which may confirm, modify or revoke any such requirement of fee. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-7. - Control of private disposal sites. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit or permit to be deposited on land under his ownership and control any solid waste without having first obtained a disposal area permit as required by regulations of the state department of natural resources and the acceptance of the site by the city manager for such use and purpose. 
(b)  The city manager or the authorized representative of the state department of natural resources shall be permitted to enter private disposal sites at any time during normal business hours for free and unhindered inspections to determine compliance with this chapter and all other pertinent laws and regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-8. - Charges. 
(a)  Solid waste service charges for the purpose of financing collection and disposal systems and for acquisition of disposal sites shall be as enacted by the city commission from time to time. 
(b)  Fees and charges imposed by this section shall become an obligation of each unit of residence and each unit of commercial establishment, unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(c)  The City of Brunswick may impose a fee schedule for fees and charges related to solid waste collection by resolution from time to time as it sees fit. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-9. - Collection of fees by the City of Brunswick for fees for service prior to January 1, 2010. 
    Prior to January 1, 2010, the City of Brunswick may collect for charges and bills for solid waste service via a monthly bill to the owner of the commercial establishment, owner of the residence, renter or lessor of a commercial establishment, renter or lessor of a residential establishment, or owner or lessor of any other establishment located within the City of Brunswick. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-10. - Collection of fees by tax commissioner or city commission designee for fees for service on and after January 1, 2010. 
    Beginning on January 1, 2010 and continuing thereafter, all billing for solid waste service in the City of Brunswick shall be billed under the following procedure. Bills for the subsequent year may be issued and become due prior to the date of service. Therefore, bills for the year 2010 may be billed in the year 2009, but shall be bills for service for the year 2010. The following procedure shall be followed beginning with billing for service to be received in the year 2010: 
(a)  All fees for solid waste collection and disposal may be assessed upon the tax commissioner's books for each year and may be collected by the tax commissioner, should the city commission choose to designate the tax commissioner as the point of collection for fees for solid waste. After collection, the tax commissioner or whoever the city commission may designate shall transfer the solid waste fee to the city treasury at the same time as city ad valorem taxes. In collection, of this solid waste fee, the tax commissioner or city commission designee shall have the authority to resort to any remedy or right allowed by law for the collection and payment of city ad valorem taxes. 
(b)  The tax commissioner or city commission designee shall prepare and mail to each owner of residential property and to each owner of a non-homestead mobile home an annual billing for solid waste fees. The property owner shall be assessed a solid waste fee for each dwelling unit on the property. The solid waste fee will appear as a separate line item assessment on the owner's annual property tax bill and shall become due and payable at the same that city taxes are due and payable. Each year's payment entitles the property owner to solid waste collection and disposal service for each dwelling unit at that property location for the succeeding year. If the solid waste fees remain unpaid, the tax commissioner or an authorized designee, shall have the authority to issue a writ of fieri facias or execution against the property served. The writ of fieri facias or execution shall have the same lien dignity and priority as a writ of fieri facias or execution issued for city ad valorem taxes. Each annual installment shall become a lien against the property served on January 1 of each year in the same manner and the same priority that lien attaches for city ad valorem taxes. Any solid waste fee that remains unpaid shall accrue penalty, interest, and fieri facias charges in the same manner and the same rate as delinquent city ad valorem taxes. 
(c)  There shall be no free service offered by the City of Brunswick for solid waste sanitation service except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(d)  The city commission of the City of Brunswick may choose to provide exceptions to the collection of solid waste service via the tax commissioner or whoever the city commission may designate, by instead submitting billing through other means which are hereby enumerated: 
(1)  Mobile home parks and multi-family dwellings: 
a.  Mobile home parks and rental dwellings whose sanitation is serviced by the City of Brunswick, or its designee: In lieu of payment of this solid waste fee, an owner of a mobile home park or two or more rental dwellings may produce proof to the City of Brunswick Finance Manager clearly showing undivided management of each rental dwelling or of the mobile home park and its intended use for rental or lease space or lots for two or more mobile homes. The owner of the mobile home park or the rental dwellings will be billed quarterly at the rate of 1/4 of the annual fee and will pay quarterly in advance for the sum total of all the mobile homes located on the parcel, regardless of habitation, or the sum total of rental dwellings within the city boundaries regardless of habitation. 
b.  Mobile home parks and rental dwellings whose sanitation is not serviced by the City of Brunswick, or its designee: In lieu of payment of the solid waste fee in its entirety, an owner of a mobile home park or a rental dwelling may produce proof to the City of Brunswick Finance Manager, clearly showing payment of the full year fees to a private vendor or an executed contract with a private vendor to provide for on-site solid waste collection services for all dwelling units on the property for the entire service year. If the contract between the property owner and the private vendor should be terminated at any time during the service year, the property owner shall give written notice to the city finance manager within three business days of termination of the contract. Property owner shall have seven business days from mailing such notice to obtain replacement solid waste collection and disposal service from a private vendor and produce proof of this service to the city finance manager. Notice shall be deemed given on the date of mailing the notice. If the property owner does not obtain replacement service and produce proof of that service to the city finance manager within seven business days of the notice of termination, the city finance department shall bill in full the solid waste fee to the property owner on a pro-rated basis with the owner paying 1/12 of the annual fee for each of the months or parts of months remaining in that year for all billable units located on the property. 
(2)  Commercial establishments: In lieu of payment of this solid waste fee via the tax commissioner or whoever the city commission may designate, an owner of a commercial establishment may produce proof to the city manager, or his or her designee, showing payment of a full year's fees to a city licensed private solid waste collector or an executed contract with a private solid waste collector to provide for on-site solid waste collection services for the owner's commercial establishment for the entire service year. If a commercial establishment does not provide proof of payment or a contract with a private solid waste collector the City of Brunswick shall, in lieu of payment of the solid waste fee via the tax commissioner or whoever the city commission may designate, bill for solid waste service via a bill for monthly service to the registered address of the owner of the commercial establishment. 
(3)  Tax exempt properties: In lieu of payment of this solid waste fee via the tax commissioner or whoever the city commission may designate, all tax-exempt properties, which are exempt via the United States Internal Revenue Code, § 501(c), shall be billed for solid waste service via a monthly bill to the registered address of the tax exempt property and/or organization. 
(4)  Low income: Any occupied or unoccupied dwelling unit, owned in whole or in part by an individual whose income falls below the federal poverty guidelines for the service year may be excepted from an annual payment of the solid waste fee and billed on a monthly basis by the City of Brunswick Finance Department. In order to qualify for the exception, the individual must submit an application in accordance with subsection (e) of this Code each year, including individuals who have previously applied for and received this exception. 
(5)  Disability: Any occupied or unoccupied dwelling unit owned in whole or in part by an individual who, as of January 1 of the service year, has been found, adjudicated, or declared totally (100 percent) disabled and unable to work by either the U.S. Social Security Administration or U.S. Department of Veterans Affairs and whose income falls below the federal poverty guidelines, may be excepted from an annual payment of the solid waste fee and billed on a monthly basis by the City of Brunswick Finance Department. 
(6)  Unoccupied property: Any unoccupied dwelling unit owned in whole or in part by an individual who is 62 years old or disabled as defined above as of January 1 of the service year and whose income falls below the federal poverty guidelines may be exempt from any annual or regular payment of the solid waste fee. 
(7)  Other exceptions: The city manager may make recommendations to the board of commissioners at any time to consider amendments to provide for further exceptions. 
(e)  Application for exception: Applications for exceptions may be obtained from the City of Brunswick customer service counter on the first floor of city hall. The City of Brunswick Finance Manager or his or her designee must receive all applications and required documentation for exceptions for the service year in question by August 1 of the service year at 5:00 p.m.; no applications will be accepted after that date. 
(f)  Approval or denial of application for exception: The city finance manager, in her sole discretion, shall approve or deny the application for exception. All decisions will be made within five business days of submission of the application. 
(g)  Appeals: A person aggrieved by the city finance manager's discretion may apply to the city manager within 30 days of the decision of the finance manager. The decision of the city manager shall be final. No appeal shall be considered if it is received by the city manager after the 30-day period has run. All decisions regarding appeals will be made within ten business days of submission to the city manager. 
(h)  Partial year service: If construction is begun on undeveloped residential property after January 1 of the service year, the City of Brunswick Finance Department shall bill the property owner upon the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for the property. The solid waste fee in such instance shall be assessed on a prorated basis with the owner paying 1/12 of the annual fee for each of the months or parts of months remaining in that year. This fee will be due in full and payable at the time of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. 
(i)  Uninhabitable property: Property designated by the City of Brunswick Building Inspector to be uninhabitable in accordance with the City of Brunswick Housing Code, may be excepted from the solid waste removal fee for the period of time the property is bound by such classification. Upon the removal of the uninhabitable classification, the owner of the property shall be assessed a pro rata solid waste removal fee for the remainder of that service year. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009; Ord. No. 1036, § 1, 4-16-2014) 
Sec. 18-11. - Air pollution controls. 
(a)  No person shall set fire to, or burn, any papers or other solid waste deposited at the disposal site or on the ground thereof. 
(b)  No garbage or other materials from which offensive or noisome odors emanate during combustion shall be burned outside of any building. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-12. - Acceptable solid waste. 
    The following classes of solid waste shall be acceptable for disposal at publicly owned and operated disposal sites: 
(1)  Garbage. 
(2)  Ashes, the residue from burning of combustible materials for fuel. 
(3)  Rubbish. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-13. - Unacceptable solid waste. 
    The following classes of solid waste shall not be acceptable for disposal at public expense on publicly owned and operated disposal sites: Industrial waste, solid or semisolid waste resulting from industrial processes in excessive quantities, as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-14. - Hazardous waste and dead animals. 
    When suitable personnel, area, equipment and time are available, hazardous waste and large dead animals over 100 pounds in weight may be accepted at the disposal site for final disposal in a separate and specifically prepared disposal area if necessary, at the discretion of the city manager who shall assess and collect for the city fees for such disposal. Interference with and delay of routine disposal operations shall be avoided by prior arrangement and scheduling of delivery to the disposal site by the owner of the hazardous waste or dead animals. Fees for hazardous waste disposal shall be based upon actual cost of disposal plus 25 percent of cost to cover records, land use, equipment maintenance, and administration. Fees for animal disposal shall be set from time to time by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-15. - Authorized sites. 
    Sites approved for final disposal of solid wastes shall be designated by appropriate signs posted near the roadside. Such sites shall be maintained in use until permanently closed in accordance with pertinent laws and regulations. At that time additional authorized sites shall be opened and publicized by posting and through the press. All solid waste shall be delivered and deposited at authorized disposal sites in accord with the directions and orders of the city manager or his representative in charge of operation except privately operated sites may be used for sanitary disposal of industrial waste or other specified waste upon approval of the city manager and upon receipt of a disposal area permit issued pursuant to regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-16. - Operating hours. 
    Authorized disposal sites shall be operated Monday through Saturday of each week, with the exception of holidays, from 8:00 a.m., to 6:00 p.m., inclusive. During such hours acceptable solid waste generated in the city, except industrial waste, shall be received for disposal from any person. Except for bona fide residents of the city disposing of garbage or refuse from his residence, a charge for landfill use will be made, as established from time to time by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-17. - Responsibility of users. 
(a)  Persons entering into contracts with the commission for collection of solid wastes shall sign and file with the city manager a general release which shall absolve the city, its officers and employees, from responsibility for any accident to such contractors or their employees or for damage to trucks or other property owned or operated by such contractors or employees when such accident or damage occurs at a city-operated disposal site or on the grounds thereof. 
(b)  No person shall enter a disposal site except when an attendant is present and during the hours and days prescribed in section 18-14, unless a specific agreement to do so has been executed by the city manager. All materials delivered and deposited for disposal on the grounds of disposal sites shall be the property of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-18. - Salvage. 
    No person shall be permitted to salvage, scavenge or reclaim any solid waste which has been delivered to a public disposal site for disposal except a person who has executed a contract for salvage rights with the city, in accordance with the rules and regulations of the state department of natural resources. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Secs. 18-19-18-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION PROCEDURES 

Sec. 18-36. - Collection by city. 
    All solid waste generated or accumulated in the incorporated areas of the city shall be collected, transported and disposed of by the city through its designated agents, employees or contract representatives. No other person shall collect, transport, or dispose of any solid waste generated or accumulated in the city except as provided. 
(1)  Private solid waste contractors, operating within areas approved by the city manager, must comply with this chapter and all applicable city ordinances, including licensing and franchising ordinances. 
(2)  Individual residents may transport their own solid waste to approved disposal sites, provided they comply with all applicable city, state, and federal ordinances and laws. Any individual resident who chooses to transport their own solid waste to an approved disposal site will remain liable for any pertinent solid waste fees. 
(3)  For backdoor waste collection services for disabled residents or elderly residents with medical hardships, there will be no additional charge with proof of disability or hardship from a licensed medical professional or other proof as deemed by the city manager or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-37. - Containers. 
(a)  Solid waste containers shall be provided by the owner or occupant of each residence, industry, place of business, congregation or institution. For individual residential properties the solid waste container shall be a 95-gallon container unless otherwise designated by the city manager or his or her designee or otherwise specified in this chapter. For all other structures and properties in the City of Brunswick such solid waste containers shall be either a 95-gallon container, a six-cubic yard container, an eight-cubic yard container, or another container as designated by the city manager or his or her designee unless otherwise specified in this chapter. 
(b)  All putrescible waste (including pet and animal body waste, but not including leaves and yard trimmings and not including rags, paper, cans, cartons and boxes which contain no putrescible matter) shall be placed for collection in sturdy, durable, rust-resistant, nonabsorbent, watertight containers which provide protection against intrusion or scattering of such waste by animals. Any waste containing pet or animal body waste shall be separately wrapped in unbroken, securely sealed containers prior to being placed in garbage containers. Disposable bags may be used for storage and collection of such putrescible waste and pet and animal body waste provided that disposable bags containing such waste must be placed for collection inside a sturdy solid waste container as otherwise required by this subsection. 
(c)  Non-putrescible waste, leaves and yard trimmings, and rags, paper, cans, cartons and boxes which contain no putrescible matter may be placed in disposable bags for collection, provided that such bags must be tied, must not be overfilled or overweighed, and must otherwise be used in a manner to avoid spillage and scattering. 
(d)  Containers for putrescible waste shall be equipped with handles and tight-fitting covers and shall have a capacity of not more than 32 gallons, provided that business, commercial and other establishments or entities which generate solid waste in quantities exceeding five cubic yards per week shall provide commercial containers of a design approved by the city manager. Such containers shall be suitable for dumping by all of the city's mechanized commercial collection equipment. 
(e)  It shall be unlawful for any person to place any garbage, trash or refuse for collection in any receptacle not meeting the requirements of this section. No wooden boxes, pails or barrels shall be used for garbage or refuse, and the collectors shall be required to remove all such boxes or barrels. 
(f)  In the event that any person shall have a receptacle for garbage or trash which shall not conform to the requirements of this chapter or shall become unacceptable by reason of use or other cause, the city manager or his or her designee shall place or cause to have placed a tag thereon notifying the owner thereof of such fact. In the event such receptacle is not replaced or repaired to conform to the requirements of this section prior to the next regularly scheduled pickup, the city manager shall have the authority to refuse to pick up garbage from such unacceptable receptacle, or to have the nonconforming container removed by the collectors. 
(g)  Any solid waste containers which are obtained on or after March 1, 2009, by any person within the city from the City of Brunswick shall be subject to a deposit fee. Such deposit fee shall apply to every solid waste container obtained on or after March 1, 2009, and shall be a deposit fee to be set by resolution of the city commission, from time to time. All solid waste containers which are obtained before March 1, 2009 shall be grandfathered in and shall not be liable for any deposit fee to the City of Brunswick. However, if a city resident shall choose to obtain an additional solid waste container or obtain a new solid waste container on or after March 1, 2009, then that container shall be subject to the aforementioned deposit fee. 
(h)  In the event that all fees for solid waste collection and disposal are not paid in a timely manner the City of Brunswick shall remove any and all solid waste containers of the delinquent customer until such time as all fees for solid waste collection and disposal are paid. Any solid waste container which has been collected by the City of Brunswick because fees for solid waste collection and disposal were not paid in a timely manner shall be subject to the provisions of subsection (g), above, regardless of whether the container is re-obtained by the customer before or after March 1, 2009. Therefore, any customer who has become delinquent in his payment of fees for solid wasted collection and disposal to the City of Brunswick and has had his solid waste container removed by the city, must pay all fees for solid waste collection and disposal owned to the City of Brunswick and a deposit fee to be set by resolution of the city commission, from time to time, to have such container returned. 
(i)  All delinquent customers shall continue to be charged for solid waste collection and disposal even after any and all solid waste containers have been removed by the City of Brunswick and shall be fully liable for any and all charges accrued whilst delinquent and whilst containers are not present. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-38. - Preparation. 
(a)  Garbage and rubbish shall be drained of excess liquid before being placed for collection. 
(b)  Rubbish, when placed in containers or bundles, must not be over 50 pounds gross weight when placed for collection. Limbs or cuttings shall not be over four feet in length and four inches in diameter, and shall be stacked separately, with the butt ends in the same direction. Leaves, straw and similar items must be placed for collection in neat piles, separate from all other rubbish, immediately behind the curb on curbed streets, and immediately adjacent to the roadway on uncurbed streets. In no event will they be placed in the gutter or drainage ditches. 
(c)  Larger items in size or weight shall be handled at special fees which may be established based upon size of crew, size and weight of the items, and time of service, with minimum charges set by resolution of the city commission. Further details for collection of such larger items is described below in section 18-46. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person to trim trees for compensation within the city unless the trimmings and limbs and trash resulting there from are immediately removed from the premises and placed or deposited by the contractor in a disposal site. 
(e)  Building materials, such as stone, dirt, plaster, lumber, brick, roofing, concrete, etc., or other materials from contract labors, shall not be collected or removed by the city. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-39. - Storage. 
(a)  No person shall place any solid waste in any street, public place, roadway, or on private premises except in proper containers for collection or under the express prior approval of the city manager. No person shall place any solid waste in any stream, lake or other body of water. 
(b)  Any unauthorized accumulation of solid waste on any premises is hereby declared to be a violation hereof and is prohibited. Failure to remove any existing accumulation of solid waste within such reasonable time as may be fixed by written notice of the city manager shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
(c)  Solid waste to be collected by the city or its representative shall be placed on the curb or roadway in front of the residence or establishment in which it has been accumulated, but not in the street, drainage ditches or in the gutter. 
(d)  Residential garbage containers shall not be placed further from the street than five feet beyond the rearmost projection of the residence building, except where pickup is made from the rear of the lot. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-40. - Scavenging. 
    No person other than the owner thereof, or an agent or employee of the city manager, or any employee of a person holding a contract with the city for collection of solid waste shall interfere with any container placed for the purpose of storing solid waste pending collection, or remove or take any of the contents thereof, or remove any such container from the location where same shall have been placed by the owner thereof, unless permission to do so has been granted by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-41. - Collection limitations. 
    No person shall contract for the collection, transportation, or disposal of solid waste who does not possess a current license for such business operation in the city. Applications for licenses shall be written and shall be considered after evidence has been presented to show that the applicant has received a current permit, appropriate to the type of business concerned, as required under the solid waste regulations of the state department of natural resources. Licenses shall then be issued in accordance with criteria established by the city manager after payment therefore has been made in full as set forth in section 18-8. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-42. - Private solid waste collectors. 
(a)  No private solid waste collector shall be allowed to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, or disposing of solid waste within the city limits of the City of Brunswick without first obtaining a license from the city. 
(b)  Private solid waste collectors must contract with the city commission to engage in the business of collecting, transporting or disposing of solid waste within the city limits of the City of Brunswick. Such private solid waste collectors must have obtained an appropriate solid waste permit in accordance with regulations of the state department of natural resources. Persons contracting for solid waste collection shall, before engaging in such business, be licensed by the city and shall conform to all regulations providing for safe and sanitary collection and transportation of waste to a point of disposal, and shall execute a bond to the city in the sum of not less than $100,000.00 with a responsible surety company duly authorized to do business in the state, to be approved by the commission who shall establish conditions for the full and faithful performance of all agreements and covenants in such contract. 
(c)  Any private solid waste collector who does not obtain a license from the City of Brunswick to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, or disposing of solid waste within the city limits of the City of Brunswick within 90 days of receiving written notice of the requirement to do so, shall be cited for each violation. For this section, every individual collection, transportation, and disposal shall count as a violation and a private solid waste contractor may be cited for each individual violation. 
(d)  A license granted pursuant to this chapter to any private solid waste collector shall be subject to the police power of the city to adopt and enforce general ordinances necessary to the safety and welfare of the public; and the private solid waste collector shall be required to comply with all applicable general laws and ordinances enacted by the city pursuant to such power. 
(e)  Licenses granted pursuant to this section of this chapter of the City Code of Brunswick shall be limited in scope as to allow the licensee to engage in the business of collecting, transporting, and disposing of solid waste within the city limits of the City of Brunswick, but not preventing other licensees from conducting business within the city limits and not preventing the city itself from conducting business within the city limits. 
(f)  Before a private solid waste contractor license shall be granted or renewed, the applicant shall pay a license fee in accordance with a fee scale or percentage scale which shall be established by the city commission by resolution from time to time. All private solid waste contactors operating in the City of Brunswick will be required to provide annual financial reports to the City of Brunswick indicating gross sales within the city limits of the City of Brunswick. 
(g)  Private solid waste contractors, operating within the city, may only operate in relation to commercial establishments within the City of Brunswick. 
(h)  Vehicles to be used on streets and highways for solid waste collection, transportation or disposal shall be kept clean and shall be certified in regard to highway safety by the motor vehicle division of the state department of public safety. Such vehicle bodies shall be in good condition and repair, covered and constructed in such manner that the contents thereof cannot be spilled, leaked or blown from the vehicle. The outside of the body shall be painted and identified by the name, telephone number and permit number of the person owning the collection business in letters and numbers not less than three inches high and easily legible. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-43. - Dead animal collection. 
    Small dead animals, not over 100 pounds in weight, if kept separate from garbage and rubbish, will be collected without charge upon notice to the city manager or his or her designee, provided that a charge will be made for all such animals collected from animal hospitals, kennels, pet shops and the like. Owners of large dead animals shall be responsible for their removal and disposal. The city manager may remove large dead animals upon request, and charge an appropriate fee there for. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-44. - Residential collection. 
    The phrase "residential collection," for the purposes of this section, means placing of cans and/or suitable containers at curbside as hereinbefore set forth on the days of collection. Cans placed on the public right-of-way shall be placed for collection by 8:00 a.m., and shall be removed on the day of collection not later than 12:00 midnight. Bins and other fixed structures are prohibited on the public way. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-45. - Roll-off containers. 
    The use of roll-off containers in the city is prohibited unless such roll-off container is obtained through the City of Brunswick Public Works Department, other department of the City of Brunswick as the city manager may designate, or other entity as the city manager may designate. Any roll-off container which is obtained for use in the city without the permission of the appropriate department or entity shall be in violation of this section and the person, persons, or business responsible for obtaining that roll-off container shall be found in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-46. - White goods, brown goods, and junk. 
    As described in section 18-38, larger items in size or weight shall be handled at special fees which may be established based upon size of crew, size and weight of the items, and time of service, with minimum charges set by resolution. These fees shall be determined by the City of Brunswick Public Works Department and such minimum fee for such collection may be set by the city commission from time to time by resolution. Larger items may be, but are not limited to, items classified in the below groups. All hazardous waste must be properly and legally removed from white goods, brown goods, and junk prior to the city collecting such items. 
(a)  White goods. 
(1)  Stoves. 
(2)  Ovens. 
(3)  Refrigerators. 
(4)  Dishwashers. 
(5)  Washer/dryer. 
(6)  Hot water heaters. 
(7)  Microwaves. 
(8)  Gas and oil heaters. 
(9)  Other similar items and appliances. 
(b)  Brown goods and junk. 
(1)  Furniture. 
(2)  Mattresses and box springs. 
(3)  Windows and mirrors (must be taped and wrapped to prevent shattering). 
(4)  Lawn equipment (with all gas and oil properly drained). 
(5)  Automobile tires. 
(6)  Carpet/flooring. 
(7)  Plumbing/electrical materials. 
(8)  Car parts. 
(9)  Large electronic goods (televisions, computers, etc.). 
(10)  Other similar items. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Sec. 18-47. - Overflow trash. 
    The city will pick up excess solid waste placed next to any city provided container, such as, but not limited to a 95-gallon container, a six cubic yard container, or an eight cubic yard container, as long as such excess solid waste is placed in a bag which has been approved by the City of Brunswick Public Works Department Director or his or her designee and as long as the current fees for any and all containers for that specific and particular property have been paid and there are no past due fees. The City of Brunswick Public Works Director or his or her designee shall issue in writing which type or types of bags are appropriate for city residents to place excess solid waste next to their city container. 
(Ord. No. 1010, § 1, 2-18-2009) 
Chapter 19 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-216 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; housing, ch. 12; zoning, ch. 23; subdivision regulations, app. B. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority over streets and sidewalks, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4), O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street systems generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-90 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 19-1. - Bills, posters, circulars, etc.-Distributing. 
    All bills, posters, circulars or advertising matter, when distributed in the city, shall be delivered at the doors of residences personally to an inmate of such residences and not in any case left loose to be blown about the premises or streets. 
(Code 1953, § 3.2) 
Sec. 19-2. - Same-Posting. 
    No person shall stick or post any handbill or placard of any description upon any public or private building or upon any post, fence, billboard, or any other structure or thing which is the property of another, without permission of the occupant or owner of such property. 
(Code 1953, § 3.3) 
Sec. 19-3. - Width of sidewalks, roadways, etc.-Generally. 
    The widths of sidewalks, roadways, street parks and center-of-street grass plats, on all the streets and classes of streets in the city shall be as follows: 
(1)  On each 90-foot street in the business section the width of the sidewalk on each side of the street shall be 12 feet and the width of the roadway shall be 66 feet. 
(2)  On each 90-foot street in the residence section the width of each sidewalk shall be eight feet, and there shall be two roadways, the width of each of which shall be 25 feet. 
(3)  On each 80-foot street in the business section, each sidewalk shall be 12 feet in width, and the roadway shall be 56 feet wide. 
(4)  On each 80-foot street in the residence section, the width of each sidewalk shall be eight feet in width, and there shall be two roadways, each 20 feet wide. 
(5)  On each 60-foot street in the residence section, each sidewalk shall be six feet wide, there shall be two parks, each six feet wide, and one roadway 36 feet wide; except on Norwich Street, north of F Street on which portion of such street the sidewalks shall be eight feet wide and the two parks shall be four feet wide. 
(6)  On each 50-foot street in the business section, each sidewalk shall be ten feet wide and the one roadway shall be 30 feet wide. 
(7)  On each 50-foot street in the residence section, each sidewalk shall be five feet wide, there shall be two parks, each five feet wide and one roadway 30 feet wide. 
(8)  On each 45-foot street in the business section, each sidewalk shall be nine feet wide and there shall be one roadway 27 feet wide. 
(9)  On each 45-foot street in the residence section each sidewalk shall be six feet wide, there shall be two parks, each three feet wide and one roadway 27 feet wide. 
(Code 1953, § 33.1) 
Sec. 19-4. - Same-Future street improvements. 
    All future street improvements in the city shall be planned and executed so that the same shall conform to and comply with the provisions of section 19-3. On any street where sidewalks or other street improvements may now be constructed or in process of construction, the city reserves the right and power to compel the property owners to adjust or extend such sidewalks or other improvements so as to make the same comply with the provisions and requirements of the preceding section. 
(Code 1953, § 33.2) 
Sec. 19-5. - Underground connections generally-Permit required for excavations. 
    No person shall be permitted to make any excavation or hole in any street, lane, alley or sidewalk in the city for the purpose of laying gas pipes, water pipes, sewer or drain pipes or underground conduits, without first obtaining a written permit so to do signed by the city engineer or director of public works, or his authorized agent. 
(Code 1953, § 33.8) 
Sec. 19-6. - Same-Depth of pipes. 
    All pipes laid under sidewalks on shelled, graveled or improved streets shall be laid at least 20 inches below the top of the street curb or to such depth as may be designated by the city engineer or director of public works, or his authorized agent, in any particular instance, in case no curb exists and on unimproved streets. 
(Code 1953, § 33.9) 
Sec. 19-7. - Same-Trenches not to be filled until work inspected. 
    No trench made for the purpose of laying mains or service pipes shall be filled until the city engineer or director of public works shall have inspected and approved the same. 
(Code 1953, § 33.10) 
Sec. 19-8. - Same-Trenches not to be left in unsafe condition. 
    It shall be unlawful for any gas or water company, or servant of such company, or any plumber, or any other person, after having opened a trench or hole in any street, alley, lane or square, to keep or leave the same in an unsafe condition. 
(Code 1953, § 33.11) 
Sec. 19-9. - Excavations for purpose of placing poles, planting trees, etc. 
(a)  No person shall be permitted to make any excavations or hole in any street, lane, alley or sidewalk in the city for the purpose of placing poles, planting trees or for any other purpose whatsoever without first having obtained a written permit to do so from the city engineer and director of public works or his authorized agent. 
(b)  All poles or trees placed in any street, lane, alley or sidewalk shall be placed at such points as shall be designated by stakes driven by the city engineer and director of public works or his authorized agent. 
(Code 1953, § 33.15) 
Sec. 19-10. - Temporary excavations or obstructions-Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make any temporary excavation or to place any temporary obstruction or any pile of sand, brick or other paving or building material in or upon any street, sidewalk, square, lane or alley of the city, without first obtaining written permission so to do from the city manager. 
(Code 1953, § 33.16) 
Sec. 19-11. - Same-To be lighted at night. 
    Any person who shall make any temporary excavation or who shall place or who shall own or control any temporary excavations or temporary obstruction, pile of sand, brick or other building or paving material in or upon any street, sidewalk, square, lane or alley of the city, under the provisions of section 19-10, shall see to it that from darkness to daylight of each night there shall be displayed a red light on each side and on each end of such temporary excavation or temporary obstruction, pile of sand, brick or other paving or building material. Such person shall see to it that such light shall be of such brightness that the same can be easily seen a block away. 
(Code 1953, § 33.17) 
Sec. 19-12. - Sidewalks to be kept clean. 
    It shall be the duty of every person owning or renting any building or lot lying upon any street in the city to keep the sidewalks in a clean condition. 
(Code 1953, § 33.19) 
Sec. 19-13. - Fences, steps, etc., encroaching on streets, sidewalks, etc.-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to allow or erect any fence, railing, platform or steps, portico or other structure beyond the lot line, or so as to encroach on any street, square, alley or sidewalk of the city, except as provided in chapter 5 of this Code. 
(Code 1953, § 33.20) 
Sec. 19-14. - Same-Removal within 24 hours after notice. 
    Any person maintaining any encroachment under the provisions of section 19-13 shall remove the same within 24 hours after notice so to do by the marshal or other officer. 
(Code 1953, § 33.21) 
Sec. 19-15. - Same-Failure to remove after notice; removal by city; cost. 
    Upon failure or refusal of the person maintaining any encroachment under the provisions of section 19-13 to remove the same in obedience to the notice provided for in section 19-14, the same shall be removed by the marshal, and the cost of removal shall be collected from the person so offending by execution as in other cases. 
(Code 1953, § 33.22) 
Sec. 19-16. - Obstructions prohibited-By erection of stands, lunch wagons, etc. 
    No person shall erect, place or maintain in, upon or over any sidewalk, street, alley, or other public place in the city, any fruit stand, shoeshining stand, flower stand, vegetable stand, lunch wagon, table, box, bin or other arrangement or structure for the display or sale of goods, wares or merchandise, or for the pursuit of any occupation whatsoever. 
(Code 1953, § 33.26) 
Sec. 19-17. - Same-By storage of merchandise, etc. 
    No person shall use any sidewalk, street, alley or public place for the storage of personal property, goods, wares or merchandise of any kind; nor shall any person place or cause to be placed in or upon any sidewalk, street, alley or public place any barrel, box, hogshead, crate, package or other obstruction of any kind, or permit the same to remain thereon longer than is necessary to convey such article to or from the premises abutting on such sidewalk. 
(Code 1953, § 33.27) 
Secs. 19-18-19-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADDRESSING SYSTEM[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 948, § 1, adopted Mar. 6, 2002, deleted former art. II of this chapter and added new provisions as art. II as herein set out. Former art. II, §§ 19-36-19-42, pertained to house numbering and derived from the 1953 Code, §§ 33.38-33.44. 

Sec. 19-36. - Title, scope, intent and administration. 
(a)  Title. This article shall be entitled the "City of Brunswick Addressing Code." 
(b)  Authority and scope This article is enacted pursuant to the provisions of the Georgia Emergency Telephone Number "911" Service Act of 1977, at Section 120 et seq. of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as amended. All powers granted to the governing authority of the county by the statute are hereby incorporated by reference so as to be assumed, delegated and granted pursuant to this article. 
(c)  Intent. The purpose of this article is to enhance the easy and rapid location of properties by law enforcement, fire, rescue, and emergency medical service personnel in the incorporated area of the city. It is found and declared by the city commission that establishing a physical addressing process will ensure that the new addresses will provide the best address information for the enhanced 9-1-1 database which can be used by emergency service providers, as well as by mail delivery services, utilities, delivery services, and others, for the health, safety and welfare of the people of the city. 
(d)  Administration. The county GIS department is hereby authorized to and shall approve road names and assign numbers to all properties, and shall administer this article. The GIS department, fire department, and police department will coordinate the approval of road names. All requests shall be submitted to GIS. GIS will relay requests to the police and fire departments for approval. GIS will strive to provide address approval the same day unless a problem or concern exists. An example of a problem could consist of a road name request that already exists within the same ESN area. These problems or concerns will be submitted to the public safety committee for review and approval. Members of the public safety committee are the police chief, fire chief, heads of utilities and public works, or their designees. The public safety committee will make a determination within in five working days of receipt of the problem or concern from GIS. The decision of the public safety committee is final and binding on all parties. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Sec. 19-37. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated. 
    Addressing means the assigning of a numerical address and street name, which name shall be numerical, to each location within the incorporated area of the city and replaces any route and box numbers currently in place in the "911" database. 
    ESN means emergency service number, a geographic overlay defining different emergency service areas. 
    GIS means geographic information system, or its successor, presently a department of the county government, as established by the county board of commissioners. 
    Person means owner of a house, dwelling unit, or place of business. 
    Property means any lot on which a permanent structure or building has been erected or could be placed. 
    Road means any highway, road, street, avenue, lane, private way or easement, or similar paved, gravel, or dirt passage way. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Sec. 19-38. - Naming system. 
    All roads that serve two or more properties shall be named. A road name approved by the GIS department for addressing purposes which has been assigned to a private road shall not constitute or imply acceptance of the road as a public way and shall include the letters "P.E." after the name. Each P.E. (private easement) must be named. The following criteria shall govern the naming system: 
(1)  No two roads shall be approved with the same name in the same ESN, except when the roads intersect perpendicularly to one another and the names are followed by different suffixes (e.g., Oak Road and Oak Lane). This exception shall only be granted if the road name does not currently exist elsewhere in the same ESN. 
(2)  No two roads shall be approved with similar sounding names (e.g., Beach Street and Peach Street) unless they exist in a different ESN. 
(3)  Existing duplicate road names will be changed unless roads are located in: 
a.  Different geographic areas, such as the mainland of unincorporated Glynn County, St. Simon Island, and Sea Island; or 
b.  Different emergency service number zones (ESN). 
(4)  Existing duplicate roads will be renamed in the following order: 
a.  Road impacting the larger number of residents shall maintain the existing name. 
b.  Length of time road name has been in use. 
(5)  The main entrance into a subdivision shall have the same name as the subdivision unless it constitutes a public safety issue. 
(6)  Each road shall have the same name throughout its entire length in the incorporated area of the city. When a state highway has numerous names, the highway number will be used as the E-911 road name. 
(7)  No two subdivisions, condominiums, apartment complexes, hotels/motels, or shopping centers within the same ESN will be approved with the same name. 
(8)  Shopping centers shall have a road name assigned to the general primary public access drive of the shopping center. The road shall have the same name as the shopping center as approved by the GIS department. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Sec. 19-39. - Numbering system. 
    Assignment of address numbers shall be based on linear feet. In residential areas, address numbers shall be assigned every 60 feet along both sides of a road where possible. In commercial areas, address numbers shall be assigned every ten feet along both sides of a road where possible. The following criteria shall govern the numbering system: 
(1)  Four-way and "T" type intersections shall be numbered in the same manner as residences. 
(2)  Numbers shall be assigned from the point of beginning of each road. For dead end roads, numbering shall originate at the intersection of the adjacent road and terminate at the dead end road. From the point of beginning, address numbers shall be assigned even numbers on the right side and odd numbers on the left side of the road. 
(3)  Numbering shall begin at the main entrance to subdivisions and trailer parks. All other roads shall be numbered from the southern beginning point and proceed in a northerly direction, or from the western beginning point and proceed in an easterly direction. From the point of beginning, address numbers shall be assigned even numbers on the right side and odd numbers on the left side of the road. If a "911" accurate addressing system is presently in place, then new address assignments or any changes shall follow the existing "911" addressing system. 
(4)  The number assigned to each building shall be that of the numbered interval falling closest to the primary entrance. If the primary entrance cannot be seen from the street, then the number shall be that of the interval falling closest to the driveway of the building. 
(5)  Every multi-residential building with separate entrances shall have a separate number. For example, duplexes will have two separate numbers; condominiums will each have a separate number. 
(6)  Businesses, apartments and multi-tenant (three or more dwelling units) buildings shall have an address assigned to the primary entrance of the building. Apartment or suite numbers shall be assigned in ascending order from south to north or west to east end of the building. 
(7)  Sequential addressing numbers shall be assigned on lots in approved subdivisions with restrictive covenants assuring only one dwelling structure per lot. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Sec. 19-40. - Designation of numbers and duty to display. 
    All persons, by the date set forth in section 19-42 herein, shall display and maintain in legible condition the assigned numbers in a conspicuous place, as follows: 
(1)  Number on the building or residence. Where the building or residence is within 40 feet from the edge of the road right-of-way, the assigned number shall be displayed on the front of the building or residence near the primary entrance visible from the street or parking lot providing general public access. The same requirement applies to buildings, dwelling units, and place of business within apartments, condominiums, and nonresidential developments located on private streets. 
(2)  Number at the street line. Where the building or residence is over 40 feet from the edge of the road right-of-way, regardless whether the road is a private or public way or easement, the assigned number shall be displayed on a post, fence, wall, mailbox, or on some structure at the property line next to the walk or access drive to the building or residence. 
(3)  Size and color of number. The standard number shall be not less than three inches in height for residential, or less than six inches in height for non-residential and multi-tenant buildings, and with a contrasting background. The numbers shall not be more than one inch apart or equal to the width of any number except the number "1". Numerals shall be maintained in a legible condition and shall be visible at night. 
(4)  Temporary numbers. Each person constructing a building of any kind shall, during such construction, erect or post a temporary number, designated by "0" by the GIS department unless a permanent number can be assigned. This number shall not be smaller than five inches wide and 12 inches high and shall be posted not further than ten feet from the front of the lot upon which construction is being done. The number shall remain posted until a permanent number is assigned, erected or posted. This subsection (4) shall not apply to building permits issued for ancillary buildings that are accessory to the main building such as a separate vehicular garage, pool house or storage building. A temporary number will be assigned only when a permanent number cannot be assigned. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Sec. 19-41. - Construction, subdivisions, and business licenses. 
(a)  Construction. Whenever any residence or other building is constructed or renovated, it shall be the duty of the owner to obtain an address number or verify the accuracy of the existing address number through the GIS department. The owner shall obtain or verify, as applicable. 
(b)  Subdivisions. It shall be the duty of any person who intends to subdivide property to obtain approval from the GIS department for any proposed road name in the subdivision. The proposed name of the subdivision and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivisions or streets in the same ESN, except as set forth herein. 
(c)  Business licenses. All applications for new or renewed business licenses issued by the city finance department will be reviewed by the GIS department for correctness and compliance with this addressing article. Compliance with this subparagraph (c) shall be enforced by the city code enforcement officer or such other person as may be designated in writing by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Sec. 19-42. - Effective date, notification, compliance. 
(a)  This article shall become effective upon approval of the city commission. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the GIS department to notify by certified mail each property owner and the U.S. post office of a new address at least 90 days before the effective date of its use. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of each property owner to comply with this article, including the posting of new address numbers and the removal of old numbers within 90 days following notification of a new address. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Sec. 19-43. - Violations and penalties. 
(a)  Penalties for each violation shall be as follows: 
Minimum Fines 
of Not Less Than (1) First occurrence Written warning (2) Second occurrence $100.00 (3) Third occurrence $200.00 (4) Later occurrences $300.00 to $1,000.00  
The written warning for a first occurrence shall be hand delivered or mailed by first class mail and certified return receipt requested to the location of the house, dwelling unit or place of business prior to the issuance of a citation for violation of this article. Failure to make, deliver, mail or receive the first occurrence warning shall not affect any subsequent enforcement efforts nor the penalty for any subsequent violation of this article. 
(b)  The violation of any provision of this article may be enjoined as a nuisance by issuing a citation for an article violation returnable to the city municipal court. Such action may be maintained notwithstanding that other adequate remedies at law exist. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Sec. 19-44. - Enforcement. 
    The city code enforcement officer, or such other person as may be designated by the city manager in writing, in conjunction with GIS, will be responsible for enforcing the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Sec. 19-45. - Construction. 
    This article shall be cumulative of other ordinances and code provisions applicable to property and improvements in the city and shall not repeal other ordinances and code provisions pertaining to similar subjects and procedures, except in the event of actual conflict between the provisions. 
(Ord. No. 948, § 1, 3-6-2002) 
Secs. 19-46-19-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POLES AND WIRES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Cable television, ch. 6. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to reasonably exercise police power over the erection and maintenance of poles, wires and other facilities of electric suppliers, O.C.G.A. § 46-3-15. 

Sec. 19-61. - Locations and specifications. 
    All poles, posts, crossbars, wires and other fixtures, owned or used by any telegraph, telephone, electric light or power company, placed in any street, alley or public place, in the city shall be so placed and used under the supervision and direction of the city manager. The placing of such poles shall not be more than 12 nor less than ten inches from the outside of the curb or sidewalk. Where such poles belong to a company having an electrician it shall have notice and if such electrician and the city manager do not agree the matter shall be referred to the city commission for determination, and in order that such poles may be placed upon the sidewalks all obstructions above the sidewalks in the way of doing so shall be removed by the owner thereof and at his expense under the direction of the building inspector, before such poles are required to be placed. Poles shall not be less than 25 feet in height nor less than eight inches nor more than 18 inches in diameter. 
(Code 1953, § 28.1) 
Sec. 19-62. - Obstructing streets; removal of superfluous poles. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to direct the placing of poles and wires in the streets, alleys and public places of the city so that they shall cause as little obstruction as possible either to public travel on such thoroughfares or to the private use and enjoyment of adjacent property. It shall also be his duty to compel the removal of superfluous poles. 
(Code 1953, § 28.2) 
Sec. 19-63. - Failure to remove poles after city manager's order. 
    Any person owning and using any poles who shall refuse or fail, after five days' notice from the city manager to remove any poles deemed by him unsuitable, unsafe or improperly located, or the location of which he shall require to be changed, shall upon conviction be punished in accordance with section 1-6. The erection or use of any poles rejected or condemned by the city manager shall subject the offender on conviction to a like penalty; provided, that any company having an electrician disagreeing with the city manager, such disagreement shall be referred to the city commission for determination. 
(Code 1953, § 28.3) 
Sec. 19-64. - Disconnection of "dead" wires. 
    The city manager shall require the owner to disconnect at the pole all wires, except telephone wires, that have not been used for 30 days and which are known as "dead" wires. All dead wires of telephone companies shall be detached from the buildings with which they have been connected. 
(Code 1953, § 28.4) 
Sec. 19-65. - Poles allotted and wires to be confined in zones; topmost pole zone reserved for city. 
    On any pole of any electric light, power, street railway, telephone or telegraph company used jointly by two or more such companies, each company shall be allotted a special zone, and shall confine its wires to that zone. Spaces shall be measured from the tops of poles downward, and the topmost zone on every pole shall at all times be reserved for the free use of the city in stringing its fire alarm or police telegraph wires. 
(Code 1953, § 28.5) 
Sec. 19-66. - Use of trees prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to attach any electric light, telegraph, telephone or other similar wire to any tree upon any of the public streets, squares, lanes or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1953, § 28.7) 
Secs. 19-67-19-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - COMPLETE STREETS 

Sec. 19-70. - Complete streets. 
(a)  All transportation projects in the city shall create complete streets that allow safe and convenient travel along and across streets for users of all ages and abilities and for all modes of transportation, including motorists, bicyclists, public transportation vehicles and their passengers, and pedestrians. 
(b)  Subsection (a) shall apply to all transportation projects conducted by, or using funds awarded by, the city, or any other local, state, or federal agency. This shall include new construction, reconstruction, resurfacing, restoration, repaving, and rehabilitation of highways, roads, and streets. 
(c)  The City of Brunswick shall modify its procedures, documents, training programs, and performance measures within one year of the effective date of this Act to ensure that the needs of all users of the highways, roads, and streets in Brunswick are included in all phases of all transportation projects, including funding, planning, designing, operating, and maintaining transportation infrastructure. 
(d)  The City of Brunswick shall develop and/or adapt design manuals, standards, and guidelines based on the latest and best practices of street design, construction, operations, and maintenance as these apply to bicycle, pedestrian, transit, and highway facilities. All manuals, standards, and guidelines must be made publicly available. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 19-71. - Exceptions to complete streets requirements. 
(a)  A transportation project shall not be required to accommodate the needs of a particular user group if the City Engineer, Director of Public Works, or other senior management personnel determines in writing that: 
(1)  The use of the transportation facility by the particular user group is prohibited by law; 
(2)  The cost of accommodating the needs of the particular user group for the transportation project would be excessively disproportionate to the current or future need or probable use of the facilities by the particular user group; 
(3)  There is a demonstrated absence of future need by the particular user group, as determined by factors including current and future land use, current and projected user volumes, population density, and crash data; or 
(4)  The adverse impacts of accommodating the needs of the particular user group significantly outweigh the benefits. 
(b)  The determination shall be supported by data and written documentation. The determination shall identify the applicability of an exception for each user group whose needs will not be accommodated by the transportation project. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 19-72. - Advisory board. 
    The city's development review team (DRT) shall act as an advisory board to help the city engineering and public works departments comply with the Complete Streets Act and to provide ongoing feedback related to the implementation of the Complete Streets Act. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 19-73. - Program evaluation and reporting. 
(a)  The city engineering or public works department, in conjunction with any department or agency that plans or implements transportation projects, shall establish benchmarks reflecting the ability of all users to travel safely and conveniently along highways, roads, and streets within the agency's jurisdiction. 
Examples of such benchmarks may include: 
(1)  New miles of bicycle lanes and sidewalks; new street trees or plantings; the number of new curb ramps and improved street crossings; and improved signage; 
(2)  Measurements regarding existing levels of service for different modes of transport and categories of users, including public transportation ridership; 
(3)  Collision statistics by neighborhood and mode of transportation, as well as bicycle and pedestrian injuries and fatalities; 
(4)  Other benchmarks to track the safety, functionality, and actual use of the neighborhoods and areas within the City of Brunswick by each category of users. 
(b)  Each such department or agency also shall develop plans and set goals to ensure the successful implementation of the Complete Streets Act in low- and moderate-income communities. On or before June 30, 2018, each such department or agency shall prepare an initial report to identify barriers, and propose solutions, to successful implementation of the Complete Streets Act in low- and moderate-income communities. 
(c)  Each such department or agency shall collect and monitor data to determine compliance with the established benchmarks. 
(d)  Each such agency shall provide annual reports to the city planning, development and codes department (PDC) to allow the department to evaluate implementation of the Complete Streets Act. Each annual report shall include the data collected pursuant to section 19-73 as well as a list of transportation projects initiated or completed during that fiscal year. The report also shall include a list of on-going transportation projects. If any exceptions are applied to transportation projects pursuant to section 19-71 herein, such projects and the relevant exceptions should be identified in the annual report. 
(e)  All benchmarks and reports shall be made publicly available online. 
(f)  For the purpose of this section, "low income community" refers to any census tract that meets one of the following criteria (as reported in the most recently completed decennial census published by the U.S. Bureau of the Census): 
(1)  The poverty rate for the census tract is at least 20 percent; or 
(2)  For a community within a metropolitan area, the MFI for a census tract does not exceed 80 percent of the greater of statewide MFI or metropolitan area MFI; or 
(g)  For the purpose of this section, "moderate income community" refers to any population whose income is between 81 and 95 percent of the MFI for the area. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 19-74. - Effective date. 
    The Complete Streets Act shall take effect on the date of final adoption by the City of Brunswick City Commission, provided that it shall not apply to any transportation project for which a preliminary design has been completed on or before said adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1048, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Chapter 20 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration, ch. 2. 
State Law reference- Taxation power of municipal governments, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § IV; revenue and taxation, O.C.G.A. tit. 48. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 20-1. - Administration. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city clerk, as ex-officio tax commissioner, shall be charged with the duty to administer the imposition, collection, and enforcement of all taxes and special assessments levied or imposed by the city in accordance with the administrative procedures set forth in this article. The city clerk shall be assisted by the finance director and the city marshal, who shall have specific responsibilities set forth hereinafter. In any case where this article does not specifically provide a procedure, said officers shall act in the manner established for the collection of state and county taxes under applicable state law. 
(b)  In determining the fair market value of property within its taxing jurisdiction, the city shall use the fair market value as determined for the property for county ad valorem tax purposes, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-352. 
(c)  Following adoption of the budget for each fiscal year, the city commission shall adopt a resolution setting the millage rate upon which property subject to ad valorem tax will be billed for the current tax year. Prior to adoption of the mileage rate, the commission shall publish notice of the proposed ad valorem tax rate, as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-32. Millage rates shall be calculated using 40 percent of the assessed fair market value of the property upon which the tax is levied. 
(d)  The city clerk shall cause a bill to be sent to all taxpayers at the address last shown on the tax digest by regular U.S. mail, with adequate postage thereon to assure delivery; provided, however, that failure of the taxpayer to receive a bill shall not constitute grounds for nonpayment or late payment of the tax. The bill shall state the location or description of the property taxed, the fair market value of the property (100 percent) and its taxable value (40 percent of fair market value), the net amount of tax due thereon, and the due date after which taxes shall be in default. The bill shall also state such other information as may be required by law, including the information required by O.C.G.A. § 48-8-91 with respect to proceeds of the local option sales tax if applicable. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999) 
Sec. 20-2. - Due date; payment; interest on past due taxes. 
(a)  All ad valorem taxes shall be due and payable in full within 60 days after notice, or on such date as the commission shall establish, not less than 60 days after notice, unless the due date falls on a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday, in which case it shall be postponed until the first day following that is not a Saturday, Sunday or legal holiday. Supplemental ad valorem taxes and special assessments shall be due and payable on the date specified in the ordinance or resolution imposing the tax or assessments. 
(b)  All taxes and assessments imposed by the city shall be paid in full in legal tender of the United States; except where specially authorized by law or ordinance, no partial payments shall be accepted. 
(c)  Taxes and special assessments shall bear interest at an annual rate equal to the bank prime loan rate as posted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System in statistical release H. 15 or any publication that may supersede it, plus three percent, to accrue monthly. Such annual interest rate shall be determined for each calendar year based on the first weekly posting of statistical release H. 15 on or after January 1 of each calendar year. Interest shall begin to accrue from the date the tax or assessment is due until the date the tax or assessment is paid. For purposes of this section, any period of less than one month shall be considered to be one full month. The city clerk shall be authorized to waive the collection of any interest, in whole or in part, due the city on unpaid taxes or assessments whenever or to the extent that the clerk reasonably determines that the delay in payment was attributable to action or inaction of the clerk's office. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999; Ord. No. 1054, § 1, 3-7-2018) 
Sec. 20-3. - Penalties. 
(a)  All penalties imposed by this article are part of the tax or assessment and are to be collected as such. The proceedings to collect the original tax, the tax constituted from penalties imposed, and the interest shall all be conducted in the same manner. Any provision of law for criminal prosecution shall not operate to relieve any taxpayer of any tax, penalty or interest imposed by this article. 
(b)  In any instance in which any taxpayer willfully fails to pay a tax or assessment within 120 days of the due date, such person shall pay a penalty of five percent of the amount of the tax due, together with interest as specified herein. After 120 days from the imposition of the initial penalty, an additional penalty of five percent of any tax amount remaining due shall be imposed, together with interest as specified by law. If any tax amount remains due after 120 days from the imposition of such additional penalty, a penalty of five percent shall be imposed, together with interest as specified by law. Should any tax amount remain due 120 days after such date, a penalty of five percent shall be imposed, together with interest as specified by law. The aggregate amount of penalties imposed pursuant to this subsection shall not exceed an amount equal to 20 percent of the principal amount of the tax originally due. 
(c)  The city commission may waive, in whole or in part, the collection of any amount due as a penalty under this article to the extent that said body finds and determines that the default giving rise to the penalty was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect or disregard of this article. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999; Ord. No. 1054, § 1, 3-7-2018) 
Sec. 20-4. - Executions on delinquent taxes and assessments. 
(a)  After the last day for payment of taxes and assessments has arrived, the city clerk shall notify the taxpayer in writing of the fact that the taxes have not been paid and that, unless paid within 30 days an execution shall be issued. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions for the nonpayment of taxes and assessments at any time after 30 days have elapsed since giving notice as provided in subsection (a) above. The execution shall identify the defendant in fi.fa. (taxpayer), the tax year(s) for which the execution is issued and the amount thereof. Executions shall be directed to "all and singular the sheriffs and constables of the state." 
(c)  The city clerk shall cause all executions issued for delinquent taxes on real property to be recorded on the general execution docket in the county prior to any tax sale. All executions issued for delinquent taxes on personal property or special assessments shall be recorded on the general execution docket in any county where any property of the taxpayer can be found. 
(d)  All executions issued shall continue to bear interest and penalties at the rates established in this article for delinquent taxes and assessments. 
(e)  The city clerk shall cause all executions to be placed in the hands of the city marshal for collection or levy and sale of property. The marshal shall exercise his best efforts to collect the full amount of taxes and assessments due, together with all interest, penalties, and any costs due thereon, from the defendant in fi.fa. In the event he is unable to do so, the marshal shall levy the execution on a sufficient amount of the property of the defendant in fi.fa., whether real or personal, to satisfy the obligations due at a sale to be held and conducted in accordance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999) 
Sec. 20-5. - Levy of executions; sale of property. 
(a)  The chief of police is hereby designated as the marshal of the city, and he and any deputy marshal designated by him shall be responsible for carrying out the duties specified in this article. The marshal shall be subject to being ruled for money in his hands arising from the public sale of any property pursuant to process issued by the city clerk. After first paying the city clerk the amount due on any process under which the sale was made, the marshal shall pay any surplus to any lawful claimant holding an interest subordinate to the lien for taxes, else to the defendant in fi.fa. 
(b)  In all cases of levying on real property, written notice of the levy shall be given to the defendant in fi.fa. and to any tenants in possession personally or by certified mail within five days of the levy. If the land is unoccupied, a copy of the notice of levy shall also be conspicuously posted on the land. In the case of personal property, the marshal shall enter the same on the execution and plainly describe the property levied on and the amount of the interest of the defendant in fi.fa. therein. 
(c)  Whenever any real property is levied upon for taxes or assessments, it shall be the duty of the marshal, before proceeding to advertise the property for sale, to give 20 days' written notice of the levy to the record owner(s) of the property and the holder of each security deed of record. The 20-day period shall begin to run from the time the notice is personally delivered or, when delivered by registered or certified mail with return receipt requested, from the date of mailing. The notice shall contain a description of the land levied upon, the name of the owner, the year or years for which the taxes were assessed, and a statement of the amount of taxes due, together with accrued costs. The marshal shall keep a copy of the notice on which he shall enter the date the notice was delivered or mailed and how, where, and to whom the notice was delivered. The marshal shall file the copy with the city clerk. 
(d)  When a levy is made upon real or personal property, the property shall be advertised and sold by the marshal in the same manner as provided for executions and judicial sales; provided, however, in addition to such other notice as may be required by law, the defendant in fi.fa. shall be given at least ten days' written notice of such sale by registered or certified mail. The notice shall be addressed to the taxpayer at the last known address listed in the records of the county tax commissioner. In addition, if the United States has a claim or lien on the property subject to being sold and such lien was filed or recorded more than 30 days before the proposed sale, the marshal shall cause written notice of the sale to be given to the Secretary of the Treasury or his delegate not less than 25 days before the sale. Notice may be given either by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. 
(e)  The marshal shall publish weekly for four weeks in the official legal organ of the county in which the sale will be conducted an advertisement of the date, place, and hours during which the sale will be conducted, together with a full and complete description of the property to be sold, making known the names of the owner(s) of record and any person who may be in possession of the property. The notice shall state the property is being sold for collection of taxes due to the city and the tax year(s) for which execution has been issued. 
(f)  Sales of property under execution shall be made by the marshal at City Hall, in the meeting room of the city commission, on the first Tuesday in each month between the hours of 10:00 a.m. and 4:00 p.m. eastern standard time or daylight savings time, whichever is applicable, and at public outcry to the highest bidder for cash; provided however, should the first Tuesday of the month fall on New Year's Day or Independence Day, such sales shall take place on the immediately following Wednesday. The purchaser shall look for himself as to the title and soundness of all property sold under tax executions and neither the marshal conducting the sale nor the city may make any representations or warranty of title, condition, or fitness for a particular purpose, expressed or implied. 
(g)  The marshal shall sell the property to the highest bidder for cash, and upon collection of the sales price, make a deed or bill of sale to the purchaser. Any person who becomes the purchaser of any property sold at the sale, who fails or refuses to comply with the terms of sale when requested by the marshal to do so shall be liable for the amount of the purchase money. It shall be the option of the marshal either to proceed against the purchaser for the full amount of the purchase money or to resell the property and then proceed against the first purchaser for any deficiency. A tax deed for real property or bill of sale for personal property, made and delivered as evidence of a sale for taxes conducted pursuant to this article shall convey the title as effectually as if the sale were made by the person against whom the process was issued. Sales of personal property shall be final; real property sold by virtue of an execution issued for the collection of taxes or for any special assessments is subject to redemption rights of the defendant in fi.fa or any person having any right, title or interest in or lien upon such property at the time of levy and sale. Recitals in a deed or bill of sale under power of sale for taxes shall be prima facie evidence of the facts recited in the instrument. The marshal shall put the purchaser in possession of the property so sold; provided, however, the purchaser of real property is not entitled to be placed in possession until after the time for redemption has expired. 
(h)  Whenever no bids are forthcoming on property to be sold for taxes after the property has been offered for a reasonable time, the marshal may either re-advertise and sell the property at a later date or abandon the property. The marshal shall make a proper notation on the execution whenever property levied upon and exposed for sale has been abandoned due to lack of bids. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999) 
Sec. 20-6. - Bidding by city at tax sales; disposition of property acquired. 
(a)  If during any sale of property for taxes and after the property has been offered a reasonable time no one present at the sale bids an amount for the property being sold which is as much as the total of the taxes due (including any priority liens for taxes due the state, county, and school and other special tax districts of the state) plus the marshal's cost due on the sale, then the city manager or his designee may purchase the property for the city. If the city purchases property at a sale, the marshal shall make to the city a deed to the property sold and shall deliver the deed to the city manager. The marshal shall put the city in possession of the property so sold. 
(b)  Property acquired by the city pursuant to a sale for taxes or assessments may be divested or alienated by the city only by public sale of the property to the highest bidder; however when the city has not parted with title to the property, the city may quitclaim the property to the owner at the time of the tax sale, or to the owner's administrators, executors, heirs, or assigns, upon full payment of the redemption price provided in section 20-9 of this article. 
(c)  The right of redemption in real property purchased by the city at a tax sale shall be foreclosed in the manner set forth in section 20-9 of this article. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999) 
Sec. 20-7. - Accounting by marshal; final return or settlement. 
(a)  The marshal shall make a prompt accounting to the city clerk for all executions placed in his hands for collection or levy and sale. He shall pay over to the city clerk all amounts due the city for taxes and assessments, interest, penalties, and costs and shall file a final written return or settlement showing the amounts so paid, together with disposition of any excess proceeds derived from the sale. If there is any excess after paying taxes, costs, and all expenses of a sale, it shall be immediately paid to the person authorized to receive the excess. 
(b)  In any event, if, within 90 days form the date executions are placed in his hands, the marshal finds an execution to be either uncollectible or not collectible in full, he shall so notify the city clerk in writing. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the clerk to cause cancellation of executions on the general execution docket upon their final payment or collection. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999) 
Sec. 20-8. - Garnishments by city; reduction of executions to judgment. 
(a)  Whenever the marshal can find no property belonging to a defendant in fi.fa on which to levy any tax execution in his hands, he shall make an entry to the effect on the execution. The city clerk, in the name of the city, may then petition any court of competent jurisdiction to issue a summons of garnishment against any person whom he or she believes to be indebted to the defendant in fi.fa or who has property, money, or effects in his hands belonging to the defendant in fi.fa. The clerk shall enter upon the execution the names of the persons garnished and the court and file number of the action where the garnishment is filed. All subsequent proceedings shall be the same as provided by law in other cases where judgments have been obtained or execution issued. 
(b)  When an execution for taxes remains unsatisfied and an entry of nulla bona has been duly entered by the marshal on the execution within the immediately preceding 30-day period and the city clerk has reason to believe the defendant in fi.fa. may have or may come into ownership of assets outside the state, the clerk, in the name of the city, may petition the superior court of the county in this state in which the defendant in fi.fa maintains, place of business or agent to receive service, to reduce the execution to judgment. If the defendant in fi.fa does not maintain a known residence in this state, the action may be brought in the county, where the tax obligation arose. This and all subsequent proceedings shall be brought in accordance with O.C.G.A. ch. 48-3. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999) 
Sec. 20-9. - Redemption rights of defendant in fi.fa.; vesting of title in grantee. 
(a)  Whenever real property is sold by non-judicial sale for taxes or any special assessment, the defendant in fi.fa. or any person having any right, title, or interest in or lien upon such property may redeem the property from the sale by the payment of the redemption price or the amount required for redemption as fixed by O.C.G.A § 48-5-42, at any time within 12 months from the date of sale, and at any time after the non-judicial sale until the right of redemption is foreclosed by giving of the notice provided for in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-45, which code sections are incorporated herein by reference as a part of this article. 
(b)  Where notice of foreclosure of the right to redeem real property sold at a non-judicial tax sale has not been given as required in subsection (a) above, title shall ripen by prescription after a period of four years from the date of recording of the deed, provided the defendant in fi.fa. was not laboring under any legal disability at the time of sale. Unless the tax deed indicates a lesser interest was levied upon and sold, a fee simple title to the property shall vest absolutely in the grantee in the deed or in the grantee's heirs or assigns. In the event the defendant in fi.fa is laboring under any legal disability, the prescriptive term shall begin from the time the disabilities are removed or abated. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999) 
Sec. 20-10. - Costs. 
(a)  For issuing executions, the city shall receive only an amount equal to any filing fees charged by the clerk of superior court for recording and cancellation of the tax fi.fa. 
(b)  Once a levy is made or posed on the property of a defendant in fi.fa, in addition to all taxes, interest, penalties and costs heretofore accrued, the marshal shall collect a levy administration fee of five percent of the taxes due or $250.00, whichever is the lesser; however no levy administration fee shall be less than $50.00. 
(c)  In addition to the levy administration fee, after levy but prior to the sale, the marshal shall collect his actual cost for advertising the sale, postage and service fees actually incurred, and any attorneys' fees incurred in examination of title to property, plus a commission for conducting the sale, not to exceed eight percent on sums of $50.00 or less, six percent on sums above $50.00 up to $550.00, and three percent on all sums exceeding $550.00. 
(d)  The costs provided in this section shall be cumulative and in addition to any statutory premiums allowed as part of the redemption price. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999) 
Sec. 20-11. - Judicial in rem tax foreclosure proceedings. 
(a)  In addition to the non-judicial tax sales authorized by section 20-5 above, the city clerk, with the assistance of the city attorney, is hereby authorized to proceed with judicial in rem tax foreclosure proceedings in the county superior court in accordance with the terms of O.C.G.A. tit. 48, ch. 4, art. 5 and by resolution of the city commission dated February 3, 1999. 
(b)  This provision for judicial in rem tax foreclosure is intended to be in addition to, and not in lieu of, all other available tax collection methods. 
(Ord. No. 937, § 1, 2-3-1999) 
Secs. 20-12-20-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - EXCISE TAX ON ROOMS, LODGINGS AND ACCOMMODATIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to levy and collect an excise tax on rooms, lodging or accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 

Sec. 20-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except when the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Dealer means every person engaged in the business of operating an innkeeper's facility in the city who furnishes for value any room or rooms, lodgings or accommodations to the public. 
    Person shall mean any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, corporation (profit and nonprofit) joint venture, association, trust, business trust or other legal entity, public or private, or quasi-public, and the plural as well as the singular number. 
    Units of accommodation means individual tourist cabins, trailers, trailer sites, camp sites, apartments, suites, and other multiroom accommodations and accommodations consisting of other than a "room," as that term is normally understood in the sale and purchase of accommodations which accommodations are furnished as units and for which charges are assessed on per unit basis. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 2, 12-8-1976) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 20-27. - Imposed. 
    There is levied and imposed on the furnishing for value to the public of any room or rooms, lodging or accommodations on and after January 1, 1977, by every dealer a tax in the amount of three percent of the charge to the public, as of the time such charge is made, for each room or other unit of lodging or accommodation furnished to the public. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 1, 12-8-1976) 
Sec. 20-28. - Exclusions. 
    The tax imposed by this article shall not be levied or collected upon the furnishing of any room or other unit of accommodation where such room or other unit is contracted, prior to such occupancy, to be furnished and is in fact furnished for a period exceeding ten consecutive days to the same occupant or occupants, or is actually furnished for a period of ten or more consecutive days although not previously contracted for; nor shall such tax be levied upon the sale of or charges for the use of meeting rooms; provided, however, that such meeting rooms or units are those normally and usually furnished for the purposes of meetings and other gatherings and are not those designated and normally furnished for sleeping accommodations. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 3, 12-8-1976) 
Sec. 20-29. - Liability of dealer. 
    Every dealer furnishing any room or other unit of accommodation to the public shall be liable for the tax thereon and for the collection, reporting, and remittance of such tax. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 4, 12-8-1976) 
Sec. 20-30. - Monthly report. 
    It shall be the duty of each dealer liable for the tax imposed by this article to report on or before the 15th day of each calendar month to the director of finance of the city, on forms furnished by the city or on forms prepared by the reporting taxpayer and disclosing the same information, the number of rooms or other units of accommodation furnished during the preceding calendar month; the total charges therefor (excluding charges for telephone, food and beverage services, if any); the number of rooms or other units of accommodation furnished to the same occupant or occupants for a period exceeding ten consecutive days; the total charges therefor (excluding charges for telephone, food and beverage services, if any); the tax base and the total tax due for the month preceding the month of filing. All such reports shall be made under oath and shall be signed by the reporting dealer. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 5, 12-8-1976) 
Sec. 20-31. - Remittance of tax due. 
    It shall be the duty of each dealer liable for the tax imposed by this article to remit monthly to the director of finance of the city with the report prepared and submitted pursuant to section 20-30, the tax due in the amount shown on such report. Failure to so remit such tax shall cause such tax to become delinquent. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 6, 12-8-1976) 
Sec. 20-32. - Compensation of dealers. 
    For the purpose of compensating the dealers for collecting, reporting, and remitting the tax levied by this article, each such dealer shall be allowed three percent of the amount of the tax due and accounted for and remitted to the city in the form of a deduction in submitting his report and paying the amount due by him, provided the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 7, 12-8-1976) 
Sec. 20-33. - Penalty for delinquency. 
(a)  When any dealer shall fail to make any report or pay the full amount of the tax required by this article, there shall be imposed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the remittance and/or report is not delinquent for more than 30 days, with an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional 30 days, or fraction thereof, during which the failure continues not to exceed 25 percent or $25.00 in the aggregate whichever is greater; provided, however, if such failure is due to providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city commission in affidavit form attached to the report and remittance within ten days of due date, such reports may be accepted exclusive of penalties and interest. In the case of a false or fraudulent report or the failure to file a report, where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due under this article, a specific penalty of 50 percent of the tax due shall be assessed. 
(b)  When any person or other legal entity fails to remit the tax, or any portion thereof on or before the day when such tax shall be required by law to be paid, there shall be added to the amount due interest at the rate of eight percent per annum from the date until paid. 
(c)  All penalties and interest imposed by this article shall be payable and collectible by the city in the manner as if they were a part of the tax imposed. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 8, 12-8-1976) 
Sec. 20-34. - Extension of due date. 
    The city commission for good cause may extend, for not to exceed 30 days, the time for making any reports required under the provisions of this article. In the event that any person or other legal entity should fail to make a report and pay the tax as provided by this article, or in case any person or other legal entity should make a grossly incorrect report, or a report which is false or fraudulent, it shall be the duty of the commission, through its designated agents, to make an estimate for the taxable period of the proceeds from the furnishing of rooms or other units of accommodation, to calculate the tax base taking into consideration the exception for rooms or other units furnished for a period exceeding ten consecutive days, as provided by section 20-28, and to assess and collect the tax and interest, plus penalty, if such have accrued, on the basis of such assessments which shall be considered prima facie correct, and the burden to show the contrary shall rest upon the dealer. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 9, 12-8-1976) 
Sec. 20-35. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of every dealer required to make a report and pay any tax under this article to keep and preserve suitable records of the furnishing of rooms or other units of accommodation, such other books of account as may be necessary to determine the amount of tax due hereunder, and other information as may be required by the city. It shall further be the duty of every such dealer to keep and preserve for a period of three years all such records of charges made for the furnishing of rooms or other units of lodging or accommodation. All such records, including but not limited to books of account, shall be open to examination at all reasonable hours to the city or its authorized agents. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 10, 12-8-1976) 
Sec. 20-36. - Agent for collection. 
    For purposes of collection, reporting, and remittance of the tax imposed by this article, each dealer may appoint an authorized agent and may delegate the collection, reporting, and remittance to such agent; provided, however, dealers appointing such agents shall notify the city in writing of the name and address of such agent; and provided further, that any dealer appointing such agent shall remain fully liable for the tax and for the collection, reporting and remittance of such tax. 
(Ord. No. 705, § 11, 12-8-1976) 
Secs. 20-37-20-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXES ON BUSINESSES AND OCCUPATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 924, § 1, adopted Feb. 7, 1996, repealed former art. III, §§ 20-40-20-68, of this chapter, which pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. No. 919, § 2, adopted Dec. 24, 1994. Section 2 of Ord. No. 924 enacted provisions as a new art. III to read as herein set out. 
Cross reference- Licenses and business regulations, ch. 13. 

Sec. 20-40. - Occupation tax required for business dealings in the city. 
    For the year 2001 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the incorporated area of the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for said business, trade, profession or occupation; and the occupation tax certificate indicating the payment of the tax shall be displayed in a conspicuous location in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the incorporated area of the city. If the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the incorporated area of the city, such occupation tax certificate shall be shown to the occupation tax officer or enforcement officers or to any police officer of the city, upon his or their request. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996; Ord. No. 945, § 2, 12-13-2000) 
Sec. 20-41. - Construction of terms; definitions. 
(a)  Wherever the term "city" is used herein, such term shall be the City of Brunswick, Georgia. 
(b)  As used in this article, the term: 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax, which approximates the reasonable handling and processing of the occupation tax. 
    Business means any person, corporation, partnership, or other legal entity which exerts substantial efforts within the city, engages in, came to be engaged in, and/or represents or holds out to the public to be engaged in any occupation or activity with the object of gain or benefit, either directly or indirectly. 
    Business location means the physical location of a business, and includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession, or occupation is conducted. This definition does not include a temporary or construction work site, which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. A temporary work site which serves multiple customers is included in this definition, and any business operating at such location is subject to the requirements of this article. For the purposes of this article, a separate location shall exist if there is a separation of buildings of a business by the property of another, not including public streets. 
Each rental residential property consisting of four or more units shall be deemed a branch establishment or separate place of business for the purpose of this article when there is a representative of the owner or the owner's agent living on the premises who is authorized to conduct business for such owner or owner's agent or there is a regular employee of the owner or the owner's agent working on the premises who is authorized to transact business for such owner's agent. 
    Commission means the board of commissioners of the city. 
    Dominant line means the type of business within a multiple line of business from which the greatest amount of income is derived. 
    Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099 and shall include an owner of said business if such owner performs managerial or any other work for the business. 
    Engaged in business means doing or performing any act of selling any goods or services, or soliciting business, or offering any good or services for sale primarily in attempt to make a profit, including selling or performing services of the character of a wholesaler or retailer, or being involved in any of the functions performed as a manufacturer, or renting real or personal property; all of the foregoing performed either as an owner, operator or agent of any business, trade, profession, or occupation within the city. 
    Manufacturing means either directly or by contracting with others for the necessary labor or mechanical services, manufacturing for sale or commercial use any articles, substances or commodities, including but not limited to, the following: materials upon which commercial activities have been applied, by hand or machinery, so that as a result thereof a new substance of trade or commerce is produced; the production or fabrication of special or custom-made articles; the making, fabrication, processing, refining, mixing, slaughtering, packing, aging, curing, preserving, canning, preparing and freezing of fresh foods, fruits, vegetables, and meat. 
    Nonprofit organization means an organization which is formed for a purpose not involving pecuniary remuneration, directly or indirectly, to its shareholders or members as such. Such organizations encompass those, which are truly altruistic as well as those whose aid is limited to its membership. 
    Number of employees means the highest number of employees employed by a business, trade or profession, either on a full or part-time basis during the period October 1 through December 31 of the year preceding the tax year; for first time applications, the highest number of employees anticipated in the last quarter of the tax year. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue raising purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in occupation, profession or business. 
    Occupation tax officer means the finance director of the city or his or her successor in office or their designee. 
    Occupation tax certificate means the form issued by the occupation tax officer as evidence that the business has registered and paid the occupation tax and fees due under this article. 
    Person shall be held to include sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships or any other form of business organization but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which utilize 80 percent of their proceeds for charitable purposes. 
    Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law is subject to state licensure requirements regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions or occupations shall not include practitioners who are employees of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
    Registration shall mean the information supplied to the occupation tax officer to enable that officer to compute the occupation license tax and the executed form provided by the occupation tax officer for that purpose. 
    Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees, as defined by paragraph 8 of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2, capital tapping fees, tapping fees or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
    Retailer means a person who sells to consumers or any other person for any purpose, other than for resale, any tangible person or property. 
    Services means the accommodating or performing a duty or work by a person utilizing time or talents for direct or indirect remuneration. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996; Ord. No. 945, § 2, 12-13-2000) 
Sec. 20-42. - Administrative fee; no regulatory fees provided by this article; limit on amount of occupation tax. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee of $30.00 shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  This article does not provide for the imposition of any regulatory fees and shall not be construed so as to impose such fees. Regulatory fees imposed by other provisions of this Code shall be in addition to the administrative fee and occupation tax levied in this article. 
(c)  In order to avoid economic disincentives for businesses and in order to promote economic development, the maximum amount of tax levied on any business or occupation under this article shall be $720.00 per year, in addition to the administrative fee of $30.00. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-43. - Occupation tax levied; restrictions; refunds. 
(a)  (1)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices with the unincorporated area of the city and upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon the number of employees of the business or practitioner. 
(2)  The number of employees is computed on a full-time position basis or full-time equivalent basis, provided that for purposes of this computation an employee who works 40 hours or more weekly shall be considered a full-time employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than 40 hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by 40 to produce full-time position equivalents. 
(b)  Occupation tax schedule. The occupation tax levied shall be based upon a tax schedule which shall be established by the city commission by resolution from time to time. 
(c)  (1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupational tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  The city shall not require an occupation tax on those employees that were taxed by occupation tax in other localities or states, provided that those businesses were taxed in full compliance with O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7 and 48-13-14. Upon request by any city official, including but not limited to personnel of the business license department, finance department, and building inspection department, the operator of a business shall be required to provide proof that the business was taxed pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-7 and 48-13-14. 
(3)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any manner except as described in this section. 
(d)  Refunds. 
(1)  A business, trade, profession or occupation may apply for a partial refund of its previously paid occupation tax when the business ceases to conduct business with the city. A business with multiple locations may apply for a refund when it closes one or more of its locations or offices, and no business dealings are conducted in the city from the closed location(s) or office(s). The previously paid occupation tax shall be prorated from the date certified in the written request for a refund and calculated pursuant to subparagraph (3), below. 
(2)  A written request for a refund shall be submitted to the occupation tax officer within six months after the business, trade, profession, or occupation ceases to exist as a legal entity doing business in the city, and the request shall certify the date the business ceased to exist. If one or more locations or offices are still in operation and conducting business in the city, then the request for refund shall certify the date the location(s) or office(s) for which the occupation tax was paid ceased to conduct business in the city. 
(3)  The occupation tax levied and paid under this section shall be subject to a prorated refund based on the number of full months left in the year for which the occupation tax certificate was issued upon written request as provided herein. 
(4)  Administrative and regulatory fees and any penalties paid on behalf of a business, trade, profession or occupation shall not be subject to a refund. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996; Ord. No. 945, § 2, 12-13-2000; Ord. No. 991, § 1, 6-20-2007) 
Sec. 20-44. - Paying occupation tax of business with no location in Georgia. 
    Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the State of Georgia if the business's largest dollar volume of business in Georgia is in the city and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generate income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-45. - Each line of business to be identified on business registration. 
    The business registration of each business operated in the city's jurisdiction shall identify the line or lines of business that the business conducts. No business shall conduct any line of business without first having that line of business registered with the city's finance department and that line of business being noted by the finance department upon the business registration form which is to be displayed by the business owner; and the business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-46. - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
    Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-47. - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18). 
    Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax for the year 2001 and subsequent years, one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on number of employees; or 
(2)  A fee of $400.00 per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid at the practitioner's office or location. The per practitioner fee shall include all persons in the business who qualify as practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996; Ord. No. 945, § 2, 12-13-2000) 
Sec. 20-48. - Practitioners practicing exclusively for a government. 
    Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county or an instrumentality of any of the foregoing shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-49. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied herein is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax applies only to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 through 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the city pursuant to the pertinent general law and ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-50. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the year 1995 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. Said registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 1 of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as prescribed in this article. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city in 1995 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty shall be imposed. The tax registration herein provided for shall be issued by the finance department, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kind of profession, trade or calling subject to this article without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall upon conviction in the municipal court be punished as provided in section 15-8 of the Brunswick Code. 
(b)  In addition to the foregoing remedies, the marshal may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-51. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 945, § 2, adopted Dec. 13, 2000, in part repealed section 20-51 of the Code, which pertained to allocation of gross receipts with multiple intra- or interstate locations and derived from Ord. No. 924, § 2, adopted Feb. 7, 1996. 
Sec. 20-52. - Exemption on ground that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
    No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by this article shall be exempt from said registration or tax on the ground that such business is operated for a charitable purpose unless 50 percent or more of the entire proceeds of said business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-53. - Evidence of state registration required if applicable; state registration to be displayed. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. Title 43 shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-54. - Evidence of qualification required if applicable. 
    Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-55. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
    All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for said business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration herein provided for before commencing the same; and any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any of the kinds of business, trade, profession or occupation without first having so obtained said registration shall be subject to penalties provided therefor. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-56. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided herein before March 1 of each year, and on March 1 of each year thereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained said registration shall be subject to the penalties provided in section 20-57. Said penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, herein provided; and may be collected by the remedies herein provided for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration herein provided for shall be issued by the finance department, and if any person, firm or corporation whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after said occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact in the city any of the kind of business, trade, profession or occupation without having first obtained said registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-57. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person convicted of violating any provision of this article shall be subject to punishment as provided in section 15-8. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-58. - City marshal; citation and arrest powers. 
    The city marshal and his designated deputy or deputies shall act as business inspectors for the purpose of enforcement of this article, and they shall have full power to issue citations and to make arrests in conjunction with any violation of this article. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-59. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
    The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of general state law or other local law where applicable: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the Public Service Commission. 
(2)  Those electric service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. ch. 46-3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355 (businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed, or cottonseed meal and hulls). 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state, governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-60. - Occupation tax inapplicable where prohibited by law or provided for pursuant to other existing law. 
    An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by state or federal law. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-61. - Occupation taxes levied on business to be transacted during current calendar year; filing of returns showing gross receipts during preceding calendar year. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in section 20-43 shall, on or before the dates hereafter set forth, file with the finance department the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth herein. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business subject to said occupation tax for the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year and on or before March 1 of the current calendar year file with the finance department, on a form furnished by the finance department, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in said return. Said return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. Said figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in determining the business tax liability. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-62. - Filing of return showing actual gross receipts during calendar year; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  On or before March 1 of each year the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the finance department on a form furnished by the department a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding year. 
(b)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article, exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 20-61 hereof, the difference in said amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city by March 1 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before said date. 
(c)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of said tax provided for in this article is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by said business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 20-61 hereof, the difference in said amounts shall be refunded to the taxpayer, or if said business continues to be conducted during the current calendar year, shall be credited to the amount of occupation tax to be paid by said business for the current year. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-63. - When occupation tax due and payable. 
    The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city at the office of the finance department on January 1 of each year and shall be delinquent if not paid on or before March 1 each year. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-64. - Payment of occupation tax by newly established businesses. 
    In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from the date of commencement of business, to the end of the calendar year and the tax shall be paid on the basis of such estimate. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-65. - More than one place or line of business. 
    Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, the business shall pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing tax rate for the dominant line at each location. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-66. - Returns confidential. 
    Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee or agent of the city or any other person to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of such returns shall be confidential and open only to the officers, employees and agents of the city using said returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as employees. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, federal or other local governments. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-67. - Inspection of books and records. 
    In any case the finance department of the city, through its officers, employees, agents or representatives, shall have the right to inspect the books and records of any business for which a return has been made, and upon demand of the finance department, such books and records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure to submit such books and records within 30 days shall be ground for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. If it is determined that there is a deficiency in the amount of tax paid as a result of underreporting the volume of gross receipts, the taxpayer shall be liable for the amount of such deficiency plus penalty of ten percent and interest at the rate of 12 percent calculated from the date of delinquency. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-68. - Effect of failure to comply. 
    In addition to the other remedies herein provided for the collection of the occupation tax herein levied, upon any tax or part thereof becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, the finance department or city marshal shall be authorized to request, and the city clerk shall be authorized to issue execution for the correct amount of said tax against the persons, partnership or corporation liable for said tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax became delinquent, and the lien shall cover the property of the person, partnership or corporation in the same manner as an execution for ad valorem taxes. 
(Ord. No. 924, § 2, 2-7-1996) 
Sec. 20-69. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 945, § 2, adopted Dec. 13, 2000, in part repealed section 20-69 of the Code, which pertained to alphabetical business classification index and derived from Ord. No. 924, § 2, adopted Feb. 7, 1996. 
Chapter 21 - TAXICABS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Revocation of for-hire vehicle license for certain offenses, § 13-39; ambulances, § 13-71 et seq.; wreckers, § 13-556 et seq.; motor vehicles and traffic, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Vehicles for hire, O.C.G.A. § 40-2-95. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 21-1. - Definition. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the word "taxicab" shall be taken to mean any automobile used in the city for the purpose of carrying passengers for hire, excluding busses and u-drive-it cars. 
(Code 1953, § 35.1) 
Cross reference- Definitions and rules of construction generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 21-2. - Compliance with chapter. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate or cause to be operated any taxicab within the city without first having complied with the provisions of this chapter. Compliance with the requirements of this chapter is made a condition precedent to the operation of a taxicab business in the city and to driving a taxicab in the city. 
(Code 1953, § 35.2) 
Sec. 21-3. - Requirements as to vehicles. 
    Every taxicab shall: 
(1)  Be painted in one uniform color or combination of colors, adopted by the owner and reported to the marshal; 
(2)  Have four doors, unless such type vehicle cannot be obtained by the owner because of a national emergency or because of other circumstances beyond his control and this requirement waived by resolution of the city commission; 
(3)  Have in letters not less than four inches high, the full name of the owner of the vehicle, and in figures not less than three inches high, the telephone number or numbers of the owner; 
(4)  Have plainly painted on the outside of each rear door, in letters not less than four inches high, the word "Taxicab," and also in figures not less than six inches high the number assigned to such vehicle pursuant to section 21-4 which number shall also be painted plainly on the rear of the vehicle in figures not less than six inches high. 
(Code 1953, § 35.3) 
Sec. 21-4. - Each vehicle to be assigned a number; registration of numbers and owners. 
    A separate number shall be assigned to each taxicab in the city by the marshal, which number shall not be altered or changed without the consent of the marshal. Such number, together with the name of the owner of the vehicle to which it was assigned, shall be registered at the police department of the city in a book to be kept by the marshal for such purpose. 
(Code 1953, § 35.4) 
Sec. 21-5. - Manifests. 
(a)  Every taxicab driver shall maintain a daily manifest upon which are recorded all trips made each day, showing time and place of origin and destination of each trip and amount of fare, and all such completed manifests shall be returned to the owner by the driver at the conclusion of his tour of duty. The forms for each manifest shall be furnished to the driver by the owner and shall be of a character approved by the marshal. 
(b)  Every owner of a taxicab shall retain and preserve all driver's manifests in a safe place for at least the calendar year next preceding the current calendar year, and such manifests shall be available to the city manager, marshal and city commission. 
(Code 1953, § 35.4A) 
Sec. 21-6. - Monthly inspection of vehicles; certificates of inspection. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of the owner of any taxicab operated in the city to present such vehicle to the marshal at the police station of the city, on or before the fifth day of each month, for the purpose of permitting the marshal or some person designated or approved by him to make a full and complete inspection of such vehicle, especially of the brakes thereof, for the purpose of determining whether such may safely be permitted to operate upon the streets of the city. 
(b)  The marshal, or person designated or approved by him, shall inspect the vehicles so presented and test the brakes thereof. If the vehicle is found to be in such condition that it can safely be operated upon the streets of the city, the marshal, or person designated or approved by him, shall issue to the owner thereof a certificate of inspection allowing the operation of such vehicle for one month. It shall be unlawful for any owner to operate any taxicab upon the streets of the city without a currently valid certificate of inspection. 
(c)  It shall be the duty of the person making the inspection to refuse to issue a certificate of inspection to any owner of a taxicab when he shall find the vehicle to be unsafe for operation upon the streets of the city. 
(d)  During the inspection herein provided for, an inspection shall also be made with reference to the requirements of section 21-3 and an entry made on the certificate of inspection as to compliance or noncompliance with such requirements. 
(e)  The driver of any taxicab shall at all times carry in such vehicle the certificate of inspection issued for that vehicle, which certificate he shall exhibit to any police officer of the city upon demand. 
(Code 1953, § 35.5) 
Sec. 21-7. - Inspection fee. 
    The owner of any taxicab operated within the city shall pay an annual fee of $25.00 for each vehicle for all required inspections. 
(Ord. No. 861, § 1, 1-6-88) 
Sec. 21-8. - More than one passenger in front seat prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any driver of a taxicab upon the streets of the city to carry more than one passenger upon the front seat of such vehicle. 
(Code 1953, § 35.6) 
Sec. 21-9. - Parking. 
    No taxicab shall be parked upon any street of the city other than at a taxicab stand. 
(Code 1953, § 35.7) 
Sec. 21-10. - Leasing vehicles-Notice to police department; approval by commission. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any taxicab to lease such vehicle to any other person or to enter into any similar agreement, scheme or device with any person, unless and until the owner of such vehicle so leased shall notify the police department, in writing, of such lease or similar agreement, giving the name and address of the person to whom such vehicle is leased, and such lease is approved by the city commission. 
(Code 1953, § 35.8) 
Sec. 21-11. - Same-Lessee as owner. 
    In the event of the lease of a taxicab or the entrance by the owner of a taxicab into any agreement, scheme or device similar to a lease, and approval thereof by the city commission, the lessee shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be considered the owner of the vehicle. 
(Code 1953, § 35.9) 
Sec. 21-12. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating or failing to comply with any of the provisions of this chapter shall, upon conviction, be punished in accordance with section 1-6. 
(Code 1953, § 35.10) 
Secs. 21-13-21-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TAXICAB LICENSE 

Sec. 21-21. - Required; fee. 
    It shall be unlawful for the owner of any vehicle to operate, or cause to be operated, such vehicle as a taxicab in the city unless there shall have been issued to such owner by the city commission a taxicab license providing for the operation of such vehicle as a taxicab, and the payment of the license fee which is $100.00 annually for each taxicab operator to cover all vehicles of the operator. 
(Code 1953, § 35.11; Ord. No. 861, § 2, 1-6-1988) 
Sec. 21-22. - Application. 
    Before any taxicab license shall be issued by the city commission to the owner of any taxicab, such owner shall file with the secretary of the city commission a written application therefor, which application, at the time of filing, shall be approved by three freeholders of the city and bear written approval of the city manager and the marshal. 
(Code 1953, § 35.12) 
Sec. 21-23. - Grant or refusal. 
    Upon consideration of an application for a taxicab license filed as provided in section 21-22, the city commission may grant or refuse the taxicab license applied for in its discretion. 
(Code 1953, § 35.13) 
Sec. 21-24. - Suspension and revocation. 
    Any taxicab license granted under this article may be suspended for any part or all of any year or revoked entirely by the city manager, upon the conviction of the holder thereof in the police court of the city for a violation of any ordinance of the city or upon conviction of the holder thereof in any other court of the state for a violation of any traffic law of the state or any offense against the laws of the state which, in the opinion of the city manager, would render the holder of the license an unfit person to hold a taxicab license. Such suspension or revocation of a taxicab license by the city manager shall be effective only after written notice of not less than five days to the license holder by the city manager of a time and place of a hearing and opportunity to the holder of the license to be heard on the charges, which charges shall be specified in the notice. It shall be the duty of the marshal, after any such conviction, to serve the notice herein provided for, which notice shall be signed by the secretary of the city commission. 
(Code 1953, § 35.14) 
Secs. 21-25-21-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INDEMNITY BONDS AND INSURANCE 

Sec. 21-31. - Indemnity bond required. 
    Any person making application for a taxicab license shall, for each such vehicle to be operated as a taxicab, give and maintain in full force and effect an indemnity bond in the amount of $10,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, in the amount of $20,000.00 for injury to more than one person sustained in the same accident and $5,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident. Such bond shall be subject to the approval of the city manager and shall be approved by him before it shall be lawful to operate such vehicle as a taxicab. Such bond shall be filed in the office of the secretary of the city commission and shall have as surety thereon a surety company authorized to do business in the state. The applicant shall maintain the bond in the amount specified during the whole time of operation. Such bond shall be conditioned to the effect that in the event any person or property shall be injured or damaged by the operation of such vehicle for which the owner may be liable under the laws of the state, the person so injured in his person or property shall have a right of action under such bond, and the bond shall not be void upon first recovery, but may be sued under from time to time until the full penalty thereof may be exhausted. 
(Code 1953, § 35.15) 
Sec. 21-32. - Required provision in bond. 
    In any bond required under the preceding section of this chapter signed and executed by any surety company as surety, there shall be incorporated this additional provision: "Such surety hereby consents to be joined with the said principal in any suit or action which may be instituted against the principal by any member of the public having a right of action against the principal under the provisions of the bond." 
(Code 1953, § 35.16) 
Sec. 21-33. - Separate policy required for each vehicle; exception. 
    Wherever any person operating any taxicab elects to give a policy of indemnity insurance in lieu of the bond provided for in section 21-31, there shall be a separate policy of such indemnity insurance for every such separate vehicle, except where such person actually owns and holds a legal title to more than one such vehicle, in which event, such person may give one policy of indemnity insurance covering all of such vehicles actually owned by such person; this provision, however, shall not apply to any group of persons separately owning taxicabs who may be jointly operating or doing business under a trade name. 
(Code 1953, § 35.17) 
Sec. 21-34. - Policy in lieu of bond. 
    In lieu of the bond provided for in section 21-31, the owner of a vehicle to be operated as a taxicab may give a policy of indemnity insurance with an indemnity insurance company authorized to do business in the state in the amount of $10,000.00 for bodily injury to any one person, in the amount of $20,000.00 for injuries to more than one person sustained in the same accident, and in the amount of $5,000.00 for property damage resulting from any one accident, for each such vehicle, which policy must substantially conform to all of the provisions of such section relating to bonds and be subject to the approval of the city manager. 
(Code 1953, § 35.18) 
Sec. 21-35. - Required endorsement on policy. 
    There must be endorsed on or incorporated in any liability insurance policy provided for in section 21-34 the following provisions: "In consideration of the premium stated in the policy to which this endorsement is attached, the insurer hereby insures the motor vehicles described in the policy and any motor vehicle substituted therefor, but not additional motor vehicles, and agrees to pay within the limits of the policy or any endorsements attached thereto, any final judgment for personal injuries, including death resulting therefrom, to any person, except employees of the inured engaged in operating or caring for such vehicles, and damages to property, which may be obtained in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel such payment, and in accordance with the terms of the policy to which this endorsement is attached. No condition, provision, stipulation or limitation contained in the policy or any other endorsement thereon, or violation of any of the same by the inured, shall affect in any way the rights of any person injured in person or property by the negligence of the inured, or relieve the insurer from the liability provided for in this endorsement, or from the payment of any judgment, to the extent and in the amount set forth in the policy. The insurer consents to be joined in any suit which shall be brought by a member of the public against the insured under this policy. This endorsement, when countersigned by a duly authorized representative of the company, and attached to Policy No. ____________ , issued to ____________ , shall be valid and form a part of the policy." 
(Code 1953, § 35.19) 
Sec. 21-36. - To be attached to application for taxicab license. 
    The insurance policy or bond required in this article must be attached to the application for a taxicab license. 
(Code 1953, § 35.20) 
Sec. 21-37. - Approval, etc., prerequisite to issuance of taxicab license. 
    No taxicab license shall be issued to any person until the bond or policy required in this article shall have been given and approved. 
(Code 1953, § 35.21) 
Sec. 21-38. - Term; renewal. 
    The bond or insurance policy provided for in this article shall continue and extend for the period of time covered by the license issued by the city for the operation of the vehicle as a taxicab and shall expire with such license and be renewed upon the issuance of another taxicab license. 
(Code 1953, § 35.22) 
Sec. 21-39. - Who may bring suit or action. 
    The bond or the policy of indemnity insurance provided for in this article shall be for the benefit of and be subject to suit or action thereon by any person who shall sustain actionable injury or loss protected thereby. Any person sustaining actionable injury either to person or property by the operation of a taxicab covered by such bond or policy shall have the right to bring any suit or action therefor jointly against the owner or operator of such vehicle and the surety company signing such bond or insurance company executing such liability insurance policy. 
(Code 1953, § 35.23) 
Sec. 21-40. - Notice of voiding. 
    If a bond or policy as referred to in sections 21-38 and 21-39 is voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, notice thereof shall be given in writing to the secretary of the city commission at least ten days before the same shall take effect. 
(Code 1953, § 35.24) 
Secs. 21-41-21-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - DRIVER'S PERMIT 

Sec. 21-51. - Required; contents; possession. 
(a)  Before any person shall be entitled to drive any taxicab in the city, he shall first obtain a taxicab driver's permit. It shall be unlawful for any person to drive any taxicab in the city without such a permit. 
(b)  No person who owns or controls a taxicab shall permit it to be driven for hire in the city unless the driver of such taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force a taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this article of this Code. The permit granted shall be a card bearing the name, age, height, weight, color of eyes and hair, and address of applicant. Such permit shall be in possession of the holder at all times while driving or in control of a taxicab in the city. 
(Code 1953, § 35.25) 
Sec. 21-52. - Qualifications of applicants. 
    Applicants for taxicab drivers' permits shall not be less than 21 years of age, must have been a resident of the city for six months and shall be a sober and an able-bodied person of good character with no physical infirmities of any kind. 
(Code 1953, § 35.26) 
Sec. 21-53. - Application generally; fee. 
    Each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall submit an application in writing to the marshal on a form to be furnished by the police department, which shall be accompanied by a fee of $7.00. Such application shall be made under oath and shall contain the following information: The age of the applicant; his address; length of time he has resided in the city; his knowledge of the streets and traffic ordinances of the city and how such knowledge was obtained; whether he has any physical infirmities, and whether he has been convicted of a violation of any of the laws of this state or any other state or of the United States or ordinances of the city and if so, when, and of what offense, and the sentence of the court. It shall be unlawful to make any false statement in any such application. 
(Code 1953, § 35.27; Ord. No. 861, § 3, 1-6-1988) 
Sec. 21-54. - Character of applicant and physical condition to be vouched for. 
    An applicant for a taxicab driver's permit shall present personally to the marshal at the time he files his application: 
(1)  The affidavits of two residents of the city who have known the applicant for a period of two years and who will vouch for the sobriety, honesty, and general good character of the applicant, which affidavits shall give the addresses of the affiants, and 
(2)  A certificate from a reputable physician of the city certifying that, in his opinion, the applicant is not inflicted with any disease or infirmity which might make him an unsafe or unsatisfactory driver. 
(Code 1953, § 35.28) 
Sec. 21-55. - Investigation of applicant and grant or refusal of permit. 
    The police department shall conduct an investigation of each applicant for a taxicab driver's permit and a report of such investigation and a copy of the traffic and police record of the applicant, if any, shall be attached to the application for the consideration of the marshal. The marshal shall, upon consideration of the application and the reports and certificate and affidavits required to be attached thereto, approve or reject the application. If the application is rejected, the applicant may, within five days after rejection, request a personal appearance before the marshal to offer evidence why his application should be reconsidered. The provisions of section 21-56 shall be available to applicant within five days of original rejection or within five days of final rejection after reconsideration. 
(Code 1953, § 35.29) 
Sec. 21-56. - Appeal from refusal to grant. 
    In the event of refusal of the marshal to grant a taxicab driver's permit to an applicant therefor, such applicant so refused shall have a right to enter, in writing, within five days from the decision complained of, an appeal to the city commission. Upon such appeal, the decision of the city commission shall be final. 
(Code 1953, § 35.30) 
Sec. 21-57. - Revocation. 
    The city manager shall have the right to revoke a taxicab driver's permit in the event the holder is convicted in the police court for a violation of any ordinance of the city or is convicted in any court of any state or of the United States for a violation of law or whenever it is determined that the applicant has made a false statement in the application for such permit. From the decision of the city manager in revoking any such permit, the holder of the permit shall have the right to enter an appeal to the city commission. The decision of the city commission shall be final. Such appeal shall be entered in writing within five days from the order or decision of the city manager complained of. 
(Code 1953, § 35.31) 
Chapter 22 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1014, §§ 1-4, adopted May 4, 2010 repealed the former Ch. 22, §§ 22-1-22-29, and enacted a new Ch. 22 as set out herein. The former Ch. 22 pertained to utilities and derived from Ord. No. 954, § 1, 2-5-2003; Ord. No. 957, § 1, 8-6-2003; Ord. No. 1009, § 1, 12-1-2008; Ord. No. 1011, § 1, 5-6-2009. 
Cross reference- Department of public works, § 2-216 et seq.; buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; poles and wires, § 19-61 et seq.; zoning, ch. 23; utility improvements and standards in subdivisions, app. B, Art. XIV. 

ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 22-1. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and cited as the "Water and Sewer Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-2. - Scope; the utility. 
(a)  On April 19, 2006, the Governor of Georgia signed into law House Bill 1585 (Ga. L. 2006, p. 3661) (hereinafter referred to as "Act 485") approved by referendum on July 18, 2006, creating the Brunswick-Glynn County Joint Water and Sewer Commission (JWSC) as a separate legal entity from the city. 
(b)  In accordance with Section 7 of Act 485, the city entered into an operational agreement, effective June 5, 2007, as amended by an addendum thereto, effective July 6, 2007, with the JWSC and Glynn County (the] county) detailing the power of the JWSC to operate a unified system of city and county water and wastewater systems and which sets forth the rights of the city and county governing bodies for the duration of the agreement. 
(c)  In accordance with Section 9 of Act 485, the JWSC submitted to the city commission for adoption this water and sewer ordinance which standardizes the city and county water and sewer ordinances and which the city commissioners adopted on May 4, 2010. 
(d)  This chapter shall regulate maintenance, uses and operation of water and wastewater systems within the City of Brunswick, Georgia. Pursuant to Act 485 and the operational agreement, as amended, the service areas of the city are combined with the service areas of the unincorporated areas of the county to create a unified system of water and sewer systems under the authority of the JWSC. The service areas combined under the JWSC shall in no way limit future service areas within the boundaries of the city. 
(e)  The JWSC shall be referred to hereinafter as the "utility." The utility shall be administered and governed pursuant to the rules and regulations set forth hereinafter and in accordance with federal, state and local laws, rules, and regulations promulgated thereunder having jurisdiction over the operations of the utility. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-3. - Purpose and policy. 
(a)  The objectives of this chapter are: 
(1)  To provide for the efficient administration and regulation of the water and wastewater utility; 
(2)  To enable the utility to comply with all applicable state and federal statutes and regulations governing the operations of the water and wastewater utility, particularly the following: 
a.  The Safe Drinking Water Act (SDWA), as amended, 42 U.S.C. § 300f et seq. 
b.  The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (FWPCA), as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
c.  "General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," 40 C.F.R., Part 403, applicable to general industrial pretreatment. 
(3)  To provide for protection of water resources in the City of Brunswick, including both groundwater and surface water sources; 
(4)  To provide for protection of the drinking water production and distribution system to ensure users with high quality drinking water; 
(5)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment system which will interfere with the operation of the system or contaminate the resulting sludge; 
(6)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the wastewater treatment system which will pass through the system, inadequately treated, into receiving waters or the atmosphere or otherwise be incompatible with the system; 
(7)  To improve the opportunity to recycle and reclaim wastewater and sludge from the system; 
(8)  To provide for equitable distribution of the costs of the water production and distribution system; and 
(9)  To provide for equitable distribution of the costs of the water and wastewater systems. 
(b)  This chapter shall be liberally construed to affect the foregoing beneficent purposes provided, however, that such construction shall not impair vested contractual rights. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-4. - Director of water and wastewater utility. 
    The chief administrative officer of the water and wastewater utility shall be the director of the utility, who shall have general responsibility, power and authority over the personnel, management and operations of the utility, subject to the authority of the JWSC as provided by law. It shall be the duty of the JWSC to appoint a qualified person to the position of director. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-5. - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of the words and phrases used in this chapter shall be as follows: 
    Account: A single point of utility service billed on a periodic, regular basis. 
    Act of God: A cataclysmic phenomenon of nature, such as a hurricane, earthquake or abnormal flood. A natural phenomenon including, but not limited to, rain, wind or high water. 
    Act or the Act: The Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. 
    Authorized representative of the user: 
(a)  If the user is a corporation, then by: 
(1)  The president, secretary treasurer, or vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy-making or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
(2)  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operating facilities, provided the manager is authorized to make management decisions that govern the operation of the regulated facility including having the explicit or implicit duty of making major capital investment recommendations, and initiate and direct other comprehensive measures to assure long-term environmental compliance with environmental laws and regulations; can ensure that the necessary systems are established or actions taken to gather complete and accurate information for individual wastewater discharge permit requirements; and when authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(b)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship, then by a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(c)  If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility, then by a director or the highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(d)  The individuals described in subsections (a) through (c), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing and notarized. The authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for the environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the utility. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD): The quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/L). 
    Brunswick-Glynn County Joint Water and Sewer Commission (JWSC): A body corporate and politic, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia and a public corporation created by an Act of the General Assembly (Ga. L. 2006, p. 3661), acting by and through its commissioners, and responsible for the operations of the utility. 
    Building drain: That part of the lowest horizontal piping of a plumbing system which receives the discharge of waste, and other drainage from pipes inside the walls of buildings and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet (1.5 meters) outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer: The extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection or service connection. 
    Bypass: The intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
    Categorical pretreatment standards or categorical standards: Any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. § 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    Chemical oxygen demand (COD): A measure of the oxygen required to oxidize all compounds, both organic and inorganic, in water. 
    City: The City of Brunswick, a municipal corporation, created and existing under the laws of the State of Georgia, acting by and through its mayor and commissioners. 
    Combined sewer: A sewer receiving both surface runoff and sewage. 
    Commercial wastes: 
(a)  Non-toxic, non-hazardous liquid wastewater from commercial facilities; 
(b)  Grease device/interceptor contents generated by a commercial food operation or institutional food preparation facility, including without limitations, fats, oils, grease, and food scraps; or 
(c)  Any oil waste residue produced from vehicle maintenance or washing that discharge to an oil-water separator or sand trap. 
    Commercial waste transporter permit: A permit issued by the utility for an individual tank truck. 
    Composite: A sample made up of a number of individual samples collected on the basis of either equal flow or equal time, and shall reasonably reflect the characteristics of the water, domestic wastewater or industrial wastewater at the time of each sample collection. 
    County: Glynn County, a political subdivision of the State of Georgia, acting by and through its board of commissioners. 
    Customer: The person responsible for one or more accounts. 
    Developer: Any person or legal entity undertaking development. 
    Development: Any construction or expansion of a building, structure or use, any change in use of a building or structure, or any change in the use of land, any of which creates additional demand and need for public facilities. 
    Director: The person designated as the chief administrative officer of the water and wastewater utility, and appointed by the JWSC. 
    Easement: A right of use over the property of another. 
    Effluent: The discharge flow of a pretreatment device/interceptor and/or facility. 
    Environmental Protection Agency (EPA or USEPA): The United States Environmental Protection Agency or, when appropriate, the administrator of EPA or other duly authorized official of the agency. 
    Environmental protection division (EPD): The Environmental Protection Division, Department of Natural Resources, State of Georgia. 
    Existing source: Any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by the EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
    Floatable oil: Oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment device/interceptor and/or facility. 
    FOG separator or grease interceptor: A structure or device designed to collect and retain fats, oils, grease and solids usually found in kitchen or similar wastes. Commonly referred to as a grease trap. 
    Grab sample: A sample which is taken from a wastestream, without regard to flow rate of the wastestream, over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes and which reasonably represents the characteristics of the stream at the time of sampling. 
    Grit trap: A structure or device designed primarily for the accumulation and removal of grit. 
    Hazardous waste: Any solid waste that has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the board of natural resources, Chapter 391-3-11 [rules and regulations of the EPD]. 
    Health department: The county board of health department, and includes the director and/or other persons designated and their duly authorized assistants. 
    Indirect discharge: The introduction of nondomestic pollutants from any source regulated under Section 307 (b) and (c) of the Act into the POTW, including holding tank waste such as from vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, septic tanks, and tank trucks. 
    Infiltration and/or inflow: Groundwater or surface water which leaks or otherwise enters into the sewers through defective pipes, joints, manholes, yard drains, down spouts, sump pumps, or by other means or openings. 
    Interference: A discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes, operations, sludge processes, use or disposal; and which is or has the potential to be a cause of a violation of the utility's NPDES and/or LAS permit, as applicable, or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal by the POTW in compliance with any of the federal, state, or local statutory and/or regulatory provisions or permits issued hereunder. 
    Land application system (LAS): Any method of disposing of pollutants in which the pollutants are applied to the surface or beneath the surface of the parcel of land and which results in the pollutants percolating, infiltrating, or being absorbed into the soil and then into the water of the state. 
    Lint trap: A structure or device designed primarily to collect and retain excessive amounts of fabric/clothing lint. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit: A permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act, as amended. 
    Natural outlet: Any outlet, including storm sewers and combined sewer overflows, into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake, or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    New source: 
(a)  Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is or may be a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
(1)  The building, structure, facility or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; 
(2)  The building, structure, facility or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
(3)  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source should be considered. 
(b)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather then a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of paragraphs (a)(1) or (a)(3), above, but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(c)  Construction of a new source as defined under subsections (a) and (b), above, has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
(1)  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
a.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
(2)  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment, which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Oil-water separator: A structure or device designed primarily to collect and retain petroleum substances. 
    Originator: The owner or operator of a grease or FOG interceptor, grit trap, oil-water separator, lint trap or sand trap from which commercial wastes are removed. 
    Pass through: A discharge which exits the POTW into the waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the POTW's NPDES and/or LAS permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of the violation. 
    Person: Any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity or any other legal entity, or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. The masculine gender shall include the feminine and the singular shall include the plural when indicated by the context. 
    pH: A measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution expressed in standard units. 
    Pollutant: Dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, metals, organic and inorganic materials, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pretreatment or treatment: The reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment device/interceptor: A structure or device designed to collect and retain fats, oils, grease and solid substances usually found in the waste stream. 
    Project improvements: 
(a)  Site improvements and facilities that are planned and designed to provide service for a particular development project which are necessary for the use and convenience of the occupants or users of the project, and that are not system improvements. 
(b)  The character of the improvement shall control a determination of whether an improvement is a project improvement or system improvement. 
(c)  The physical location of the improvement onsite or offsite shall not be considered determinative of whether an improvement is a project improvement or a system improvement. 
(d)  If an improvement or facility provides or will provide more than incidental services or facilities capacity to persons other than users or occupants of a particular project, the improvement or facility is a system improvement and shall not be considered a project improvement. 
(e)  No improvement or facility included in a comprehensive plan for public facilities approved by the utility shall be considered a project improvement. 
    Proportionate share: That portion of the cost of system improvements which is reasonably related to the service demands and needs of the project. 
    Public sewer: A common sewer which is owned or leased or controlled by the utility. 
    Publicly owned treatment works (POTW): A treatment works as defined in Section 212 of the Act which is owned or operated by the utility, and includes any devices and systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling and reclamation of municipal and/or industrial wastes of a liquid nature. This includes sewers, pipes, and other conveyances only if they convey wastewater to the POTW treatment plant, owned or operated by utility. The term also means the municipality as defined in Section 502(4) of the Act, with jurisdiction over the indirect discharges to and the discharges from such treatment works. 
    Receiving waters: Those waters into which wastewater effluent is discharged. 
    Registration: Acceptance by the EPD of a transporter. 
    Registered commercial waste transporter: A business and/or owner registered by EPD, and whose tank trucks are permitted by the utility. 
    Residential equivalent unit (REU): That portion of a user's facility that has an impact on the water and/or wastewater systems equivalent to a single family unit. 
    Sand trap: A receptacle designed for the accumulation and removal of sand, grit, rocks and other similar debris. 
    Sanitary sewer: A sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not intentionally admitted. 
    Satellite system: A private and independently owned water and/or wastewater system, including infrastructure, appurtenances, structures, lift stations, and devices, which connect to the utility's public water and/or wastewater systems. 
    Septic tank: A subsurface impervious tank designed to temporarily retain sewage or similar waterborne wastes together with: 
(a)  A sewer line constructed with solid pipe, with the joints sealed, connecting the impervious tank with a plumbing stub out; and 
(b)  A subsurface system of trenches, piping, and other materials constructed to drain the clarified liquid from the tank and distribute it underground to be absorbed or filtered. 
    Septic wastes: Any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Service district: An area delineated by functional separation of infrastructure in which a defined set of public facilities provide service for development within the area. Service districts shall be designated on the basis of sound planning or engineering principles or both. 
    Sewer: A pipe or conduit that carries wastewater. 
    Significant industrial user: 
(a)  Any industrial user of the utility's wastewater disposal system who is: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, non-contact cooling and boiler blowdown wastewater); contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or is designated as such by the utility on the basis that the user has reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(b)  Upon a finding that an industrial user meeting the criteria in paragraph (a) (2), above, has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the utility may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from an industrial user or POTW, and in accordance with 40 C.F.R. § 403.8(f)(6), determine that such industrial user is not a significant industrial user. 
    Slug: Any discharge of water or wastewater which in concentration of any given constituent or in quantity of flow rate, and which adversely affects the collection system and/or performance of the wastewater facilities. 
    Stormwater: Any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation. 
    Tap fees: 
(a)  Connection/capital tap fee: A fee imposed upon new and existing development prior to connection to the utility, or change of use of property already connected to the utility, to pay for a proportionate share of the cost of capital system improvements needed to serve new growth and development and based on REUs. 
(b)  Installation/operational tap fee: A fee charged for labor and materials for connecting to the mains of the utility which are adjacent to the property or near the property line to be served. 
    Total suspended solids (TSS) or suspended solids (SS): The total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and that is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant: Any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the EPA or EPD under the provisions of the Clean Water Act or other law; or that is determined to be toxic by laboratory analysis or other investigations performed with sound scientific principles. 
    Tank truck: Any vehicle that removes and transports commercial wastes. 
    Transporter: Any person or firm, which owns or operates one or more waste tank trucks that receive or dispose of commercial waste in the State of Georgia. 
    User: 
(a)  As applied to commercial waste handling, the term refers to any owner of a facility, and any person who operates the facility, who contributes, causes, or permits the discharge of wastewater into the sanitary sewer system; or 
(b)  A customer. 
    Utility: The combined or unified water and wastewater systems of the city and county under the authority of the Brunswick-Glynn County Joint Water and Sewer Commission, acting by and through its commissioners, to operate and maintain the unified system, and any additions and extensions thereto. 
    Wastewater: A combination of the liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial establishments, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, together with any groundwater, surface water, and stormwater that may be present and which may enter the POTW. The equivalent term is sewage. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-6. - Abbreviations. 
The following abbreviations shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD Biochemical oxygen demand C.F.R. Code of Federal Regulations COD Chemical oxygen demand EPA U.S. Environmental Protection Agency FOG Fats, oils and grease gpd Gallons per day LAS Land application system mg/L Milligrams per liter (parts per million (ppm)) NPDES National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System O&M Operation and maintenance POTW Publicly owned treatment works RCRA Resource Conservation and Recovery Act NAICS North American Industry Classification System TSS Total suspended solids U.S.C. United States Code  
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-7. - Water and sewer requirements. 
    This section shall be applicable to the service district located in the City of Brunswick. 
(a)  Water. 
(1)  No person shall install or operate a private well within an established service area for the purpose of obtaining potable water when utility water service is available. 
(2)  All new developments and other new construction shall be required to connect to public water lines within 60 days after service becomes available within 500 feet of the corner of the property nearest to the water main. 
(3)  The utility shall have the right to reserve a sufficient supply of water at all times in its reservoirs to provide for fires and other emergencies, and may restrict the quantity of water used by water service customers when a water shortage exists, or whenever the public welfare may require it. It shall be unlawful to violate any water use restriction established by the utility. 
(4)  No person shall use water supplied by the utility system for the purpose of watering lawns, flowers, gardens or other vegetation, or for the purpose of washing motor vehicles, sidewalks or porches, during periods when a shortage of water exists, as determined by the utility based on the best interests of the health and welfare of the users. 
(5)  Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants in the incorporated and unincorporated service areas may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
a.  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, mules, horses, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
b.  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
c.  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
d.  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
e.  Watering personal food gardens; 
f.  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
g.  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
h.  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
i.  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
j.  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
k.  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
l.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
m.  Hydroseeding. 
No person shall use or allow the use of water supplied by the utility in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this chapter. 
The city code enforcement officers or such other person or persons as the city manager may from time to time designate in writing, in conjunction with the utility, shall enforce violations of outdoor water use under this subsection (a)(5) pursuant to section 1-6, of this Code. 
(6)  All leaks in the service line or any other pipe or fixture on the premises of the user shall be immediately repaired. Upon failure to repair any such leak, service may be discontinued until repairs are made. 
(7)  The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other human congregation purposes and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located a public water system, upon failure of a private water system, and at the owner's expense, the owner shall connect directly with the public water in accordance with the provisions of this chapter within 60 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public water is within 500 feet of the property line. 
(b)  Sewer. 
(1)  No person shall install or operate a private facility for sewage treatment and disposal within an established service area when utility sewer service is available. 
(2)  All new developments and other new construction shall be required to connect to public sewer within 60 days after it becomes available within 500 feet of the corner of the property nearest to the sewer main. 
(3)  All premises shall be provided, by the owner thereof, with at least one toilet. All toilets shall be kept in a sanitary and working condition. 
(4)  No person shall dispose of human excrement except in a toilet. 
(5)  It shall be unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet any non-storm wastewater or other polluted waters, including septic tank effluent or cesspool overflow, to any open drain, ground or well-penetrating water bearing formation, except where an NPDES and/or LAS permit has been issued by the EPD. 
(6)  Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any septic tank, cesspool or other facility intended or used for the disposal of wastewater. 
(7)  The owner of any house, building, or property used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other human congregation purposes and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located a public sanitary sewer, upon failure of a private wastewater disposal system, and at the owner's expense, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days after notice, provided that said public sewer is within 500 feet of the property line. 
(8)  Except as otherwise provided herein, all sinks, dish washing machines, lavatories, basins, shower baths, bathtubs, laundry tubs, washing machines, and similar plumbing fixtures or appliances shall be connected to the public sewer. 
(c)  When the owner determines that it is not feasible to install a water line or sewer service lateral and/or extension of water lines or sewer trunk lines for a single-family residential unit, the owner may submit to the director a written request for an exemption from connection to the utility's system. The owner's request shall include documentation of such feasibility determination by the owner. The director may request additional documentation before making a decision concerning the requested exemption. The director shall submit his decision to the owner by certified mail. 
(1)  Administrative appeal. The owner who has been denied an exemption by the director may appeal the adverse decision to the board of commissioners of the utility as follows: 
a.  The owner must submit to the director a written appeal within 30 calendar days from the date of the decision upon which the appeal is based. The written appeal must include an independent feasibility report by a professional qualified to make such determinations, such as an engineer. The feasibility report shall contain the reasons for specific objections to the director's decision to deny the exemption, and the alternative the owner intends to utilize in lieu of connecting to the utility system. 
b.  Failure to submit a timely appeal to the director or failure to provide the information required for the appeal in subsection (c)(1)a., above, shall be deemed a waiver by the owner of the right to an administrative appeal. 
(2)  Final decision. The decision of the board of commissioners of the utility shall be considered a final administrative action for purposes of judicial review. 
(d)  The minimum size of the water and/or sewer infrastructure to be installed shall be sized to serve a new development or facility adequately, and any incremental increase in the sizing of the water and/or sewer infrastructure required by the utility shall be paid for by the utility. 
(e)  No person shall interfere with or damage any utility facility, machinery, or other property used for the procurement and distribution of water or for the collection and treatment of sewage. 
(f)  As necessity may arise in the case of a break, emergency or for other unavoidable cause, the utility shall have the right to temporarily cut off the water supply or wastewater service, in order to make necessary repairs, connections, etc. In such case, the utility shall not be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered by the customer; nor shall the utility be liable for any claim against it at any time for interruption in service, lessening of the supply, inadequate pressure, quality of water or for any causes beyond its control. 
(g)  Water connection shall be allowed for residential and light commercial landscape irrigation purposes by installation of a separate meter in accordance with section 22-7.1. Non-domestic use of water for commercial application may be allowed when the use is no more than the monthly average for domestic use pursuant to national standards. Separate irrigation meters may be up to a maximum of one inch in size. A separate service must be established for a landscape irrigation meter. 
(h)  It shall be a violation of this chapter: 
(1)  For the owner or occupant of property served to drive or knowingly permit to be driven a motor vehicle over or so near water and/or sewer appurtenances including, but not limited to, water meters, valves, clean-outs, and manholes, located in unpaved areas, whether on private or public property, as to risk damage thereto; or 
(2)  For any person to place, dispose or permit the placement, disposal or deposit of waste, trash, soil, building materials or other substances, objects, or obstructions in, on or around water and/or sewer appurtenances including, but not limited to, water meters, valves, clean-outs, and manholes on private or public property. No person shall allow or permit such appurtenances to be obstructed or obscured by vehicles, boats, trees, shrubs, plants or in any other manner so as to impede its intended use or access. The utility shall have the legal authority and right hereunder to enter the premises to remove or trim any obstructions as needed to effect replacement or repairs to such appurtenances. Any damage resulting from the removal of obstructions will be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(3)  Repeated violations will be deemed cause for discontinuation of service. 
(i)  Right of entry. The utility shall have the legal authority and right hereunder to enter the premises, at all reasonable hours, or as necessity may dictate due to an emergency, where water or sewer lines are in use, for the purpose of inspecting pipes or fixtures, setting and repairing meters, connecting or disconnecting service, effecting emergency repairs, and collection of potable water samples when EPD/EPA regulations require the utility to take samples "at the customer's tap," enforcing the provisions of this chapter or any rules or policies promulgated pursuant to the authority thereof including, but not limited to, access to determine compliance with all the requirements of this chapter and any permits or orders issued hereunder. Unreasonable delays in allowing the utility access to the premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(j)  If all or any portion of the utility infrastructure is repaired or replaced for reasons, other than failure due to normal usage, resulting from neglect or some act of the customer or owner of the property served, then the cost of the repairs will be charged to the customer. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 1021, § 1, 11-17-2010; Ord. No. 1038, § 1, 1-7-2015) 
Sec. 22-7.1. - Water on separate meter used for landscape irrigation only. 
(a)  Water conservation: All irrigation systems shall be designed, installed, maintained, altered, repaired, serviced, and operated in a manner that shall prevent the waste of water, promotes the most efficient use of water, and applies the least amount of water that is required to maintain healthy individual plant material or turf and control erosion. 
(b)  Definitions: As used in this section the following words shall mean: 
    Backflow means the undesirable reversal of flow of water or mixtures of water and other liquids, gasses, or other substances into the distribution pipes of the utility's potable supply of water from any source or sources. 
    Backflow prevention assembly means an assembly used to prevent backflow into the utility's potable water system. The type of assembly used should be based on the degree of hazard or pollution which may impair or have an adverse effect on the quality of potable water. 
(c)  Application: All users of the water of the unified system shall submit an application to the director, or his designee, for the installation of separate meter for landscape or irrigation purposes. The application must be completed, submitted and approved by the director prior to installation. The director, or his designee, may not approve the application for an irrigation meter when the existing water main does not provide sufficient water volume or pressure to support the demand of an irrigation system without causing unacceptably low water pressure for other customers on the same water main, or when installation of the meter would cause a situation which is likely to create an imminent hazard to the utility's water distribution system. No meter will be issued when the utility determines, based on USGS geological study results, that the Floridan Aquifer, or any other aquifer, supplying the water to the customer is in distress. 
(d)  Fees, rates and charges; billing: The costs associated with installing a landscape or irrigation meter shall be set forth in the utility's rate resolution, as amended from time to time. A monthly bill will be provided to customers itemizing irrigation only meters. 
(e)  Equipment and maintenance: 
(1)  All automatic sprinkler systems shall be equipped with a functioning rain sensor/shut-off device that ensures the automatic irrigation system will not operate during time of precipitation. Rain sensors shall be adjusted and set so that they automatically shut off the irrigation system after one-fourth inch of rainfall or more has occurred. No person shall adjust either the rain sensor or the irrigation system so that the rain sensor is not able to override and turn off the irrigation system after one-fourth inch of rain has fallen. 
(2)  Irrigation heads shall be adjusted as to prevent water from landing on impervious surfaces including, but not limited to, sidewalks, driveways, streets. 
(3)  Backflow prevention assemblies shall be installed to ensure protection of the potable water supply and tested annually by a certified backflow technician to ensure proper operation. The results of the test shall be submitted to the director, or his designee, within ten working days of the customer receiving the inspection report. 
(f)  Operating schedule: 
(1)  Irrigation systems shall be allowed to operate only on the scheduled days and time periods set forth by the utility. 
(2)  Irrigation systems shall not be allowed to operate during periods of rainfall in accordance with paragraph (e)(1) herein above. 
(3)  During water emergencies, irrigation systems shall only be allowed to operate during times as set forth either by the State of Georgia or the utility. 
(g)  Discontinuance of service: Service may be discontinued for any one of the following reasons: 
(1)  For misrepresentation in the application as to property fixtures to be supplied or the use to be made of the water supply; 
(2)  For the use of water for any other property or purpose than that described in the application; 
(3)  For waste of water through improperly sized pipes, fixture or otherwise; 
(4)  For failure to keep the connections, service lines or fixtures in good repair; 
(5)  For nonpayment of account for irrigation meter service or of any scheduled related fee or charge; 
(6)  For tampering with any service pipe, meter, curb stop, or any other appliance of the utility controlling or regarding the water supply; 
(7)  In case of vacancy of the premises; or 
(8)  For causing to be introduced, without permission, into the customer's water system from a supply other than that of the utility. 
(9)  The customer's service may be discontinued, either temporarily or permanently, when the utility determines, based on USGS geological study results, that the Floridan Aquifer, or any other aquifer, supplying the water to the customer is in distress. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 2, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 22-8. - Application and connection to water and sewer service. 
(a)  No connection shall be made to a public sewer or water main, nor water furnished to any premises, without a written and approved application having first been made to the utility in compliance with the requirements of this section. 
(1)  The utility furnishing water or sewer service for residential use to a tenant will not seek to recover any charges or penalties for the furnishing of water or sewer service to or for the tenant(s residential use from any subsequent tenant on account of nonpayment of charges by a previous tenant. The utility may, however, require that service to subsequent tenants be furnished on the account of the landlord or property owner in accordance with utility policies. 
(2)  The utility may refuse water or sewer service to commercial or industrial property based on unpaid bills incurred by a former tenant on the property in accordance with utility policies. 
(b)  At the time of filing an application, the applicant for connection to the public sewer or water main or for water service shall pay to the utility all such charges, fees and deposit(s) as required herein, except as otherwise provided for herein below. In the event that the applicant is required to reimburse the utility for actual costs, the applicant shall pay the amount estimated by the utility. An adjustment shall be made after completion of the connection if the estimate of charges is inconsistent with actual costs to the utility. 
(1)  A customer with ten or more accounts may provide the utility with an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of a cash deposit for account(s), provided, however, the customer is in good standing with the utility, and has had no more than two late payments, no collection charges, no cut-offs, and no returned (NSF) checks within the prior 12 months. 
(2)  The letter of credit shall be issued by a federally insured lending institution authorized to do business in the State of Georgia, payable to the utility, and in a form acceptable to the utility's chief financial officer. All fees for the letter of credit shall be paid by the customer. For new accounts, the letter of credit shall become effective on or before the date the customer account(s) is established. 
(3)  If the letter of credit is for a time period less than the life of the customer account(s), then the customer must renew the letter of credit or replace it on or before 45 days prior to the expiration date of the letter of credit. If the customer fails to deliver to the utility either the renewal letter of credit or a replacement prior to the 45 days, then the utility may draw the entire face amount of the letter of credit held by the utility as security for the customer(s obligations to pay all deposits for its accounts. 
(4)  The utility will release the letter of credit when the customer closes the account(s); except that the utility shall be authorized to draw upon such letter of credit to recover any fines, penalties or sums due and owing to and assessed by the utility. 
(c)  All new construction or rehabilitation of a current water or wastewater system shall be designed and constructed in conformance with the utility's standards as set forth in the utility's "Standards for Water and Sewer and Design and Construction" and "Water and Wastewater Development Procedures," as amended from time to time. No certificate of occupancy will be issued for new construction until the utility affirms that the new construction meets the specifications set forth herein. 
(1)  No person other than an authorized employee of the utility shall uncover, make any connection with or opening into, alter, use or disturb any public sewer or water main or appurtenances thereof except by written permission of the director. Connection shall be made at a wye, manhole or connection point unless otherwise approved by the director. 
(2)  The director may authorize licensed master plumbers and utility contractors licensed in any state to install connections to water or wastewater facilities upon written application. 
(3)  The owner, or his designee, is responsible for contacting the utility to request an inspection of the installation prior to the work being covered over. In the event that such installation is not made in accordance with specifications and/or standards of the utility, then the director may require the installation to be corrected or removed and reinstalled as necessary, including uncovering the work if the customer failed to have it previously inspected by the utility. 
(d)  The owner of the property to be served shall be responsible for the cost of the installation of the building sewer and/or water service lines from the facility to be served to a point where the building sewer and/or service lines tie into the utility's system. The owner is responsible also for any portion of the building sewer and/or water service lines extending onto the public right-of-way or utility easement. 
(e)  The utility shall install and maintain all necessary fittings, pipes and appurtenances, including all meters and meter boxes, to deliver water to the water service line, at a point immediately outside the property line in an alley, easement or public right-of-way. Notwithstanding that the applicant for service will have paid the cost of labor and materials, all such fittings, pipes, appurtenances, meters and meter boxes will be and remain the property of the utility, and shall be accessible to, and under the control of, the utility at all times. 
(f)  The water service line and building sewer line shall be of appropriate material and of ample size, weight and quality for the premises and for the purpose intended and shall be subject to the approval of the director, who shall have authority to refuse connection and service to the premises, in his discretion, if he deems the installation inadequate based on sound engineering practices. 
(g)  New connections for water service shall be available to individual customers only, on the basis of connection for each residential or commercial unit on the premises, and shall not be provided for multiple residential or business units by a single connection. 
(h)  The owner of the property served shall be responsible for maintenance of portions of the building sewer line between the facility served and the public right-of-way or utility easement and portions of the water service line between the facility served and the water meter, provided that if the water meter is located on the property served, the owner shall be responsible, also, for maintenance of portions of the water service line between the meter and the public right-of-way or utility easement. The utility shall be responsible for maintenance of the other portions of the building sewer line and water service lines and meter, provided, however, that the director shall hold the owner responsible for the cost of repairs or replacement of such portions of the building sewer or water service lines and meter when he finds that such repairs or replacement were made necessary by fault attributable to the owner or occupant of the property, or his agent, employee or contractor. 
(i)  No person, firm or corporation shall make, cause to be made, or allow to exist, a cross-connection between a private water or sewerage facility and any system belonging to the utility. All private water or sewerage facilities shall be kept entirely separate and apart from the utility systems at all times, and the separation of a private facility by the placement of a valve between such facility and the utility system shall not be permitted. 
(j)  A separate and independent building sewer line shall be provided for every building. Where a building stands to the rear of another on a single lot and no separate building sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, courtyard, or driveway, the utility may grant permission for the building sewer from the front building to be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer line, upon a showing of necessity. The utility does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(k)  Existing building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found on examination and test by the utility to meet all of the requirements of this chapter. 
(l)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building water and/or sewer line, the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, jointing, testing and backfilling the trench shall all conform to the requirements of the city's building code or "Water and Wastewater Specifications," as applicable, or as such document(s) is superseded by the utility's "Water and Sewer Design and Construction Standards and Specifications." 
(m)  Whenever possible, the building sewer line shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement or first floor. No building sewer line shall be laid parallel to or within three feet of any bearing wall which might thereby be weakened. The depth shall be sufficient to afford protection from live loads (automobiles, etc.) which may be superimposed. The building sewer line shall be made at uniform grade and in straight alignment insofar as possible; and when turns of 90 degree angles are required clean outs shall be installed. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(n)  No person shall maintain or make a connection of roof down spouts, exterior foundation drains, area-way drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building sewer line or building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer. 
(o)  Before any underground portions of a public water service line or sewer line are covered, the applicant shall notify the utility when the lines are ready for inspection and connection to the utility systems. The connection thereof shall be made to the public water main or sewer by an authorized representative of the utility and only after inspection and approval. 
(p)  All excavations for installation or repair of water service lines and building sewer lines in the right-of-way and/or easement shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazards. Streets, sidewalks, parkways and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored to city standards by the person, his agents and assigns, responsible for doing the work. All restoration by such person shall be accomplished as soon as the construction in the disturbed area has been completed and performed to the satisfaction of the city engineer. 
(q)  The director shall keep a permanent and accurate record of the location, depth, and direction of all new public water and sewer lines for connections, including any landmarks that may be necessary to provide an adequate description. 
(r)  When any building heretofore having water service is to be occupied by two or more tenants using water through one meter, the application for service shall be made only by the owner of the building or his authorized agent. The owner shall agree in such application to be responsible for the payment of all bills for water and wastewater services to the premises. 
(s)  A new application must be made, and approved by the director, or his designee, for re-connection in the event of a change in the occupancy or possession of premises furnished water and/or sewer service. The utility shall have the right to discontinue such service until a new application is made and approved. Should a new occupant of such premises fail to apply to the utility for service within 48 hours after taking possession, he shall be liable for all charges that have accrued since the last account of record, unless the applicant proves occupancy at a later date. 
(t)  Notwithstanding the provisions of subsection (e), above, the director shall have discretion to permit the location of the water meter or meters within the property line of the owner of the premises, subject to agreement of the owner upon reasonable conditions therefore. 
(u)  The utility shall define the availability of sewers and project scope associated with construction. 
(v)  If any owner allows the entrance of infiltration or inflow, the utility, upon written notice, may take one or more of the following actions: 
(1)  Require the owner to repair or replace the sewer lateral within 30 days of notice; 
(2)  Charge the owner a sewer rate that reflects the costs of the additional expense of sewage treatment from the owner's property; and/or 
(3)  Require the owner to disconnect his sewer from the utility sewer system or be charged for utility disconnection. 
(4)  The utility shall have the right to enter the premises to periodically inspect sewer service laterals and systems of individual users to determine the existence of ground water infiltration. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 1038, § 3, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 22-9. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of section [22-7] of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private wastewater disposal system complying with the provisions of this chapter and the requirements of the health department. 
(b)  Septic tanks, and/or a decentralized treatment unit, shall be constructed, repaired, altered, enlarged, and maintained in accordance with the plans and specifications approved by the health department. Septic tanks shall be maintained in sanitary working order. 
(c)  No person shall construct, repair, alter, or enlarge any septic tank and/or a decentralized treatment unit unless he shall hold a valid permit for such work issued by the health department. 
(d)  When a public sewer becomes available within 500 feet to a property served by a private wastewater disposal system, and upon failure of such private system, and at the owner's expenses, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer within 60 days after notice. Any septic tanks, cesspools, and similar private wastewater disposal facilities shall then be cleaned of sludge and filled with suitable material. 
(e)  When connected to the utility, the owner shall operate and maintain the private wastewater disposal facilities to the utility's standards and specifications and in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the utility. 
(f)  Any wastewater consisting of pumpage from a septic tank or other disposal system will be accepted only at the appropriate facility with the prior approval of the director. 
(g)  No statement contained in this chapter shall be construed to interfere with any additional requirements that may be imposed by the appropriate state or local regulatory agencies having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-10. - Metering. 
(a)  All water required by the user from the utility system shall be metered by the utility except fire suppression systems. All meters shall be furnished by the utility and shall remain the property of the utility and be accessible to it and under its control. The meter shall be connected to the customer's water service line so as to measure the entire water supply to the premises. 
(b)  The first meter shall be installed by the utility at the property owner's expense and will be maintained by the utility against normal usage and wear and tear. The customer shall notify the utility of any injury to or the non-working of the meter as soon as it comes to his knowledge. When the size of the meter is upgraded for any reason, the difference between the fees charged for the old meter size and the new meter size shall be collected prior to installation of the new meter. 
(c)  No person shall run or extend a water line, pipe or hose from one lot or tract of land across another lot or boundary line for the purpose of serving more than one residence or other building from a single water meter except when authorized by the director under emergency conditions. Notwithstanding, in the event such emergency occurs outside the office hours of the utility, then the next business day the person shall notify the director; an action plan will be developed to resolve the problem. 
(d)  The quantity of water registered by a meter shall be conclusive on both the water customer and the utility, except when the meter has been found to be registering inaccurately, or has ceased to register. In the latter case, the quantity may be determined by the average registration of the meter when in order. In case of a disputed account involving the accuracy of a meter, such meter shall be tested upon request of the customer in conformity with the usual standards or methods of testing meters. In the event that the meter so tested is found to have an error in registration of three percent or more, the customer's bill will be increased or decreased accordingly. If the meter is removed at the customer's request and for the purpose of testing its accuracy, a fee as established from time to time by the utility will be assessed if the meter proves to be accurate to current American Water Works Association standards. If the meter registers outside said standards, then no charge will be assessed, the customer's bill will be adjusted, and a new meter installed. 
(e)  If the water meter is repaired or replaced for reasons, other than failure due to normal usage, resulting from neglect or some act of the customer or owner of the property served, then the cost of the repairs will be charged to the customer. 
(f)  It shall be a violation of this chapter: 
(1)  For the owner or occupant of property served to drive or knowingly permit to be driven a motor vehicle over or so near the water meter, when located in unpaved areas and whether on public or private property, as to risk damage to the meter or connections thereto; or 
(2)  For any person to place, dispose or permit the placement, disposal or deposit of waste, trash, soil, sod, building materials or other substances, objects, or obstructions in, on or around meters on private or public property. No person shall allow or permit a meter to be obstructed or obscured by vehicles, boats, trees, shrubs, plants or in any other manner so as to impede its intended use or access. The utility shall have the legal authority and right hereunder to enter the premises to remove or trim any obstructions as needed to read or effect replacement or repairs to the meter. Any damage resulting from the removal of obstructions will be the responsibility of the property owner. 
(3)  Repeated violations will be deemed cause for discontinuation of service. 
(g)  It shall be unlawful for any person except authorized personnel of the utility to remove or otherwise handle or tamper with water meters. 
(h)  When a user pumps water from his own well or other source of supply and discharges waste, process water or sewage into the sanitary sewage system, said user shall be required to install a proper measuring device or devices to measure all such wastewater. 
(1)  The user shall be required to pay the cost of installation and all fees and user charges for sewer service in an amount equal to the amount charged as if all water used was purchased from the utility. 
(2)  When the user connects to the utility water system, the utility will credit the user the value of the meter and meter box against the installation/operational tap fee and move the meter to the property line. User may continue to use the private water supply for irrigation purposes but shall separate private water supply from the utility water supply at the expense of the user. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-11. - Curb stop or cutoff valve requirements. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person other than an authorized employee of the utility, or person specifically authorized in writing by the director, to cut the water supply on or off by use of the curb stop between a water meter and water main, or at any other location or point on the utility system, except in an emergency. 
(b)  In all water connections, a curb stop or cutoff valve shall be placed between the water meter and water service line, which will be owned by and under the control of the property owner for emergency use, so that the water supply may be cut off for the repair of any pipe or plumbing fixture on the premises without interference with the meter or utility curb stop. 
(c)  The director shall be authorized to require the installation, at the property owner's expense, of a curb stop or cutoff valve between the water meter and water service line at any or all premises heretofore having utility water service, as circumstances may render appropriate in the discretion of the director, to reduce interference with the utility system. 
(d)  The curb stop, meter box, and meter at or near the property lines shall be the property of the utility. The line from the meter to the premises served shall be the property of the owner, and all repairs to such lines shall be at the owner's expense. 
(e)  The utility shall have the legal authority and right hereunder to enter the premises to repair, replace, or remove the meter assembly when such assembly is located within the owner's property. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-12. - Service to fire suppression systems. 
(a)  All new customers who desire both regular commercial service and fire suppression service shall install separate lines, one to be used for fire suppression. The director may require all customers who now have only one service connection for combined commercial service and for fire suppression to install separate lines. 
(b)  The customer shall provide and maintain separate and independent plumbing facilities, including a Globe Detector Check Valve or comparable equipment, and shall maintain the fire suppression system in good working order. The director may require, at the owner's expense, installation of such a valve on an existing system when the valve is missing or inoperable and incapable of repair. 
(c)  The customer shall not be permitted to take water from the fire suppression system except for fire suppression purposes. 
(d)  Monthly fees for fire suppression service will be charged in accordance with a schedule of fees established by the utility. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-13. - Fire hydrants. 
(a)  No person, except those duly authorized, shall take water from any fire hydrant for any purpose, unless specifically permitted in writing by the director, or his designee, for the particular time and purpose. 
(b)  When a permit is granted, the customer will establish an account, pay the applicable fees, and install a hydrant meter. The quantity of water used shall be charged to the customer at the prevailing rates in effect in that particular water service district. 
(c)  In the event that any person shall take water from a fire hydrant, with or without permission, he shall be liable for payment for the quantity of water so taken or consumed, as estimated by the director, in an amount consistent with charges for water service in that particular water service district. The estimate of the director shall be conclusive upon such person. 
(d)  In the case of any person taking water from a fire hydrant without permission, the foregoing liability for payment in subsection (b), above, for the water so taken shall be in addition to any penalties otherwise provided in this chapter or by law. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-14. - Backflow prevention; public water supply. 
(a)  No water service connection to any premises shall be installed or maintained or permitted by the utility unless the water supply is protected as required by state laws and regulations and this chapter. Service of water to any premises shall be discontinued by the utility should a backflow prevention device required by this chapter not be installed (or not be installed as designed), tested and maintained, or if it is found that a backflow prevention device has been removed or bypassed, or if an unprotected cross-connection exists on the premises. The user shall be notified in writing that he has 30 days from the date of the communication to correct the condition or defect. Any corrective action taken will the responsibility of the user and at the user's expense. At the expiration of the 30-day period, the service will be disconnected if corrective action has not been taken. Should it be determined that there could be a possibility of high-hazard contaminants entering the utility water system, service will be disconnected immediately, without waiting said 30-day period, and the user shall be promptly notified in writing that service will not be reconnected until corrective action has been taken. 
(b)  Should it be determined that the installation of the water facilities of a user have not been made in accordance with plans approved by the utility when application for service was made, where such approval is required pursuant to this chapter, service shall be discontinued immediately. 
(c)  Each service connection from the public water system supplying water to premises having an auxiliary water system shall be protected against backflow of water from the premises into the public water system. 
(d)  Each service connection from the public water system supplying water to premises on which any substance is or may be handled in such a manner as to create an actual or potential hazard to the water system shall be protected against backflow of the water from the premises into the public system. This shall include premises having industrial piping systems handling industrial fluids or process water, or waters originating from the public water supply which have been subject to deterioration in sanitary quality, or any other premises or circumstances where a hydraulic linkage may occur permanently or temporarily connecting a source of contamination or pollution to the public water system. 
(e)  The protective device required shall be an approved reduced pressure principle backflow preventer device, or a double check-valve assembly, that has been designed, constructed, and tested to be operative in accordance with nationally accepted standards. Backflow prevention devices required hereunder shall be approved by the utility and shall be installed by and at the expense of the user. The devices shall be installed in an accessible location and in a manner approved by the utility. The devices shall be placed within five feet of the building, but not at the property line, unless otherwise approved by the director, or his designee, based on the feasibility of placement. The user shall regularly test and service such devices and maintain them in satisfactory operating condition and shall repair or replace such devices if they are found to be defective. A record of such tests shall be maintained for review by the utility. 
(f)  Typical installations and placement pursuant to subsection (e), above, which require an approved backflow prevention device shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Service connections to any premises where there is an auxiliary water supply. 
(2)  Service connections to any premises on which industrial fluids are handled in a separate system and there is or may be an actual or potential cross-connection on the premises. 
(3)  Service connections to any premises on which there is a sewage treatment plant, including privately owned sewage plants in buildings, sewage pumping stations, and stormwater pumping stations. 
(4)  Service connections to a hospital, medical or dental building, mortuary, multi-story apartment or office building, or other similar premises where the utility determines that an actual or potential hazard exists. 
(5)  Temporary connection to a fire hydrant. 
(g)  It shall be the duty of the director, or his designee, to implement and enforce the provisions of this section and to develop and implement an effective cross-connection control program in accordance with EPD regulations and guidelines, to ensure that no connections with unapproved water sources or cross-connections with nonpotable systems are made to the public water system. The utility shall have the legal authority and right hereunder to enter and make inspections of any new premises pending application for water service or any existing premises connected to the public water system, to approve or disapprove existing or new installations, to require the submission of plans for new construction where appropriate and to approve or disapprove the same, to make periodic inspections of all connections to the public water system, and to order the termination of water service when such termination is authorized hereby. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-15. - Satellite system. 
(a)  The owner or an association of home owners formed under Georgia law (hereinafter referred to as "owner" in this section), of an existing, or proposed, satellite system who currently, or in the future, receives potable water from the utility and/or discharges into the utility's system shall enter into an agreement between the utility and the owner. The agreement shall be conditioned upon and include, but will not be limited to, agreed areas of responsibility, standards of operation and maintenance, quality of discharge, quantity of infiltration and inflow, authority for utility inspections, and remedies for non-compliant issues. 
(b)  The owner of an existing, or proposed, satellite system consisting of a sanitary sewer system discharging wastewater to the utility's facilities shall maintain and operate the satellite system in a manner that prevents the discharge of abnormal wastewater, stormwater, excessive groundwater infiltration, excessive amounts of sand or other settling solids, cooling water, and other unpolluted wastewater into the utility's system. 
(c)  Failure of the owner to adequately operate and maintain a water and/or sanitary sewer system wastewater in the manner prescribed in paragraphs (a) and (b), above, is subject to discontinuance of service. 
(d)  All damages and costs to facilities of the utility caused by the inadequate operation or maintenance of a satellite system, and costs incurred by the utility in providing remedial maintenance, repair, engineering and administrative efforts, surveillance and sampling, cleanup equipment, and legal fees and expenses which are directly attributable to the inadequate maintenance and operation of the satellite system, shall be paid by the owner of the satellite system. Failure to adequately operate and maintain a satellite system may result in the discontinuance of services. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-16. - Unserved areas. 
(a)  Request for service may be initiated by a property owner, a group of property owners, a neighborhood association, the city, the county, the utility, or the county board of health. Request shall be submitted to the director in writing. 
(b)  The installation of primary transition mains will be normally funded by the utility; however, in some instances participation by property owners is appropriate. In other instances, mains may be constructed through an unserved area to reach a new development for which the utility has required water and/or sewer, in which case, funding may be accompanied by participation of the utility and the developer. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a request, the director shall: 
(1)  Evaluate the request in the light of circumstances prevailing at the time and future plan including, but not limited to, the following factors: 
a.  Failure of existing wells and septic tanks in the area; 
b.  Programmed pavement of a dirt road; 
c.  Projected revenue and availability of funds budgeted in the capital improvement plan as designated in the utility's master plan; 
d.  Enlargement or constriction of the area to be served; 
e.  Compatibility with other water and sewer projects; and 
f.  The best interests of the utility with respect to the public health, safety and welfare of the community. 
Coordination may be effected with the county board of health as required and such other city or county agencies or departments which may be effected. 
(2)  Prepare an estimate of the cost of the project. 
(3)  Within 45 days after receipt of the request for service, a report will be submitted to the water and sewer commission indicating facts bearing on the project and his recommendation. 
(4)  Immediately subsequent to action of the water and sewer commission, notify in writing the applicants and all property owners affected by the decision of the commission. 
(5)  If the project is approved, schedule the work at the earliest practicable time. 
(d)  In the case of minor extension of lines, the director may proceed with the work provided: 
(1)  Unexpended funds for "unserved areas" are available in the approved budget. 
(2)  Expenditures do not exceed the spending authority of the director. 
(3)  Report is made to the water and sewer commission at its next regular meeting. 
(e)  Contractual arrangement with developers: 
(1)  Notwithstanding any provision in this section to the contrary, the utility may enter into private contracts with developers consistent with provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-71-13(b) to construct system improvements that benefit the water or sewer systems as a whole as well as the developer involved. Contracts involve financial participation of the developer. The degree of benefit to the utility and developer shall be evaluated by the director based on facts available at the time and applicable capital improvement plans of the utility. The evaluation shall identify capacities created and shall fix the percentage of participation by the developer as his proportionate share of development. 
(2)  Contracts should be standardized to the extent circumstances and special conditions pertaining to systems improvement will permit. This standardization does not pertain to the capacity evaluation by the director that identifies the developer's proportionate share. 
(3)  Costs of required land, other than street rights-of-way and easements, shall be considered as part of the improvement cost. If the land required is within the development, however, its value shall be based on cost to the developer of the unimproved acreage of the planned development. 
(4)  The contract may specify reimbursement to the developer from capital tapping fees generated in the area benefitting from the improvement to the extent of developers financial participation that is in excess of the amount specified in the contract as the developer's proportionate share. A map delineating the area of improvement shall be prepared and attached to the contract. Reimbursement shall not exceed the dollar amount of such developer's participation in cost. 
(5)  Expenditures and costs which may be eligible for reimbursement of proportionate share of development: Construction of water production facilities, wastewater pollution control plants, wastewater lift stations, water distribution and sewer collection infrastructure; engineering pertaining to such construction; survey and legal costs pertaining to the improvements, and land required for system improvements. 
(6)  The contract may require, at developer's expense, a guarantee of performance by irrevocable letter of credit or other guarantee acceptable to the utility's attorney. 
(7)  Project improvements solely benefitting the developer are not eligible for utility participation. Such improvements shall be constructed at the developer's or owner's expense in accordance with the city's "Water and Wastewater Specifications" or as such document is superseded by the utility's "Water and Sewer Design and Construction Standards and Specifications." 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 22-17-22-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COMMERCIAL WASTE HANDLING (FATS, OILS AND GREASE) 

Sec. 22-21. - Purpose. 
(a)  Excessive amounts of fats, oils, grease, grit, sand and other solid or viscous materials can cause blockage and obstruction in the sanitary sewer system causing untreated wastewater to overflow into the environment. Much of the waste material that has the potential to cause blockage or obstruction originates from commercial facilities, such as food preparation and vehicle maintenance facilities. This chapter sets forth minimum and uniform requirements for the treatment and disposal of commercial waste into the sanitary sewer system, and the transportation and ultimate disposal of commercial waste sludge and byproducts. 
(b)  The objective of this chapter is: 
(1)  To minimize the discharge of pollutants associated with commercial waste discharged into the sanitary sewer system that may interfere with normal operation of the system; and 
(2)  To assure that the sludge and byproducts removed from commercial waste treatment systems are transported and disposed of in accordance with Chapter 391-3-6-.24 of the rules and regulations of the EPD. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-22. - Coverage and exclusions. 
(a)  This chapter applies to any facility that generates commercial wastes, to any person who removes commercial wastes, to any person who processes commercial wastes, and to any person who accepts commercial waste for final disposal. 
(b)  This chapter applies only within the geographical and political boundaries of the city. However, any transporter or disposal site operator within the city, who receives commercial wastes (whether such wastes originate within or outside the city or state), must still comply with the registration, permitting, and manifest requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-23. - Requirements. 
(a)  General. 
(1)  It is the responsibility of the originator to assure that the commercial waste removed from the originator's facility is properly treated and discharged to the sewer system, wastewater, sludge and byproducts are transported by a permitted transporter, and disposed of at an EPD approved commercial waste processing and disposal facility. 
(2)  The originator of commercial waste shall not allow a transporter to remove waste from their facility without a current commercial waste transporter issued by the utility. 
(b)  Permitting process. 
(1)  There is only one type of permit required under this chapter, which is a commercial waste transporter permit. 
(2)  The permit for the transporter is issued by the utility under this chapter. However, prior to obtaining a commercial waste transporter permit, the transporter must first register as a transporter of commercial waste with the EPD and obtain a transporter registration number. This registration number must be included in the permit number issued by the utility. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-24. - Manifests. 
    All originators, transporters, processing and disposal site operators, involved in the removal, transport, and disposal of commercial wastes and commercial waste sludge and byproducts, shall participate in proper maintenance of manifests. This manifest will require signatures from the originator, transporter and disposer in order to maintain and establish accountability. The approved manifest is a multi-copy form. A sample copy of an approved manifest is on file with the utility. 
(a)  The originator shall: 
(1)  Sign the received manifest form, maintain such record on site for a period of three years, making it available for inspection by the utility. 
(2)  Upon receipt of the completed copy of the manifest from the transporter, the originator must provide a copy of the manifest within ten working days to the utility. A manifest is considered complete after the commercial waste is delivered and disposed of at the commercial waste disposal or processing facility and the manifest has been signed and completed by the disposal or processing facility. 
(3)  Report any spills to the utility upon becoming aware of a spill that could impact any surrounding areas such as storm drains, adjacent streams or ground surface where the transporter has removed waste from the facility's pretreatment system. Failure to notify the utility of a spill will constitute a violation of this chapter and fines may be assessed to the commercial waste originator as well as the transporter. 
(b)  T he transporter shall: 
(1)  Utilize a manifest for each location being serviced. 
(2)  Sign the transporter portion of the manifest and leave a copy of the manifest with the originator. 
(3)  Present the manifest to the disposal operator to complete and sign the disposal section, and shall leave one copy of the manifest with the disposal site operator. 
(4)  Send a completed copy of the manifest to the originator with the signature of the disposal site operator within 30 days. 
(5)  Keep one copy of the completed manifest form demonstrating delivery to the disposal site operator for their records and shall maintain such records for a period of three years; except that the transporter's manifest (or copy thereof) covering not less than the immediately preceding 30-day period for a particular tank truck shall be kept in the transporter's tank truck. All such records shall be available for inspection. 
(6)  Ensure that the manifest contains all the information required on the manifest form prescribed and furnished from time to time by the EPD. 
(7)  A transporter must remove the entire contents of any commercial tank that is serviced and dispose of such contents, unmingled with hazardous wastes or septic wastes, and only at a facility authorized to receive such waste. 
(8)  A transporter shall provide a copy of the commercial waste transporter permit for the tank truck to each disposal site where the transporter disposes of commercial wastes. 
(c)  Processing or disposal. A processing or disposal facility of commercial waste shall maintain copies of all manifests of tank pumping at their principal place of business for a period of three years and make such records available for inspection. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-25. - Food service establishments. 
(a)  New facilities. 
(1)  Facilities likely to discharge fats, oils and grease which are newly proposed or constructed, or existing facilities which shall be expanded or renovated to include a food service facility where such facilities did not previously exist, shall be required to install an approved, and properly operated and maintained pretreatment device/interceptor. Pretreatment devices/interceptors shall be installed prior to the opening or reopening of said facilities. 
(2)  New pretreatment devices/interceptors shall be inspected by the utility during installation and prior to use to ascertain compliance with this chapter. 
(b)  Existing facilities. Existing commercial facilities shall be required to install an approved, properly operated and maintained pretreatment device/interceptor when any of the following conditions exist: 
(1)  Facilities that are found to be contributing fats, oils and grease in quantities sufficient to cause line stoppages or necessitate increased maintenance on the collection system. 
(2)  Remodeling of the food preparation or kitchen waste plumbing facility. 
(3)  Facility change of ownership or lease holder. 
(c)  The separator(s) shall exclude sanitary wastewater and is best located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. See subsection 22-27(c)(1) for alternative installations when special conditions exist. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator(s) shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. A manhole opening must be provided over the discharge pipe and the inlet and outlet pipe(s) for inspection and maintenance purposes. A separate sampling manhole may be required by the utility. 
(d)  The FOG separator equipment shall be pumped out as required herein and maintained by the originator. 
(e)  Alternative treatment methods. The use of any alternative method of treatment is prohibited without written approval of the utility. Alternative treatment systems, such as mechanical grease recovery devices, shall be used on a case-by-case evaluation and authorization of the utility. 
(f)  The use of chemical, enzymes and bacteria is prohibited. The use of any additives shall not be considered as an alternative to an adequate treatment system or in lieu of regular maintenance, as prescribed in this chapter. 
(g)  Maintenance required. All FOG separators shall be maintained at the originator's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. All FOG separators shall be pumped out at a frequency not to exceed 90 days or as required by the utility pursuant to the schedule established by the director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 6-16-2010) 
Sec. 22-26. - Maintenance and service facilities. 
(a)  Sand/oil separator required. All maintenance or service facilities shall provide approved oil and solids removal equipment or facilities sufficient to meet the limitations set forth in this chapter, including remodeling of an automotive related enterprise, commercial laundry or other users that potentially may contribute wastes with petroleum-based oils, greases or lint. 
(b)  The separator(s) shall exclude sanitary wastewater and be located outside of any building and accessible for proper maintenance and inspection. In areas where additional weight loads may exist, the separator(s) shall be installed with traffic bearing covers. A manhole opening must be provided over the discharge pipe and the inlet and outlet pipe(s) for inspection and maintenance purposes. A separate monitoring manhole may be required by the utility. 
(c)  The equipment or facilities shall be installed and maintained by the originator. 
(d)  Maintenance required. All separators shall be maintained at the originator's expense. Maintenance shall include the complete removal of all contents of the separator. All separators shall be pumped out at a frequency not to exceed 90 days or as required by the utility pursuant to the schedule established by the director or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-27. - Interceptor requirements. 
(a)  Design. Approved type of pretreatment device/interceptors shall be either interior and exterior sealed concrete construction or fiberglass construction or equivalent provided that use of any equivalent type requires pre-approval by the utility. Any unit requiring the installation of an outlet filter shall have an approved sample port installed immediately outside the unit. 
(b)  Capacity. 
(1)  Capacity will be based on the following design criteria and will meet the required effluent quality parameters stated herein. Certain applications may require the installation of multiple units installed in series with outlet filters and approved sample port. 
(2)  Restaurants and food service establishments: 
(S) × (GS) × (HR/12) × (LF) = Interceptor capacity, where: 
(S) means number of seats in dining area 
(GS) means gallons of wastewater per seat (at 25 gallons per seat) 
(HR) means number of hours open (divided by 12) 
(LF) means loading factor: 
1.25   Interstate highways 
1.00   4 Lane highways 
0.8   Two lane highways 
0.5   Other highways, locations 
(3)  Hospitals, nursing homes, other types of commercial kitchens with varied seating capacity: 
(M) × (GM) × (LF) = Interceptor capacity, where: 
(M) means meals per day 
(GM) means gallons of wastewater per meal (at five gallons per meal) 
(LF) means loading factor: 
1.0   With dishwasher 
0.5   Without dishwasher 
(c)  Location. 
(1)  The best location for a grease pretreatment device/interceptor is in an area outside of an outside wall and installed in-ground. An alternative device and location will be evaluated on an individual basis for facilities when space limitations prohibit the installation of an in-ground unit, or when special conditions exist, such as highly variable flows, high levels of grease discharge, or other unusual situations that are not adequately addressed by the formulas. 
(2)  Each grease pretreatment device/interceptor shall be installed and connected so that it is easily accessible for inspection, cleaning, and removal of the intercepted grease at any time whether the unit is installed outside in-ground or inside the facility. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 1015, § 1, 6-16-2010) 
Sec. 22-28. - Transporter permits. 
(a)  Any transporter, owning or operating one or more waste tank trucks that receive, transport or dispose of commercial waste in the city, must be registered with EPD. 
(b)  No transporter shall pump-out or vacuum FOG separators, grit traps, sand traps, or oil-water separators without a valid commercial waste transporter permit issued by the utility or other entity authorized by law to issue such permit. 
(c)  Application for the transporter permit must be made on a form prescribed by the EPD. A copy of the transporter permit application is on file with the utility. The utility will issue or deny a request for commercial waste transporter permit within 30 days of receipt of the initial permit application. 
(d)  The transporter shall include the location of the disposal site(s) on the commercial waste transporter permit application. 
(e)  No commercial waste transporter permit shall be issued if the owner of the tank truck(s) is not registered with the EPD. 
(f)  A commercial waste transporter permit shall be required for each individual tank truck owned and operated by a transporter. A copy of a sample commercial waste transporter permit is on file with the utility. 
(g)  The commercial waste transporter permit issued by the utility for operation of a tank truck shall be valid throughout the state. 
(h)  A transporter, who has trucks permitted by the utility, and who decides to have additional trucks permitted by another city or county, or their designee, must provide copies of the current commercial waste transporter permits with the new commercial waste transporter permit application. 
(i)  A transporter cannot have two tank trucks permitted with the same commercial waste transporter permit number. The registration number shall be part of the commercial waste transporter permit number issued by the utility. Every vehicle that transports commercial waste must display on the vehicle the FOG/permit number. 
(j)  Transporter permit fees. A transporter permitting fee will be assessed on an annual basis at a rate of $250.00 for the first truck and $100.00 for each additional truck, payable to the utility, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-15-21(a)(3), or such fee as required by state law, as amended. 
(k)  Vehicle inspection. Annually the utility shall inspect each tank truck prior to the issuance of a commercial waste transporter permit. Such inspection shall verify that the tank truck is substantially leak proof, durable, of easily cleaned construction, and is maintained in good repair. The utility shall maintain records of each inspection. A copy of a sample vehicle inspection form is on file with the utility. 
(l)  Any commercial waste transporter permit issued shall have a fixed term not to exceed one year, or as otherwise established by state law. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-29. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Inspection and entry. 
(1)  Representatives of the utility, after proper identification, shall be permitted to enter the premises of any originator, transporter, processor, disposal site or food service establishment in the city at any reasonable time for the purpose of making inspections to determine compliance with this chapter or the commercial waste transporter permit. 
(2)  Representatives of the utility during inspections of the originator, transporter, processor, and the disposal site operator, may review records to determine compliance with provisions of this chapter. 
(3)  The right of inspection shall include the right to measure, observe, sample, test, record, review and make copies of all pertinent documents in accordance with this chapter. 
(b)  Monitoring. 
(1)  The utility may require the user to provide, operate and maintain, at the user's expense, appropriate monitoring facilities, such as a control manhole, that are safe and accessible at all times, for observation, inspection, sample collection and flow measurement of the user's discharge to the POTW. 
(2)  The utility may impose additional limitations and monitoring requirements for the discharge to the POTW in accordance with the provisions set forth in this chapter. 
(c)  Violations. 
(1)  Facility management practices. 
a.  Written warning. A written warning shall be issued to a user for any one or more multiple violations as set forth below. The user shall have ten working days to complete corrective action and submit evidence of compliance to the utility. A written warning will be issued for failure to: 
1.  Report pumping activities (manifest); 
2.  Maintain on site records at all times; 
3.  Maintain the pretreatment device/interceptor and associated components; or 
4.  Maintain inspection access. 
b.  Notice of violation. Upon re-inspection, a notice of violation shall be issued to a user for failure to comply with the corrective action specified in the written warning. The user shall have five working days to complete the corrective action and submit evidence of compliance to the utility. 
c.  Show cause hearing. 
1.  When a user fails to initiate and/or complete corrective action within the specified time period in response to a notice of violation, the user shall be notified by certified mail of the date, time and place of a hearing, the proposed enforcement action to suspend service, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why water and/or wastewater service should not be suspended immediately. The hearing date shall be within ten working days of the date the notice is mailed. 
2.  The director, or his designee, shall preside as the hearing officer. Upon hearing, the director may suspend service immediately or he may extend an additional time up to 15 working days for the user to remedy the violation(s). The user shall have the right to appear at the hearing with or without an attorney, to introduce evidence, and to cross-examine the witnesses against them. If the user is not in compliance following the extension of time, then the director will suspend water and/or wastewater service immediately. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, and it shall be submitted to the user in writing by certified mail. 
(2)  Interceptor noncompliance. 
a.  Notice to install. Upon inspection, if the utility inspector determines a new facility does not have a pretreatment device/interceptor, or that an existing facility has a pretreatment interceptor that is not functioning properly to meet the pretreatment standards of this chapter, then the inspector shall issue a notice to install an approved, properly functioning pretreatment device/interceptor. The user shall have 90 working days to come into compliance by installing such a device/interceptor. 
b.  Show cause hearing. 
1.  If the violation specified in the notice to install is not remedied at the end of the 90-day period, as shown by a second inspection, the inspector shall issue a second notice, by certified mail, stating the date, place and time of a hearing, and to show cause why the water and/or wastewater service to the user should not be suspended immediately. The hearing date shall be within ten working days of the date the notice is mailed. 
2.  The director, or his designee, shall preside as the hearing officer. Upon hearing, the director may suspend service immediately or he may extend an additional time up to 30 working days for the user to remedy the violation(s). The user shall have the right to appear at the hearing with or without an attorney, to introduce evidence, and to cross-examine the witnesses against them. If the user is not in compliance following the extension of time, then the director will suspend the water and/or wastewater service immediately. The decision of the hearing officer shall be final, and it shall be submitted to the user in writing by certified mail. 
(3)  Emergency suspension of services. The utility may suspend water and/or wastewater services when, in the opinion of the utility, an actual or threatened discharge may present an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons or the environment, may cause sanitary sewer stoppages or overflows, damage to the sanitary sewer collection system, interference to the POTW, or cause a violation of any condition of a NPDES and/or LAS permit. 
(4)  Reinstatement fees and charges. The user shall pay all outstanding utility fees and other charges prior to, and associated with, restoration of water and/or wastewater services. 
(5)  Transporter. 
a.  Any permit issued by the utility may be suspended, revoked or modified by the utility upon a finding that the holder is not in compliance with the terms of the permit or other conditions outlined in this chapter. 
b.  The permit may be reissued by the utility upon remedy of the noncompliance that caused the suspension, revocation or modification of the permit. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of law, the utility shall be authorized to impose a civil penalty not to exceed $1,000.00 for each violation of the commercial waste handling or pretreatment device/interceptor provisions of this chapter by any person, originator or transporter, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-15-21(d), or such penalty amount as set forth in state law, as amended. For purposes of enforcing this civil penalty, municipal court shall have jurisdiction in cases of violations committed within the city to impose the civil penalty stated herein for each violation. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user in a court of law for violating this section. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 22-30-22-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - PRETREATMENT STANDARDS AND ENFORCEMENT 

Sec. 22-36. - Restricted use of the public sewers. 
(a)  A user may not introduce into any public sewer any pollutant(s), which cause pass through or interference of the POTW. These general prohibitions and the specific prohibitions in subsection (d), below, apply to each user introducing pollutants into the POTW whether or not the user is subject to other national pretreatment standards or any national, state, or local pretreatment requirements. 
(b)  No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any unpolluted waters such as stormwater, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, noncontact cooling water, or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(c)  Specific prohibitions. Except as herein provided, no person shall discharge any of the following described waters or wastes into any public sewer: 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosion hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed cup flash point of less than 140 degrees Fahrenheit or 60 degrees centigrade using the test methods specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.21. 
(2)  Pollutants which will cause corrosive or structural damage to the POTW or discharges with pH lower than 6.0 or higher than 10.0. 
(3)  Solids or viscous pollutants in amounts which will cause obstruction to the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. 
(4)  Any pollutant, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.) released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration, which will cause interference with the POTW. 
(5)  Pollutants exceeding the following parameters and concentrations: 
Parameter Concentration mg/L BOD 1,000 TSS 1,000 TKN 100 Ammonia-N 50 COD 2,000  
(6)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 104 degrees Fahrenheit (40 degrees Celsius), or which will inhibit biological activity in the POTW resulting in interference. 
(7)  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil that will cause interference or pass through at the POTW. 
(8)  Pollutants that will result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in quantities that may cause acute or chronic worker health and/or safety problems. Any noxious or malodorous gas or substance, capable of creating a public nuisance or preventing entry into sewers for their maintenance, inspection, and repair. 
(9)  Any trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the POTW. 
(10)  Any water or waste that contains more than 100 milligrams per liter fat, oil, or grease, of animal or vegetable origin. 
(11)  Any waters or waste containing in excess of one milligram per liter (1.0 mg/L) of any of the following hazardous or dangerous gases: hydrogen sulfide, sulfur dioxide, or nitrous oxide. 
(12)  Any non-domestic waters, wastes or materials containing toxic organic and inorganic priority pollutants, unless issued a written permit by the utility that provides numerical limits on the quantity of such pollutants. Such limits will be calculated based on national pretreatment standards, local conditions of the POTW, and the presence of any pollutants causing pass through or interference with the POTW. 
(13)  Any radioactive materials except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations. 
(14)  Any concentrated dye wastes, or other wastes which are highly colored, and adversely affect the effluent of the POTW. 
(15)  Detergents, surfactants, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW or effluent. 
(16)  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail toxicity test. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-37. - Local discharge limits. 
    Using EPA approved methodology, the utility has established local discharge limits for the pollutants of concern to the POTW. These limits are designed to protect the receiving stream, prevent interference with POTW operations and protect the quality of the sludge produced by the POTW. These limits apply to all users of the system. For industrial users subject to national categorical pretreatment standards, the local limit will be compared to the categorical limit and the lower value will be used. The utility reserves the right to set higher discharge limits for individual industrial users provided that the following conditions apply: 
(a)  There are no other industrial users discharging the pollutant of concern or if there are other significant industrial users discharging the pollutant of concern they are discharging below the established limit; 
(b)  If any other significant industrial users are discharging the pollutant of concern they agree to accept a lower limit; and 
(c)  The total combined loading on the POTW will not exceed the established maximum head works loading. 
(1)  A user which desires to have a higher local discharge limit should petition the director in writing. 
(2)  Any discharge to the POTW that contains concentrations of conventional pollutants above the local discharge limit will be subject to surcharges as provided in the current rate resolution. For purposes of this article conventional pollutants are considered biochemical oxygen demand, total suspended solids, chemical oxygen demand, total nitrogen, and oil and grease. 
(3)  All other regulated pollutants are considered non-conventional pollutants and any discharge to the POTW that contains concentrations of these pollutant(s) above the local discharge limit will be subject to an enforcement action as provided in this article. 
(d)  Except where expressly authorized to do so by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement, no industrial user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any other way attempt to dilute a discharge as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a pretreatment standard or requirement. The utility may impose mass limitations on industrial users that are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases where the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-38. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 C.F.R. Chapter 1, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are incorporated herein by reference. 
(a)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the director may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.6(c). 
(b)  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the director shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e). 
(c)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 C.F.R. 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(d)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 C.F.R. 403.15. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-39. - Pretreatment of wastewater. 
(a)  Pretreatment facilities. Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this chapter and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section [22-36] of this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the State of Georgia, or the director, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the director for review, and shall be acceptable to the director before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the utility under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  Additional pretreatment measures. 
(1)  Whenever deemed necessary, the utility may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sanitary waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
(2)  The director may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on his or her own property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
(3)  The utility may, upon notification, require users to install a suitable control manhole together with the necessary meters and other appurtenances to facilitate the observation, sampling, and measurement of the wastes. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at the owner's expense, and shall be maintained by the owner in a safe and accessible condition at all times. 
(4)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(c)  Accidental discharge/slug control plans. At least once every two years, the utility shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The utility may require a user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the POTW superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by subsection [22-42(g)] of this chapter; and 
[4]  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(d)  Hauled waste. 
(1)  Hauled waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the director, and at such times as are established by the director. The director may require haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. Such permits may be revoked at any time if, in the opinion of the director, continued dumping of such matter into the sewers will be injurious to the sewer system or treatment processes. 
(2)  A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping hauled waste. A record shall be kept of such dumps and statements rendered at the first of each month, the amount of such statements shall be payable within ten days after rendition. Failure to pay the amounts due within such ten-day period shall be cause for revoking the permit. 
(3)  The director may require generators of hauled waste to obtain permits. The director also may prohibit the disposal of hauled waste into the POTW. 
(4)  The director may require the hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-40. - Wastewater discharge permits. 
(a)  Wastewater analysis. When requested by the director, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 90 days of the request. The director is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(1)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the director, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section [22-41] of this chapter may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(2)  The director may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(3)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in sections [22-48 and 22-49] of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(c)  Wastewater discharge permitting. A user is required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW and must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection (b), above, must be filed at least 90 days prior to the date which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permitting-Reissuance. A user who is issued a wastewater discharge permit must submit an application to have their permit reissued at least 90 days prior to the expiration date on the permit. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit application contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The director may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by subsection [22-42(a)] of this chapter; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could be accidentally or intentionally, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the director to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
(f)  Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(g)  Application signatories and certifications. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations. 
(h)  Wastewater discharge permit decisions. The director will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 90 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application the director will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The director may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-41. - Wastewater discharge permit issuance. 
(a)  Wastewater discharge permit duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years at the discretion of the director. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(b)  Wastewater discharge permit contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the director to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the utility in accordance with subsection (f), below, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self-monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored; sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the director to ensure compliance with this chapter, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
(c)  Public notification. The director will cause to be published a notice to issue a pretreatment permit in the legal organ of Glynn County, and by electronic means on the utility's web site, at least 30 days prior to issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. The notice will indicate a location where the draft permit may be reviewed and an address where written comments may be submitted. 
(d)  Wastewater discharge permit appeals. Any person, including the user, may petition the director to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the director fails to act within 90 days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(e)  Wastewater discharge permit modifications. The director may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the utility's POTW, utility personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 C.F.R. 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(f)  Wastewater discharge permit transfer. Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 90-days' advance notice to the director and the director approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the director must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(g)  Wastewater discharge permit revocation. The director may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the director of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the director of changed conditions pursuant to subsection [22-42(f)] of this chapter; 
(3)  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow utility representatives timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this chapter. 
(h)  Wastewater discharge permits shall be void upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-42. - Reporting requirements. 
(a)  Baseline monitoring reports. Within either 180 days after the effective date of a national categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 C.F.R. 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the director a report which contains the information listed in subsections (b)(1)-(8), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard shall submit to the director a report that contains the information listed in subsections (b)(1)-(5), below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description shall include a schematic process diagram that indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated process. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the director, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long term average concentrations, and/or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (k), below. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection (l), below. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional O & M and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O & M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O & M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in paragraph (c)(1), below. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be certified in accordance with subsection [22-40(g)] of this chapter, and signed by an authorized representative as defined in section [22-5] of this chapter. 
(c)  Compliance schedule progress reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (b), above: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major comments, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the director no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the director. 
(d)  Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. Within 90 calendar days following the date for final compliance with applicable pretreatment standards or, in the case of a new source, following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, a user subject to pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the utility a report containing the information described in subsection (b), above. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 C.F.R. 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be certified in accordance with subsection [22-40(g)] of this chapter, and signed by an authorized representative as defined in section [22-5] of this chapter. 
(e)  Periodic compliance reports. 
(1)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the utility but in no case less than twice per year, submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be certified in accordance with subsection [22-40(g)] of this chapter, and signed by an authorized representative as defined in section [22-5] of this chapter. 
(2)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(3)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the utility, using the procedures prescribed in subsection (e)(1), above, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(f)  Reports of changed conditions. Each user must notify the utility of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system, which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 90 days before the change. 
(1)  The utility may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section [22-40] of this chapter. 
(2)  The utility may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section [22-41] of this chapter, or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under subsection [22-41(e)] of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow or concentration increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(4)  Significant industrial users are required to notify the utility immediately of any changes at its facility effecting the potential for a slug discharge. 
(g)  Reports of potential problems. 
(1)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to accidental discharges, discharges of non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the plant director of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(2)  Within five days following such discharge in subsection (g)(1), above, the user shall, unless waived by the utility, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability, which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(3)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (g)(1), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(h)  Reports from unpermitted users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the utility as the utility may require. 
(i)  Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. If sampling performed by the user indicates a violation, the user must notify the utility within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the utility within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the utility monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the utility samples between the user's initial sampling and when the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(j)  Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(1)  A user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 C.F.R. Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 C.F.R. Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification shall also contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. Notifications of changed conditions, however, must be submitted under subsection (f), above. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of subsection [22-41(b)(1)] and subsection [22-43(a)(1)] of this chapter. 
(2)  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (1), above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms of non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 C.F.R. 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(3)  In the cases of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste or listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the utility, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and Georgia Hazardous Waste Department authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(4)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(5)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this chapter, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(k)  Analytical requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 C.F.R. Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 C.F.R. Part 136 does not contain then sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analysis must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
(l)  Sample collection. 
(1)  Except as indicated in paragraph (2) below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is not feasible, the utility may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(2)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, sulfide, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(m)  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(n)  Record keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, name of the person(s) taking the samples, the date(s) analysis was performed, who performed the analysis, the analytical techniques or methods used, and the results of such analysis. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the utility, or when the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the utility. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-43. - Compliance monitoring. 
(a)  Right-of-entry-Inspection and sampling. The utility shall have the right to enter the premises of a user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the utility ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the utility personnel will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The utility shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The utility may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated on at least an semi-annual basis to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the utility and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the utility access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this article. 
(b)  Search warrants. If the utility has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the utility designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the utility may seek issuance of a search warrant from municipal court. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-44. - Confidential information. 
    User information and data obtained from reports, questionnaires, permit applications, permits, monitoring programs, and from inspections shall be available to the public, EPD, EPA or other governmental agency without restriction unless the user specifically requests and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the utility, EPD, and EPA that release of such information would divulge information, processes or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets of the user. Users wishing to keep such information confidential must assert a claim of confidentiality at the time the information is submitted to the utility, such confidential information may be withheld from the public but it will always be made available to the EPD and/or EPA. Effluent data will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-45. - Publication of significant noncompliance. 
    The utility shall publish annually, in the legal organ of Glynn County, a list of the users, which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean any one or more of the following: 
(a)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period exceed, by any magnitude, a numeric pretreatment standard or requirement, including instantaneous limits, as defend by 40 C.F.R. 403(1). 
(b)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of all of the measurements taken for the same pollutant parameter during a six-month period equal or exceed the product of the numeric pretreatment standard or requirement including instantaneous limits, as defined by 40 C.F.R. 403.3(1) multiplied by the applicable TRC (TRC = 1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oil, and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH). 
(c)  Any other violation of a pretreatment standard or requirement that the utility determines has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public. 
(d)  Any discharge of a pollutant that has caused imminent endangerment to the human health, welfare or to the environment, or has resulted in the utility's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge. 
(e)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the schedule date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance. 
(f)  Failure to provide, within 45 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, day compliance reports, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules. 
(g)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance. 
(h)  Any other violation(s) which the utility determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-46. - Service charges. 
The utility may adopt charges and fees, which may include: 
(a)  Fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the utility's pretreatment program. 
(b)  Fees for monitoring, inspections and surveillance procedures. 
(c)  Fees for reviewing accidental discharge procedures and construction. 
(d)  Fees for permit applications. 
(e)  Fees for filing appeals. 
(f)  Fees for consistent removal by the utility of pollutants otherwise subject to federal pretreatment standards. 
(g)  Other fees as the utility may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained herein. 
These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this article and are separate from all other fees chargeable by the utility. The applicable charges shall be set forth in the utility's rate resolution. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-47. - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Notification of violation. When the utility finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, or a wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director, or his designee, may serve upon said user written notice of violation by personal service or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested. Within ten days of the receipt date of the notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted to the director, or his designee. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the utility to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(b)  Consent orders. The director is authorized to enter into consent orders, assurances of compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with a user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period also specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as compliance orders issued pursuant to subsection (d), below, and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(c)  Show cause hearing. The director may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article or wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to show cause why a proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user including, but not limited to, immediate enforcement action. 
(d)  Compliance order. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article or a permit or order issued thereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the director may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time period. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances have been installed and are properly operated. Orders may contain such other requirements to address the noncompliance, including the installation of pretreatment technology, additional self-monitoring, and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(e)  Cease and desist order. When the director finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the director may issue an order to cease and desist all such violations and direct the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(f)  Administrative fines. Notwithstanding any other provision herein, when the utility finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the utility may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation. Each day on which noncompliance shall occur or continue shall be deemed a separate and distinct violation. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. Such assessments may be added to the user's next scheduled sewer service charge. 
(1)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after ten calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of seven percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of seven percent per month. A lien against the user's real property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties provided the owner of such real property is the person who incurred the charges. 
(2)  Users desiring to dispute administrative fines must file a written request with the director seeking reconsideration of the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within ten days of being notified of the fine. When the director determines a request has merit, the director may convene a hearing on the matter within 15 days of receipt of such request from the user. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment shall be returned to the user without interest. 
(3)  The utility may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(g)  Emergency suspensions. 
(1)  The director may immediately suspend the wastewater treatment service and/or wastewater permit of a user when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons, the POTW, or the environment. 
(2)  A user notified of a suspension of the wastewater treatment service and/or the wastewater permit shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals or the environment. The director may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the director that the period of endangerment has passed, unless termination proceedings set forth in subsection (h), below, are initiated against the user. A user who is the subject of a suspension order shall have the right to appeal to the director from such suspension, but such suspension shall remain in full force and effect pending such hearing and the decision of the director. 
(3)  A user who is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence to the director prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsection (c), above, or subsection (h), below. 
Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension. 
(h)  Termination of permit. Significant industrial users proposing to discharge into the POTW must first obtain a wastewater discharge permit from the utility. A user who violates the following conditions of this chapter or a wastewater discharge permit or order, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or any applicable state or federal law, is subject to permit termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, or wastewater constituents and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Repeatedly violates this chapter. 
Noncompliant industrial users will be notified of the proposed termination of their wastewater permit and will be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection (c), above, why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the utility shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(i)  Termination of services. The director may order a user who violates, or continues to violate, this chapter, or allows an unauthorized discharge to enter the POTW, to show cause before the director as to why termination of services should not be taken. A notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place of a hearing to be held by the director regarding the termination of services, the reasons why the action is to be taken, and directing the user to show cause before the director why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the hearing shall be served by registered or certified mail, return receipt requested, at least ten days before the hearing. Service may be made on any agent or officer of a corporation. 
(1)  The director may take evidence and hear witnesses. 
(2)  After the director has reviewed the evidence, he may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that, following a specified time period, the sewer service will be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are properly installed and/or operated. Further orders and directives as are necessary and appropriate may be issued. 
Exercise of this option by the utility shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-48. - Judicial remedies. 
    When a user discharges sewage, industrial wastes, or other wastes into the wastewater disposal system contrary to the provisions of this article, or violates, or continues to violate, any order or permit issued hereunder or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the utility may commence an action for appropriate legal and/or equitable relief in a court having jurisdiction over such matters. 
(a)  Injunctive relief. When the utility finds a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the utility may petition the court for the issuance of a preliminary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this chapter on activities of the user. The utility may seek also such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user including, but not limited to, nuisance abatement proceedings in a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(b)  Civil penalties. 
(1)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article or any order or permit issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, shall be liable to the utility for a civil penalty of up to $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of violation. In addition to the above described penalty, the utility may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with the enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the POTW and utility, and any economic benefit gained through the user's violation. 
(2)  The utility shall petition a court of competent jurisdiction to impose, assess, and recover such sums set forth in subsection (b)(1), above. In determining the amount of liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(c)  Criminal prosecution. 
(1)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, any orders or permits issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(2)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available to the utility. 
(3)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan or other document filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater permit or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this article shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than 60 days, or both. 
(d)  Remedies nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The director may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. The director may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the director is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-49. - Supplemental enforcement remedies. 
(a)  Liability insurance. The director may decline to reissue a permit to any industrial user which has failed to comply with any provision of this article, or any order or previous permit issued hereunder, unless the industrial user first submits proof that it has obtained financial assurances sufficient to restore or repair POTW damage caused by its discharge. 
(b)  Water supply severance. When an industrial user has been found after hearing to be in violation of any provision of this article, or an order issued hereunder, water service to the industrial user may be severed and service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-50. - Affirmative defenses. 
(a)  Treatment upsets. 
(1)  For the purposes of this article, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, inadequate treatment facilities, lack of preventative maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(2)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of subsection (a)(3), below, are met. 
(3)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
a.  An upset occurred and the user can identify the cause(s) of the upset; 
b.  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
c.  The user has submitted the following information to the director within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
1.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
2.  The period of noncompliance, including exact dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
3.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
(4)  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
(5)  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
(6)  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(b)  Treatment bypass. 
(1)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provisions of paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection (b). 
(2)  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, then it shall submit prior notice to the director at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
a.  A user shall submit oral notice to the director of an anticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause, the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue, and the steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. 
b.  The director may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(3)  Bypass is prohibited. The director may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless: 
a.  The bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage including, but not limited to, substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not include economic loss caused by delays in production; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventative maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (2) of this subsection (b). 
d.  The director may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the director determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (b)(3)a-c. of this section. 
(c)  Prohibited discharge standards. A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section [22-36] of this chapter, except for subsections [22-36(d)(1), (2) and (9)] of this chapter, if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the utility was regularly in compliance with its NPDES and/or LAS permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Secs. 22-51-22-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RATES AND FEES 

Sec. 22-61. - User charge system. 
(a)  Charges for water service and for wastewater service shall be made and billed in compliance with the user charge system approved by the utility with adjusted rates herein established; except, however, the utility may suspend or forego the imposition and collection of connection/capital tap fees at any time when determined to be in the best interests of utility. The user charge system shall be: 
(1)  A base rate shall be charged based on the administration and debt costs and shall be calculated based on the number of water and wastewater customers and the assignment of REUs. Every customer connected to the utility system will pay a base rate each month regardless of usage; 
(2)  A consumption rate shall be charged based on the metered volume of water used by each water and each wastewater customer for the operation, maintenance, and replacement costs incurred by the utility to be calculated on the basis of water used per 1,000 gallons; and 
(3)  Water and wastewater tap fees consists of two components, connection/capital tap fees and installation/operational tap fees. The customer at whose request for connection is made shall pay all fees and charges at the time an official request is made or at the time application is made for a building or plumbing permit, as applicable, and subject to the exception in paragraph (a), above. All tap fees are payable to the utility. 
a.  The connection/capital tap fee shall be calculated and charged on the basis of REUs. Any fractional units resulting from the calculation of REUs shall be treated as a whole unit. 
b.  The installation/operational tap fee shall be charged in accordance with schedules listed in the utility's current rate resolution. Installation/operational tap fees shall apply only to installations on mains that are adjacent to the location to be served; for any extensions necessary beyond this condition the actual costs shall be charged in addition to connection/capital tap fees and installation/operational tap fees. 
(b)  A user who discharges any toxic pollutants or other constituents which causes an increase in the cost of managing the effluent or the sludge of the aforementioned treatment works shall be required to pay for such increased costs. A surcharge will be applied to the overall strength of commercial or industrial wastewater based on the strength and volume of such wastes and the costs of treatment thereof. 
(c)  The utility shall review not less often than every two years water consumption and wastewater contribution of users, the total costs of operation and maintenance of the water and sewer systems, and the approved user charge system. The utility may revise the charges for users to accomplish the following: 
(1)  Maintain the proportionate distribution of operation and maintenance costs among users; 
(2)  Generate sufficient revenue to pay debt service, administrative costs, and total operation and maintenance costs necessary for proper operation and maintenance (including minor replacement) of the water and sewer systems; and 
(3)  Generate reserve fund contributions for emergency and/or capital planning requirements. 
(d)  The user charge system shall take precedence over any terms or conditions of agreements or contracts between the utility and users which are inconsistent with the requirements of Section 204(b)(1)(a) of the Act and 40 C.F.R. Part 35. 
(e)  The utility may collect samples for the purpose of determining surcharge and compliance, and may charge the industrial user for this service. 
(1)  The utility may require industrial users to sample and test at their own expense for the purposes of determining surcharges and permit compliance. 
(2)  In the event of a disagreement in results between samples collected by the industrial user and the utility, the utility results will prevail unless it can be proven that there was an error in utility sampling or testing protocol. 
(f)  Where a user has a private water source and discharges into the utility sanitary sewer system, said user shall be required to install a proper water flow measuring device and pay the user charges for sewer service in an amount equal to the amount charged if all water used was purchased from the utility, unless an accurate wastewater flow measuring device is installed, in which case the bill will be based on the wastewater meter. 
(g)  Timing of billing. Water and/or sewer charges shall accrue on a monthly basis from the date of connection and will be billed monthly thereafter. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 1020, § 1, 11-17-2010) 
Sec. 22-62. - Other rates, fees and charges. 
(a)  Charges for water and sewer service, tap fees, and other related fees and deposits or letters of credit, established in a rate resolution by the utility, will be as follows: 
(1)  When service has been cut-off for nonpayment or other action resulting in unauthorized use, service shall not be restored until the unpaid bill, either at the present location or at any previous location at which service was supplied to the applicant, and the service fees provided by the rate resolution are satisfied, including the following cumulative fees for each action taken to prevent unauthorized use of utility services: 
a.  Turn-on after a delinquent cut-off. 
b.  Locking meter. 
c.  Removal of meter. 
d.  Removal of straight line. 
e.  Removal of unauthorized relocated meter. 
f.  Cutting off water at main. 
(2)  Payment of the fees in paragraph (1) above shall not exempt a user from any civil or criminal action resulting from violations of this chapter. 
(b)  In addition to the fees and deposits, each applicant for service shall pay in advance an account establishment charge for either new service or transfer of service from one location to another. 
(c)  Connection fees and deposits for a facility will be based on the facility's REUs. The amount of REUs is determined by the flow characteristics as set forth in the REU table of the utility's rate resolution, as amended from time to time. In the case of existing facilities with an increase in REUs, additional fees and charges will be due. 
(d)  Deposits will be required for all customer accounts. The deposit may increase by a factor of 250 percent if the customer has a history of three or more issuances of non-sufficient funds checks, cut-offs for non-payment, or an account with the utility has been turned over to collections in the previous 24 months. A deposit will be refunded upon termination of service; provided, however, any deposit for a single-family residential account for water and/or sewer service connected to the system by an individual meter will be automatically credited to the customer's account after 36 months of consecutive timely payments for accounts in good standing, as set forth under the criteria in the utility's rate resolution. All refunds will be the actual amount paid as a deposit. No interest will be paid on deposits for refunding purposes. 
(e)  The utility may refuse to supply service to any customer if there is a delinquent account for water and/or sewer service until the bill for all prior charges billed to that customer both at the present location or at a previous location have been paid by the customer owing the outstanding amount. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 1038, § 4, 1-7-2014) 
Sec. 22-63. - Leak adjustments in water and sewer billing. 
    The utility recognizes that occasionally water service lines may develop hidden leaks, leading to unusually high water bills. The utility encourages customers to make prompt and permanent repairs while showing consideration for unusual circumstances without burdening the utility's other customers with the expenses of an individual customer's lost water. Accordingly, the utility, under certain circumstances, provides customers the opportunity to request a leak adjustment in their water and/or sewer bill. This section shall not apply to irrigation metered service. 
(a)  For purposes of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "Physical damage" means damage to a facility or equipment supplying water to the premises and the damage: 
a.  Is not visible or detectable in the customer's premises except upon excavation or some other disturbance of the property; and 
b.  Is not the result of an act of the customer, or of any agent or contractor hired by the customer. 
(2)  "[Unusually] high water bill" means a water and/or sewer bill for a particular month that reflects monthly water usage, in whatever units measured, that is at least two times the customer's average monthly usage of the premises as measured during the previous 12 monthly billing periods. 
(b)  The customer retains control over the use of water on the customer's premises, and as such, the customer is responsible for all the water passing through the meter, including water which may be lost or wasted through leaking pipes or fixtures on the premises. The customer is responsible for monitoring for unusually high water usage as reflected on the customer's bill. The customer must promptly investigate any unusually high water bills. A customer is required to repair any water leak promptly, and the customer is responsible for all repair costs. 
(c)  A customer may seek an adjustment under this chapter to an unusually high water bill caused by physical damage to the customer's water service line. A customer may not receive an adjustment unless the customer has paid all outstanding water and sewer bills owed prior to the unusually high water bill. 
(d)  A customer is not eligible for a leak adjustment to an unusually high water bill due to circumstances not caused by an undetected leak, leaks that should reasonably have been discovered, high usage caused by negligence or failure to properly maintain pools or water using/consuming items or usage from appliances whether or not operating properly. 
(e)  A customer seeking a water bill adjustment must provide written notice to the director, or his designee, within 60 days of the end of the billing period for which the adjustment is being requested. The written notice/request shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The name, address, and telephone number of the customer reporting the leak; 
(2)  A description of how the leak was discovered; 
(3)  The date the leak was discovered; 
(4)  The nature and location of the leak; 
(5)  The date the leak was repaired; and 
(6)  A description of the repair work completed. 
The customer shall provide any other information, documents, or access requested by the director as may be necessary or appropriate for investigating the circumstances of any alleged leak and/or related repairs and verifying the customer's eligibility for an adjustment. 
(f)  The adjustment period for undetected leaks cannot exceed one regular meter reading period, unless (i) the meter reading was missed during the leak period, or (ii) the leak affected two connective bills. 
(g)  If the director, or his designee, determines, upon investigation, that a customer is eligible for a leak adjustment, then the director, or his designee, is authorized to adjust the unusually high water bill as follows: 
(1)  The customer shall be responsible for an amount of the water and/or sewer bill equal to four times the customer's average monthly consumption, as calculated by averaging the prior 12 months bills before the leak, or any portion of the prior 12 months if the customer has fewer than 12 previous bills; plus an amount for the adjustments set forth below. 
(2)  For those amounts of the bill above four times the normal bill, the director, or his designee, may provide an adjustment reducing the bill amount that is more than four times the normal bill by 75 percent. 
(3)  The customer may pay the adjusted water and/or sewer bill in equal payments over a 12 month billing period in addition to the regular applicable monthly billing. 
(4)  No adjustments will be made to the portions of the bill representing the fixed charges such as, for example, debt service. 
An illustration: A customer's normal (variable) average water and/or sewer bill is $50.00 and the customer receives an unusually high water bill for $500.00 that is caused by undetected damage to the water service line. The adjusted bill amount would be $275.00 (4 x $50.00 = $200.00; 75% x $300.00 = $75.00 for a total of $275.00). 
(h)  The director's, or his designee's, determination of eligibility for a leak adjustment is a final disposition of the matter; provided, however, any leak adjustment totaling $2,000.00 or more shall be presented by the director to the commission for final determination. 
(Ord. No. 1038, § 5, 1-7-2014) 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1038, § 5, adopted January 7, 2014, repealed the former section 22-63, and enacted a new section 22-63 as set out herein. The former section 22-63 pertained to adjustments in billing and derived from Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010. 
Sec. 22-64. - Discontinuance of service. 
(a)  Voluntary discontinuance. A customer may discontinue service by providing the utility with written notice which shall contain the customer's name, address at which service is provided, and the cut-off date. Written notice is waived if the director determines exigent circumstances exist. 
(b)  Involuntary discontinuance. Service to any customer may be discontinued by the utility for any one of the following reasons: 
(1)  For misrepresentation in application as to property or fixtures to be supplied, or the use to be made of the water supply or character of waste discharged into the sanitary wastewater system; 
(2)  For the use of water for any other property or purpose than that described in the application; 
(3)  For willful or negligent waste of water; 
(4)  For failure to protect the connection, service lines and fixtures, or to maintain them in good order; 
(5)  For non-payment of any account for water or sewer service furnished, or of any scheduled fee or charge as required by the utility's rate resolution, provisions of this chapter, rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to the terms hereof, or any amendments thereto; however, the service will be discontinued five business days after the date of notice thereof but in any event prior to issuance of the customer's next successive month's bill, unless payment in full is received by the utility; 
(6)  For damaging any service pipe, meter, curb stop, seal, or any other appliance of the utility controlling or regulating the water supply; 
(7)  For violation of any provisions of this chapter or amendments thereto; 
(8)  For violation of any rules or regulations promulgated hereunder, including policies and resolutions of the utility; 
(9)  For turning off or on water at the "water main" or "water connection" or curb stop or for disconnecting or removing the meter by an unauthorized person without the prior written consent of the director. Emergency cut-off of such water without damage to any utility property shall not be considered a cause for discontinuance of service; or 
(10)  In case of vacancy of premises. 
(11)  If water is used without the knowledge of the utility by any person, then the utility upon discovery of the illegal water use, shall cause a charge to be made against the occupant of the property served for the time the water has been used as indicated from the last account of record. Water service shall be immediately discontinued and will not be restored to the occupant until all charges and fees have been paid. 
(12)  If the sewer is used without the knowledge of the utility by any person, then the utility upon discovery of the illegal sewer use, shall bill the customer for the time the sewer has been used based on the last account of record. Services shall be discontinued and not resumed until all charges and fees have been paid. 
(c)  The director shall have authority to order the temporary discontinuance of water or wastewater service in any emergency, under exigent circumstances, or whenever such discontinuance is necessary for repairs or to protect life, health or property or to prevent immediate interference with the utility systems. In such case, the utility shall not be liable for any damage or inconvenience suffered by the customer; nor shall the utility be liable for any claim against it at any time for interruption in service, lessening of the supply, inadequate pressure, quality of water, or wastewater flows for any causes beyond its control. 
(d)  In all other circumstances service shall be discontinued only after five business days written notice delivered to an adult person occupying the premises served, or posted in a conspicuous place thereon, stating the reason for discontinuance and informing the user of his right to a hearing during regular business hours before the director within such five working days from receipt or posting of said notice. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-65. - Increasing rates. 
    Prior to any increase in the variable water consumption and wastewater discharge rates charged by the utility to the public, a public hearing shall be had to allow public response. The hearing required herein may be held during a regularly scheduled meeting of the board of commissioners of the utility and must be attended by at least a quorum of the commissioners to qualify as a hearing under this section. Notice of the public hearing shall be given by publication in the official organ of Glynn County not more than 20 and not less than ten days prior the date of the hearing. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010; Ord. No. 1038, § 6, 1-7-2014) 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 1038, § 6, adopted January 7, 2014 changed the title of section 22-65, previously "establishing or increasing fees." 
Secs. 22-66-22-70. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - PENALTIES AND ADMINISTRATION 

Sec. 22-71. - Penalties. 
    This section sets forth minimum penalties payable to the utility for certain specific violations of this chapter: 
(a)  Violation of water use during a proclaimed period of water shortage (subsections [22-7(a)(3) or (a)(4)] of this chapter): 
$250.00 for each offense. 
(b)  Interfere with and/or damage to facilities and/or machinery owned, operated or leased by the utility (subsection [22-7(e)] of this chapter): 
$100.00 plus all costs for repairs or replacement. 
(c)  Unauthorized dumping from septic tank or septic tank clean out trucks (subsection [22-9(f)] of this chapter): 
$200.00 each offense plus all clean up costs. 
(d)  Unauthorized turning on and off of water and handling of meters (subsection [22-11(a)] of this chapter): 
$50.00 first offense, $100.00 for each offense thereafter, plus costs of any damages inflicted. 
(e)  Use of water from a fire hydrant without permission (subsection [22-13(c)] of this chapter): 
$250.00 first offense, $500.00 for each offense thereafter. 
(f)  Use of water without knowledge of the utility (subsection [22-8(s)] of this chapter and subsection [22-64(b)(11)] of this chapter): 
$100.00 first offense, $200.00 for each offense thereafter, plus estimated usage for each offense. 
(g)  Use of sewer without knowledge of the utility (subsection [22-64(b)(12)] of this chapter): 
$100.00 first offense, $200.00 for each offense thereafter, plus estimated usage for each offense. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-72. - Injunctions. 
    The utility or city attorney or their designee may seek an injunction against any person or legal entity who violates this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-73. - Liens. 
(a)  Any charges and/or fees made by the utility for furnishing water and wastewater services and services related thereto and for every kind of service necessary or incidental to the furnishing of water and wastewater services, shall constitute a lien against the real property to which such services are furnished upon the issuance and recording of an execution provided the owner of such real property is the person who incurred the charges. 
(b)  Should the customer, as identified in subsection (a), above, fail to pay any of the foregoing charges and the same be in default for a period of ten days after the due date, the director shall be authorized to have an execution issued by the finance director of the utility, or such person designated for same, which execution shall issue against the property, as described on the latest ad valorem tax digest and in personam against the owner of the property, for the principal amount due plus interest at the rate of seven percent per annum from the due date and the costs for issuance of the execution. Subsequent costs shall be the same as those allowed by law relative to tax executions. Such executions shall be recorded on the general execution docket of the clerk of superior court of the county and shall be delivered to the city marshall and processed in accordance with the state law covering the enforcement of executions for taxes. The execution shall constitute a lien against the property from the time of its filing, which lien shall rank on a parity with and be of equal dignity to other liens for special tax assessments. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-74. - Unauthorized obligation of utility. 
    No officer, agent or employee of the utility shall have authority to bind the utility by any promise, agreement or representation in violation of this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated in accordance herewith, including any policies and resolutions adopted by the utility. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-75. - Amendment. 
(a)  The city commission reserves the right at any time to alter, amend, or add to this chapter and to the rules and regulations promulgated by authority hereof, or to substitute other ordinances, rules and regulations therefore in consultation with the utility pursuant to the section 2 of the operational agreement, as amended. 
(b)  Rates, fees and charges provided for herein shall be established by resolution of the utility and shall be subject to revision or increase at any time by resolution of the utility, in the middle of any billing period, retroactively to the beginning of such billing period. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 1, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-76. - Severability. 
    If any provision, paragraph, word, or section of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions, paragraphs, words, and sections shall not be affected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 2, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-77. - Repeal of conflicting laws. 
    All other ordinances and parts of other ordinances inconsistent or conflicting with any part of this chapter are hereby repealed to the extent of such inconsistency or conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 3, 5-4-2010) 
Sec. 22-78. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall become effective upon the approval by the Commission of the City of Brunswick, Georgia, the 4th day of May, 2010. 
(Ord. No. 1014, § 4, 5-4-2010) 
Chapter 22A - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
ARTICLE I. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 22A-1. - Findings of fact. 
    It is hereby determined that: 
a.  Land development projects and associated changes in the landscape alter the hydrologic response of local watersheds and increase stormwater runoff rates and volumes, flooding, stream channel erosion, and sediment transport and deposition; 
b.  This stormwater runoff contributes to increased quantities of water-borne pollutants; and 
c.  Stormwater runoff, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution can be controlled and minimized through the regulation of stormwater runoff from existing and future development sites. 
    Therefore, the city establishes this set of water quality and quantity policies applicable to all surface waters to provide reasonable guidance for the regulation of stormwater runoff for the purpose of protecting local water resources from degradation. It is determined that the regulation of stormwater runoff discharges from land development projects and other construction activities in order to control and minimize increases in stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion, stream channel erosion, and nonpoint source pollution associated with stormwater runoff is in the public interest and will prevent threats to public health and safety. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-1), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-2. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This article seeks to meet that purpose through regulation of activities that can through proper regulation improve and maintain those water resources that lie partially or wholly within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-2), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-3. - Compatibility with other permit and ordinance requirements. 
    This chapter is not intended to interfere with, abrogate, or annul any other ordinance, rule or regulation, stature, or other provision of law. The requirements of this ordinance should be considered minimum requirements, and where any provision of this article imposes restrictions different from those imposed by any other ordinance, rule or regulation, or other provision of law, whichever provisions are more restrictive or impose higher protective standards for human health or the environment shall be considered to take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-3), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-4. - Responsibility for administration. 
    Unless otherwise stated, the city public works director (hereafter referred to as director) shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this article. Any powers granted or duties imposed upon the director may be delegated in writing by the director of public works to persons or entities acting in the beneficial interest of or in the employ of the city. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-4), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-5. - Ultimate responsibility. 
    The standards set forth herein and promulgated pursuant to this article unless otherwise noted are minimum standards; therefore this ordinance does not intend nor imply that compliance by any person will ensure that there will be no contamination, pollution, nor unauthorized discharge of pollutants. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-5), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-6. - Definitions. 
    When used in this article, the following words and phrases shall have the meaning given in this section. Words not defined herein shall be construed to have a meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined by Webster's Third New International Dictionary, copyright 1970. The term "shall" is mandatory. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the singular number include the plural and those used in the plural number include the singular. Words used in the present tense include the future. The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this article, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    As-built drawings. Amended site plans specifying the locations, dimensions, elevations, capacities and operational capabilities of road and drainage structures and facilities as they have been constructed. 
    Best management practices (BMPs). Structural devices to store or treat stormwater runoff or non-structural programs or practices both of which are designed to prevent or reduce the pollution of the waters of the State of Georgia and provide other amenities. 
    Buffer. An area along the course of any state waters or declared city waterway to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition. 
    Construction. Any alteration of land for the purpose of achieving its development of changing use, including particularly any preparation for, building of, or erection of a structure. 
    Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
    Design storm. The rainfall event of such size and frequency as described in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual or local design manual, which is used for the design of stormwater facilities. 
    Developer. Any person who acts in his own behalf or as the agent of any owner of property and engages in alteration of land or vegetation in preparation for construction activity. 
    Development. Any action in preparation for construction activities which result in alteration of either land or vegetation other than such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping repairs or maintenance work which result in minor soil erosion. 
    Drainage. A general term applied to the removal of surface or subsurface water from a given area either by gravity or by pumping, commonly applied herein to surface water. 
    Drainage structure. Any stormwater conveyance structure as defined below, and any piping or ditching for stormwater management purposes. 
    Drainage system. The surface and subsurface system for the removal of water from the land, including both the natural elements of streams, marshes, and ponds, whether of an intermittent or continuous nature, and the manmade element which includes culverts, ditches, channels, retention facilities and the storm sewer system. 
    DRT. The group of departmental representatives assigned by the city manager to meet periodically and review construction, subdivision, and other plans, also referred to as the "development review team." 
    Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Flood. A temporary rise in the level of rivers, streams, lakes, marshes and ocean, which results in inundation of areas not ordinarily covered by water. 
    Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to being inundated by flood waters from any source. 
    Grading. Altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Hazardous materials. Any material, including any substance, waste, or combination thereof, which because of its quantity, concentration, or physical, chemical, or infectious characteristics may cause, or significantly contribute to, a substantial present or potential hazard to human health, safety, property, or the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of, or otherwise managed. 
    Hotspot. An area where the land use or activities generate or have the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    Illicit discharge. Any discharge as defined in 40 CFR Part 122.26(b)(2) to a MS4 that is not entirely composed of stormwater, except those discharges authorized under a NPDES permit (other than the NPDES permit for discharges from the MS4) and discharges resulting from fire fighting activities. 
    Illicit connections. Any manmade conveyance connecting a discharge directly to a MS4. 
    Impervious surface. A manmade structure or surface which prevents the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Structures or surfaces which are constructed so as to only minimally affect the infiltration of stormwater are not considered impervious surfaces. 
    Industrial activity. Activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26 (b)(14). 
    Land disturbing activity. Any activity which results in changes in the volume or flow rates of rainfall runoff, soil erosion from water or wind; or the movement of sediments into state waters or onto land within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land. 
    Live retention. That quantity of water capable of being effectively contained by a designated facility for stormwater storage for a specified period of time. 
    Lot. A tract, portion or parcel of land separated from other tracts, portions or parcels by description on a subdivision plat of record or survey map or described by metes and bounds, and intended to be used to facilitate transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purposes of this chapter, the term does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
    Maintenance of stormwater facility. Preserving the enclosing walls or impounding embankment of the retention facility in good condition; ensuring structural soundness, functional adequacy and freedom from sediment; and rectifying any unforeseen erosion problems. 
    Municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4). A conveyance or system of conveyances including roads with drainage systems, municipal streets, catch basins, curbs, gutters, ditches, swales, manmade channels or storm drains, owned or operated by a municipality or other public, designed or used for collecting or conveying storm water runoff and is not a combined sewer or part of a publicly owned treatment works. 
    National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit. A permit issued by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (or by the State of Georgia under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC § 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    Natural ground surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
    Non-stormwater discharge. Any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality, or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Pollution. The contamination or other significant alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties, including, but not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety or welfare or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    Pollutant. Any impurity or waste material that degrades the physical, chemical, biological or radiological integrity of surface or subsurface waters. 
    Pretreatment. The onsite reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in stormwater prior to or in lieu of discharging or otherwise introducing such pollutants into the publicly owned drainage system. 
    Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Stormwater facility. A facility which provides for storage of stormwater runoff and controlled release of this runoff during and after a flood storm. 
    Right-of-way. "Right-of-way" shall mean a strip or parcel of land occupied by or intended to be occupied by a street, crosswalk, pedestrian path, cart path, utility system, water main, sanitary sewer or storm drain sewer main, drainage ditches and watercourses or any other valid public use. The usage of the term "right-of-way" for land platting purposes shall mean that every right-of-way hereafter established and shown on a record or final plat is to be separate and distinct from the lots or parcels adjoining such right-of-way, and not included within the dimensions or areas of such other lots or parcels. Rights-of-way intended for streets, crosswalks, water mains, sanitary sewers, storm drains or other use involving maintenance by a public [agency, shall be dedicated or deeded to public] use by the maker of the plat on which such right-of-way is established. 
    Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation. The action or process of forming or depositing sediment. 
    Stormwater. Any surface flow, runoff, and drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation 
    Stormwater runoff. The portion of a precipitation on the land which reaches the drainage system. 
    Stream. Natural, running water flowing continuously or intermittently in a channel on or below the surface of the ground. 
    Structure. Anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires a location on the ground, or attached to something having a location on the ground, including, but not limited to, tennis courts, fences, swimming pools, and buildings. 
    Subdivision. Subdivision includes all divisions of a tract or parcel of land into two or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purposes, whether immediate or future, of sale, gift, or building development and includes all divisions or development of land involving a new street or a change in an existing street. It shall also include resubdivision, the process of subdividing and the land or area subdivided; provided, however, divisions of land into parcels of five acres or more where no new street is involved are not included in this definition. 
    Watercourse. Any natural or man-made conveyance channel, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, swale, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which stormwater flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any areas adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-6), 12-13-2006) 
Secs. 22A-7-22A-20. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ILLICIT DISCHARGE PROHIBITION 

Sec. 22A-21. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to provide for the health, safety, and general welfare of the citizens of the city through the regulation of non-stormwater discharges to the storm drainage system to the maximum extent practicable. The objectives of this article are: 
a.  To regulate the contribution of pollutants to the municipal separate storm sewer system (MS4) by stormwater discharges by any user. 
b.  To prohibit illicit connections and discharges to the MS4. 
c.  To establish legal authority to carry out all inspection; surveillance and monitoring; and enforcement procedures as necessary to ensure compliance with this article. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-7), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-22. - Applicability. 
    This article shall apply to all non-stormwater discharges entering the storm drain system generated on any developed or undeveloped lands unless explicitly exempted by the city. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-8), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-23. - Prohibition of illegal discharges. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged into the MS4 or watercourses any materials, including but not limited to pollutants or waters containing any pollutants that cause or contribute to a violation of applicable water quality standards, other than stormwater. 
    The commencement, conduct or continuance of any illegal discharge to the storm drain system is prohibited except as described as follows: 
a.  The following discharges are exempt from discharge prohibitions established by this article: water line flushing or other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, rising ground water, ground water infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped ground water, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, non-commercial washing of vehicles, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, swimming pools (if dechlorinated - less than one PPM chlorine), fire fighting activities, and any other water source not containing pollutants. 
b.  Discharges specified in writing by the director as being necessary to protect public health and safety. 
c.  Dye testing is an allowable discharge, but requires a verbal notification to the director prior to the time of the test followed by written notice within ten days. 
d.  Any non-stormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit, waiver, or waste discharge order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and provided that approval has been granted for any discharge to the storm drain system. 
e.  Any stormwater discharge regulated under an NPDES stormwater discharge permit for industrial activities provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
f.  Any stormwater discharge regulated under an NPDES stormwater discharge permit for construction activities or other local land disturbance permit provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit. Proof of compliance with said permit may be required in a form acceptable to the director prior to the allowing of discharges to the MS4. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-9), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-24. - Prohibition of illicit connections. 
    The construction, use, maintenance or continued existence of illicit connections to the MS4 or watercourses is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illicit connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. A person is considered to be in violation of this article if a person connects a line conveying any material to the MS4, allows such a connection to continue without a permit from the city, or alters the existing flow of any watercourse. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-10), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-25. - Suspension due to illicit discharges in emergency situations. 
    The director may, without prior notice, suspend MS4 discharge access to a person when such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge that presents or may present imminent and substantial danger to the environment, or to the health or welfare of persons, or to the MS4 or waters of the United States. If the violator fails to comply with a suspension order issued in an emergency, the director may take such steps as deemed necessary to prevent or minimize damage to the MS4 or waters of the United States, or to minimize danger to persons. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-11), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-26. - Suspension due to the detection of illicit discharge. 
    Any person discharging to the MS4 or watercourses in violation of this article may have their MS4 access terminated if such termination would abate or reduce an illicit discharge. The director will notify a violator of the proposed termination of its MS4 access. The violator may petition the director for a reconsideration and hearing. A person commits an offense if the person reinstates MS4 access to premises terminated pursuant to this section, without the prior approval of the public works director. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-12), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-27. - [Facilities to which this section applies.] 
    This section applies to all facilities that have stormwater discharges associated with industrial activity, including construction activity. 
a.  The director or designated representatives shall be permitted to enter and inspect facilities subject to regulation under this article as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with this article. If a discharger has security measures in force, which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the discharger shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
b.  Facility operators shall allow city personnel ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, examination and copying of records that must be kept under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater, and the performance of any additional duties as defined by state and federal law. 
c.  The director shall have the right to set up on any permitted facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the director to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of the facility's stormwater discharge. 
d.  The director has the right to require the discharger to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the discharger at its own expense. All devices used to measure stormwater flow and quality shall be calibrated to ensure their accuracy. 
e.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the operator at the written or oral request of the director and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the operator. 
f.  Unreasonable delays in allowing City of Brunswick personnel access to a permitted facility are a violation of a stormwater discharge permit and of this article. A person who is the operator of a facility with a NPDES permit to discharge stormwater associated with industrial activity commits a violation if the person denies city personnel reasonable access to the permitted facility for the purpose of conducting any activity authorized or required by this article. 
g.  If city personnel are refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and he/she is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with this ordinance or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, and welfare of the community, then the director may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-13), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-28. - Specification of best management practices (BMPs). 
    The city may adopt requirements identifying best management practices for any activity, operation, or facility, which may cause or contribute to pollution or contamination of stormwater, the MS4 or watercourses, or waters of the United States. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-14), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-29. - Pollution prevention in new facilities. 
    The owner or operator of a commercial or industrial establishment shall provide, at their own expense, reasonable protection from accidental discharge of prohibited materials or other wastes into the MS4 or watercourses through the use of these structural and non-structural BMPs. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-15), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-30. - Pollution prevention in existing facilities. 
    Any person responsible for a property or premise, which is, or may be, the source of an illicit discharge, may be required to implement, at said person's expense, additional structural and non-structural BMPs to prevent the further discharge of pollutants to the MS4 or watercourses. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-16), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-31. - Discharge permits from regulatory agencies other than the City of Brunswick. 
    Compliance with all terms and conditions of a valid NPDES permit authorizing the discharge of stormwater associated with industrial activity, to the extent practicable, shall be deemed compliance with the provisions of this article. BMPs designated for compliance with the NPDES permit or BMPs implemented as a result of action taken in compliance of this article shall be included in a stormwater pollution prevention plan (SWPP) as necessary for compliance with requirements of the NPDES permit. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-17), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-32. - Watercourse protection. 
    Every person or persons owning property through which a watercourse passes, or such person's lessee, shall keep and maintain that part of the watercourse within the property free of trash, debris, excessive vegetation, and other obstacles that would pollute, contaminate, or significantly retard the flow of water through the watercourse. In addition, the owner or lessee shall maintain existing privately owned structures within or adjacent to a watercourse, so that such structures will not become a hazard to the use, function, or physical integrity of the watercourse. Those persons owning property on either side (abutting) of a watercourse, or their lessee, are responsible from their property line to the center of the watercourse and are subject to the same rules and regulations applicable to those persons having a watercourse flow through their property. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-18), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-33. - Notification of spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility or operation has information of any known or suspected release of materials which are resulting or may result in illegal discharges or pollutants discharging into stormwater, the MS4 or watercourses, or water of the U.S. said person shall take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release. In the event of such a release of hazardous materials said person shall immediately notify emergency response agencies of the occurrence via emergency dispatch services. In the event of a release of non-hazardous materials, said person shall notify the public works department in person, by phone, facsimile or email no later than the next business day. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the director of public works within three business days of the verbal notice. The notification of the discharge of materials to the director shall be in addition to notification of other applicable agencies, regional, state and federal authorities. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-19), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-34. - Enforcement. 
(a)  Whenever the director finds that a person has violated a prohibition or failed to meet a requirement of this article, the director may order compliance by written notice of violation to the responsible person. Such notice may require without limitation: 
(1)  The performance of monitoring, analyses, and reporting; 
(2)  The elimination of illicit connections or discharges; 
(3)  That violating discharges, practices, or operations shall cease and desist; 
(4)  The abatement or remediation of stormwater pollution or contamination hazards and the restoration of any affected property; 
(5)  Payment of a fine to cover administrative and remediation costs; and 
(6)  The implementation of source control or treatment BMPs. 
(b)  If abatement of a violation and/or restoration of affected property is required, the notice shall set forth a deadline within which such remediation or restoration must be completed. Said notice shall further advise that, should the violator fail to remediate or restore within the established deadline, the work may be done by a designated governmental agency or a contractor and the expense thereof shall be charged to the violator. 
(c)  Any person receiving a notice of violation may appeal the determination of the director. The notice of appeal must be received within ten days from the date of the notice of violation. Hearing on the appeal before the appropriate authority or his/her designee shall take place within 15 days from the date of receipt of the notice of appeal. The decision of the reviewing authority or their designee shall be final. 
(d)  If the violation has not been corrected pursuant to the requirements set forth in the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within ten days of the decision of the reviewing authority upholding the decision of the director, then representatives of the director shall enter upon the subject private property and are authorized to take any and all measures necessary to abate the violation and/or restore the property. It shall be unlawful for any person, owner, agent or person in possession of any premises to refuse to allow city personnel or designated contractor to enter upon the premises for the purposes set forth above. 
(e)  Within 30 days after abatement of the violation, the owner of the property will be notified of the cost of abatement, including administrative costs. The property owner may file a written protest objecting to the amount of the assessment within 30 days. If the amount due is not paid within a timely manner as determined by the decision of the reviewing authority or by the expiration of the time in which to file an appeal, the charges shall become a special assessment against the property and shall constitute a lien on the property for the amount of the assessment. 
(f)  It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. If a person has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, the director may petition for a preliminary or permanent injunction restraining the person from activities which would create further violations or compelling the person to perform abatement or remediation of the violation. 
(g)  In lieu of enforcement proceedings, penalties, and remedies authorized by this article, the city may impose upon a violator alternative compensatory actions, such as storm drain stenciling, attendance at compliance workshops, creek cleanup, etc. 
(h)  In addition to the enforcement processes and penalties provided, any condition caused or permitted to exist in violation of any of the provisions of this article is a threat to public health, safety, and welfare, and is declared and deemed a nuisance, and may be summarily abated or restored at the violator's expense, and/or a civil action to abate, enjoin, or otherwise compel the cessation of such nuisance may be taken. 
(i)  Any person that has violated or continues to violate this article shall be liable to criminal prosecution to the fullest extent of the law, and shall be subject to a criminal penalty in Brunswick Municipal Court in accordance with chapter 15 of the Municipal Code of Brunswick; each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. The city may recover all attorneys' fees court costs and other expenses associated with enforcement of this article, including sampling and monitoring expenses. 
(j)  The remedies listed in this article are not exclusive of any other remedies available under any applicable federal, state or local law and it is within the discretion of the authorized enforcement agency to seek cumulative remedies. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-20), 12-13-2006) 
Secs. 22A-35-22A-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - POST CONSTRUCTION STORMWATER RUNOFF 

Sec. 22A-51. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to establish minimum stormwater management requirements and controls to protect and safeguard the general health, safety, and welfare of the public residing in watersheds within this jurisdiction. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
a)  Minimize increases in stormwater runoff from any development in order to reduce flooding, siltation, and streambank erosion and maintain the integrity of stream and drainage channels; 
b)  Minimize increases in nonpoint source pollution caused by stormwater runoff from development which would otherwise degrade local water quality; 
c)  Minimize the total annual volume of surface water runoff which flows from any specific site during and following development to not exceed the pre-development hydrologic regime to the maximum extent practicable; and 
d)  Reduce stormwater runoff rates and volumes, soil erosion and nonpoint source pollution, wherever possible, through stormwater management controls and to ensure that these management controls are properly maintained and pose no threat to public safety. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-21), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-52. - Applicability. 
    This article shall be applicable to all subdivision or site plan applications, unless eligible for an exemption or granted a waiver by the director under the specifications of section [22A-54] of this article. This article also applies to land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development that meets the following applicability criteria, even though multiple separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
a.  New development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that disturbs one acre or more of land; 
b.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
c.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the development review team (DRT) to be a hotspot land use; or, 
d.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in items a. and b. above if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-22), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-53. - Exempt activities. 
    The following activities are exempt from this article: 
a.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
b.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures; 
c.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and, 
d.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the DRT. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-23), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-54. - Development of a local stormwater design manual. 
    The city may furnish additional policy, criteria and information including specifications and standards, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this chapter and may provide such information in the form of a Local Stormwater Design Manual (LDM). If such a LDM is developed, the requirements outlined within the LDM shall take precedence. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-24), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-55. - Permit required. 
    No land owner or land operator shall receive any of the building, grading or other land development permits required for land disturbance activities without first meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-25), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-56. - Application requirements. 
    Unless specifically excluded by this article, any land owner or operator desiring a permit for a land disturbance activity shall submit to the city a permit application on a form provided for that purpose. Unless otherwise excepted by this article, a permit application must include the minimum requirements as defined in this article or local stormwater design manual in order for the permit application to be considered. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-26), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-57. - Application review fees. 
    The city may require the submittal of a review fee for review of the stormwater management plan. This review fee shall be based on the amount of land to be disturbed at the site, and the fee structure shall be established by the DRT. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to a local budgetary category to support local plan review, inspection and program administration, and shall be made prior to the issuance of any building permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-27), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-58. - Permit duration. 
    Permits issued under this section shall be valid from the date of issuance through the date the DRT notifies the permit holder that all stormwater management practices have passed the final inspection required under permit condition. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-28), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-59. - Waivers for providing stormwater management. 
    Every applicant shall provide for stormwater management as required by this article, unless a written request is filed to waive this requirement. Requests to waive the stormwater management plan requirements shall be submitted to the DRT for approval. The minimum requirements for stormwater management may be waived in whole or in part upon written request of the applicant, provided that at least one of the following conditions applies: 
a.  It can be demonstrated that the proposed development is not likely to impair attainment of the objectives of this article. 
b.  Alternative minimum requirements for on-site management of stormwater discharges have been established in a stormwater management plan that has been approved by the DRT and local ordinance or legal developer agreement requires the implementation of the plan. 
c.  Provisions are made to manage stormwater by an off-site facility. The off-site facility is required to be in place, to be designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices and there is a legally obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the stormwater practice. 
d.  The DRT finds that meeting the minimum on-site management requirements is not feasible due to the natural or existing physical characteristics of a site. 
e.  Non-structural practices may be used on the site that reduce: a) the generation of stormwater from the site, b) the size and cost of stormwater storage; and c) the pollutants generated at the site. These non-structural practices shall be explained in detail in the local or state design manual and the amount of credit available for using such practices shall be determined by the DRT if the city provides for stormwater credits in the review process. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-29), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-60. - Conditions of waiver. 
    In instances where one of the conditions above applies, the DRT may grant a waiver from strict compliance with these stormwater management provisions, as long as acceptable mitigation measures are provided. However, to be eligible for a variance, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the DRT that the waiver will not result in the following impacts to downstream waterways: 
a.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures; 
b.  Degradation of biological functions or habitat; 
c.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation; and 
d.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life, or property. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-30), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-61. - Mitigation requirements for waivers. 
    Where compliance with minimum requirements for stormwater management is waived, the applicant will satisfy the minimum requirements by meeting one of the mitigation measures selected by the DRT. Mitigation measures may include, but are not limited to, the following: 
a.  The purchase and donation of privately owned lands, or the grant of an easement to be dedicated for preservation and/or reforestation. These lands should be located adjacent to the stream corridor in order to provide permanent buffer areas to protect water quality and aquatic habitat; and 
b.  The creation of a stormwater management facility or other drainage improvements on previously developed properties, public or private, that currently lack stormwater management facilities designed and constructed in accordance with the purposes and standards of this article; and 
c.  Monetary contributions (fee-in-lieu) to fund stormwater management activities such as research and studies (e.g., regional wetland delineation studies, stream monitoring studies for water quality and macroinvertebrates, stream flow monitoring, threatened and endangered species studies, hydrologic studies, and monitoring of stormwater management practices, etc.). 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-31), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-62. - Fee in lieu of stormwater management practices. 
    Where the DRT waives all or part of the minimum stormwater management requirements, or where the waiver is based on the provision of adequate stormwater facilities provided downstream of the proposed development, the applicant may be required to pay a fee in an amount as determined by the DRT. 
    When an applicant obtains a waiver of the required stormwater management, the monetary contribution required shall be in accordance with a fee schedule (unless the developer and city agree on a greater alternate contribution) established by the DRT. All of the monetary contributions shall be credited to an appropriate capital improvements program project, and shall be made by the developer prior to the issuance of any permit for the development. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-32), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-63. - Dedication of land. 
    In lieu of a monetary contribution, an applicant may obtain a waiver of the required stormwater management by entering into an agreement with the city for the granting of an easement or the dedication of land by the applicant, to be used for the construction of an off-site stormwater management facility. The agreement shall be entered into by the applicant and the city prior to the recording of plats or, if no record plat is required, prior to the issuance of the building permit. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-33), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-64. - Performance criteria. 
    Unless judged by the DRT to be exempt or granted a waiver, the following performance criteria shall be addressed for stormwater management at all sites. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-34), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-65. - Peak runoff rate control. 
    The applicant shall control all stormwater discharges from the proposed project such that post development peak runoff rates do not exceed pre-development peak runoff rates for the two-year, five-year, ten-year, 25-year, 50-year and 100-year frequency storms, unless otherwise specified or the DRT grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions warrant greater control than that provided by the minimum control requirements, the DRT reserves the right to impose any and all additional requirements deemed necessary to control the volume, timing, and rate of runoff. 
a.  An emergency overflow device (which does not include the throttling device) for a detention pond shall be designed to pass the 100-year peak developed inflow without overtopping the dam. 
b.  The steepest fill slopes shall be 2.5:1, and cut slopes shall be no steeper than 2:1. 
c.  An eight-foot-wide access road which runs on top of the dam shall be required around the circumference of the pond. 
d.  If a pond is deeper than four feet, a chain link fence shall be required. 
1.  The fence shall be six feet high. 
2.  Fence posts shall be set in concrete ten feet on centers. 
3.  There shall be a minimum ten-foot-wide gate for access. 
4.  The fence shall not be installed across the slope of a dam or dike, but installed completely around the pond and containing the dike and access road. 
5.  The DRT may require a planted vegetation buffer around all or part of the pond. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-35), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-66. - Channel protection. 
    To protect stream channels from degradation, a specific channel protection criteria shall be provided. The channel protection criteria may be waived by the DRT for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, lakes, estuaries, or tidal waters where the reduction in smaller flows will not have an impact on stream bank or channel integrity. Additionally, the DRT may waive the channel protection criteria if the post development peak runoff rate for the channel protection criteria is less than two cubic feet per second (cfs) for the one-year 24-hour storm in a post-development state. 
    Channel protection shall be provided through 24-hour extended detention of the one-year 24-hour rainfall event, unless the DRT grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. If the applicant provides for channel protection, the applicant shall not be required to provide detention as specified in section 22A-65 for the two-year, five-year and ten-year frequency storms. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-36), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-67. - Water quality control. 
    For new development, stormwater treatment practices shall be designed to remove pollutants to levels prescribed. It is presumed that a BMP complies with this performance standard if it is: 
1.  Sized to capture the prescribed water quality volume (WQ v ). 
2.  Designed according to the specific performance criteria applied to the treatment practice. 
3.  Constructed properly, and maintained regularly. 
    This article follows the philosophy of removing pollutants to the "maximum extent practicable" through the use of a percentage removal performance goal. The approach to be taken is to treat a water quality volume of runoff equal to that generated by 1.2 inches of rainfall (WQ v ) to remove 80 percent of the annual total suspended solids (TSS) loading commonly found in urban stormwater runoff, unless the DRT grants the applicant a waiver or the applicant is exempt from such requirements. The applicant shall reference section 2.1.7 of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM) Volume 2, First Edition for the approved methodology for calculating the WQ v . 
    All stormwater runoff generated from new development shall not discharge untreated stormwater directly into a wetland or local water body without adequate treatment. Stormwater management practices for a site shall be chosen based on the physical conditions of the site. Additionally, stormwater management practices that utilize vegetation as part of the functional treatment process (e.g. constructed wetlands, etc.) must submit a separate landscaping plan detailing both the vegetation to be in the practice and how and who will manage and maintain this vegetation. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-37), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-68. - Conveyance issues. 
    All conveyances including pipes and open channels except those associated with detention facilities shall be designed for the 25-year frequency storm. Inlets for conveyances shall be designed for an equal frequency storm (i.e. 25-year storm design pipe system shall have all inlets sized for the 25-year storm). The DRT reserves the right to increase the requirements outlined herein where deemed necessary. All pipes placed within an easement or on public right-of-way for maintenance by the city shall be reinforced concrete pipe (RCP). 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-38), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-69. - Sensitive resources. 
    Stormwater discharges to critical areas with sensitive resources (i.e., fisheries, shellfish beds, swimming beaches, recharge areas, etc.) may be subject to additional performance criteria, or may need to utilize or restrict certain stormwater management practices. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-39), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-70. - Hot spots. 
    Stormwater discharges from land uses or activities with higher potential pollutant loadings, known as "hotspots", may require the use of specific BMPs and pollution prevention practices. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-40), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-71. - Stormwater management plan required for all developments. 
    No application for development will be approved unless it includes a stormwater management plan detailing in concept how runoff and associated water quality impacts resulting from the development will be controlled or managed. This plan must indicate whether stormwater will be managed on-site or off-site and, if on-site, the general location and type of practices. 
    The stormwater management plan(s) shall be referred for comment to all other interested agencies, and any comments must be addressed in a final stormwater management plan. This final plan must be signed by a licensed professional engineer (PE). No development related permits shall be issued until a satisfactory final stormwater management plan, or a waiver thereof, shall have undergone a review and been approved by the DRT after determining that the plan or waiver is consistent with the requirements of this article. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-41), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-72. - Stormwater management plan requirements. 
    A stormwater management plan shall be required with all permit applications and will include sufficient information (e.g., maps, hydrologic calculations, etc) to evaluate the environmental characteristics of the project site, the potential impacts of all proposed development of the site, both present and future, on the water resources, and the effectiveness and acceptability of the measures proposed for managing stormwater generated at the project site. The intent of this planning process is to determine the type of stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project, and ensure adequate planning for management of stormwater runoff from future development. To accomplish this goal the applicant will prepare a design report, which shall include elements sufficient to ensure compliance with this article. These reports shall include at a minimum: a narrative description of the proposed development project and its changes to the site, predevelopment drainage maps, post development drainage maps, predevelopment runoff rates, post development rates, lists of assumptions used in calculating drainage impacts, and calculations of drainage impacts. The DRT reserves the right to extend these requirements to ensure compliance with this article. However, in these cases, the DRT must provide a written explanation of the additional elements needed to the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-42), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-73. - Performance bond/security. 
    The city may, at its discretion, require the submittal of a performance security or bond prior to issuance of a permit in order to ensure that the stormwater practices are installed by the permit holder as required by the approved stormwater management plan. The amount of the installation performance security shall be the total estimated construction cost of the stormwater management practices approved under the permit, plus 25 percent as agreed to by the applicant and the city. The performance security shall contain forfeiture provisions for failure to complete work specified in the stormwater management plan. 
    The installation performance security shall be released in full only upon submission of "as built plans" and written certification by a registered professional engineer that the stormwater practice has been installed in accordance with the approved plan and other applicable provisions of this article. The DRT will make a final inspection of the stormwater practice to ensure that it is in compliance with the approved plan and the provisions of this article. Provisions for a partial pro-rata release of the performance security based on the completion of various development stages can be done at the discretion of the DRT. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-43), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-74. - Notice of construction commencement. 
    The applicant must notify the DRT in advance before the commencement of construction so as to provide for scheduling of inspections. If any violations are found, the property owner shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. The DRT may issue a "stop work order" if the DRT determines that the corrective actions will need to be made prior to continuance of other development activities on the site to ensure compliance with this article. In these cases, no added work shall proceed until any violations are corrected and all work previously completed has received approval by the DRT. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-44), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-75. - As built plans. 
    All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management practices located on-site after final construction is completed in a format specified by the DRT. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and must be certified by a professional engineer. A final inspection by the DRT is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-45), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-76. - Maintenance easement. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit that has a stormwater management facility as one of the requirements of the permit, the applicant or owner of the site must execute a maintenance easement agreement that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of land served by the stormwater management facility. The agreement shall provide for access to the facility at reasonable times for periodic inspection by the DRT or their contractor or agent, and for regular or special assessments of property owners to ensure that the facility is maintained in proper working condition to meet design standards and any other provisions established by this article. The easement agreement shall be recorded by the applicant in the land records. The minimum width of an easement for pipe systems shall be 20 feet, however the [review authority] may increase this requirement for systems that are deeper than six feet in depth. Minimum width of an easement for an open channel shall be the width of the channel at the top of slope plus ten feet either side of the channel. All other easements for structures including but not limited to detention ponds, etc. shall be ten feet beyond the facilities footprint. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-46), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-77. - Maintenance covenants. 
    Maintenance of all stormwater management facilities shall be ensured through the creation of a formal maintenance covenant that must be approved by the DRT and recorded into the land record prior to final plan approval. As part of the covenant, a schedule shall be developed for when and how often maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility. Stormwater management facilities may be required to undergo annual inspections to document maintenance and repair needs and ensure compliance with the requirements of this article and accomplishment of its purposes. These needs may include; removal of silt, litter and other debris from all catch basins, inlets and drainage pipes, grass cutting and vegetation removal, and necessary replacement of landscape vegetation. Any maintenance needs found must be addressed in a timely manner and the inspection and maintenance requirement may be increased as deemed necessary to ensure proper functioning of the stormwater management facility. The requirement for such inspections shall be outlined in the maintenance covenant. 
    The city in lieu of a maintenance covenant, may accept dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-47), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-78. - Records of installation and maintenance activities. 
    Parties responsible for the operation and maintenance of a stormwater management facility shall make records of the installation and of all maintenance and repairs, and shall retain the records for at least three years. These records shall be made available to the DRT during inspection of the facility and at other reasonable times upon request. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-48), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-79. - Failure to maintain practices. 
    If a responsible party fails or refuses to meet the requirements of the maintenance covenant, the city after reasonable notice, may correct a violation of the design standards or maintenance needs by performing all necessary work to place the facility in proper working condition. In the event that the stormwater management facility becomes a danger to public safety or public health, the DRT shall notify the party responsible for maintenance of the stormwater management facility in writing. Upon receipt of that notice, the responsible person shall affect maintenance and repair of the facility in an approved manner and within the established deadline. After proper notice, the city may assess the owner(s) of the facility for the cost of repair work and any penalties; and the cost of the work shall be a lien on the property, or prorated against the beneficial users of the property. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-49), 12-13-2006) 
Secs. 22A-80-22A-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 22A-101. - Injuction. 
    Any development activity that is commenced or is conducted contrary to this article may be restrained by injunction or otherwise abated in a manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-50), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-102. - Notice of violation. 
    When the DRT determines that an activity is not being carried out in accordance with the requirements of this article, the DRT shall issue a written notice of violation to the owner of the property. The notice of violation shall contain: 
1)  The name and address of the owner or applicant; 
2)  The address when available or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring; 
3)  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
4)  A description of potential remedial measures necessary to bring the development activity into compliance with this article and a time schedule for the completion of such remedial action; 
5)  A statement of the penalty or penalties that shall or may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed; 
6)  A statement that the determination of violation may be appealed to the city by filing a written notice of appeal within fifteen days of service of notice of violation. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-51), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-103. - Stop work orders. 
    Persons receiving a notice of violation may be required to halt all construction activities. This "stop work order" will be in effect until the DRT confirms that the development activity is in compliance and the violation has been satisfactorily addressed. Failure to address a notice of violation in a timely manner can result in civil, criminal, or monetary penalties in accordance with the enforcement measures authorized in this article. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-52), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-104. - Civil and criminal penalties. 
    In addition to or as an alternative to any penalty provided herein or by law, any person who violates the provisions of this article shall be punished by a fine in Brunswick Municipal Court in accordance with chapter 15 of the Municipal Code of Brunswick and applicable Georgia law. Such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each day during which the violation occurs or continues. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-53), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-105. - Restoration of lands. 
    Any violator may be required to restore land to its undisturbed condition. In the event that restoration is not undertaken within a reasonable time after notice, the city may take necessary corrective action, the cost of which shall become a lien upon the property until paid. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-54), 12-13-2006) 
Sec. 22A-106. - Holds on occupation permits. 
    Occupation permits will not be granted until all corrections to all stormwater practices have been made and accepted by the DRT. A provisional occupation permit may be issued for a specified period of time not to exceed 90 days in the event the DRT determines there is an urgent need for such provisional occupancy. Provisional permits may be conditioned according to such terms as the DRT deems reasonable, and may be revoked at any time upon determination by the DRT that revocation is an appropriate means to protect the public interest in light of violation of the conditions of the provisional permit, violation of this or other ordinance of the city, or such other grounds as the DRT deems justify a revocation. 
(Ord. No. 984, § 1(22A-55), 12-13-2006) 
Chapter 23 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1006, § 1, adopted Nov. 19, 2008, amended ch. 23 in its entirety, if effect deleting ch. 23 and enacting a new ch. 23 to read as set out herein. Former ch. 23 pertained to similar subject matter. For a complete history of former ch. 23 see the Code Comparative Table. Citations to the zoning ordinance and amendments thereto are indicated by parenthetical history notes following each section. A uniform system of punctuation, capitalization, and treatment of numbers has been used, and words added for clarity have been enclosed in brackets [ ]. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; flood damage prevention, ch. 11; housing, ch. 12; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 17; subdivision regulations, app. B. 
State Law reference- Municipal authority to exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. 1983, art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 23-1-1. - Preamble. 
    This chapter establishes comprehensive zoning regulations for the City of Brunswick, creates various zoning districts within the city, regulates the development and use of land parcels according to the character of each district and provides for the administration, enforcement and amendment of this chapter. The provisions were enacted by Ordinance No. 877 on April 19, 1989, which shall be deemed to be the date of enactment. Amendments after said date shall have a date of enactment corresponding to the date of adoption of each such amending ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-1-2. - Short title. 
    This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "The Zoning Ordinance of the City of Brunswick, Georgia." 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-1-3. - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation of this chapter, all words used in the present tense include the future tense. All words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number include the plural number, unless the natural construction of the wording indicates otherwise. The word "building" includes the term "structure." The word "person" includes a firm, company, partnership, association, public or private authority, or corporation. The word "shall" is mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. The word "used" shall be deemed also to include "designed, arranged or intended to be used or occupied." The term "planning staff" refers to employees of the City of Brunswick Department of Planning, Development and Codes. The term "building official" refers to the person designated and employed as such by the City of Brunswick or to his authorized subordinate employee. The term "city commission" refers to the governing authority of the City of Brunswick. 
    Certain words and terms are defined for purposes of this chapter as set forth hereinafter. Words and terms which are not defined herein shall have their generally accepted meaning as shall be determined by the officials responsible for the administration and enforcement of this chapter. Appeals of interpretative decisions may be made to the planning and appeals commission. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-1-4. - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply to words used in this chapter: 
    Abandonment: The voluntary discontinuance of a use for a continuous period of at least 365 days, either by vacating the site, by cessation of operations, or by conversion to a different use. 
    Accessory use or structure: A use or structure customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use or structure and located on the same premises with such principal use or structure. 
    Alley: A secondary way which affords access to the side or rear of abutting property. 
    Alteration of building: Any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, columns, or girders), any addition or reduction to a building; any change in use; or any relocation of a building from one location or position to another. 
    Automobile service station: Buildings and premises on any parcel or lot where gasoline, oils, and greases, batteries, tires and automobile accessories may be supplied and dispensed at retail (or as an operation accessory to another business), where no part of the premises is used for the storage of dismantled or wrecked vehicle parts, and also where the following services, but none other, may be rendered: 
(a)  Sale and servicing of spark plugs, batteries, and distributors; 
(b)  Tire repair and servicing, but no re-capping; 
(c)  Replacement of mufflers and tail pipes, water hose, fan belts, brake fluid, transmission fluid, light bulbs, floor mats, seat covers, wiper blades, windshield wipers, grease retainers, and wheel bearings; 
(d)  Radiator cleaning and flushing; 
(e)  Washing and polishing; 
(f)  Greasing and lubrication; 
(g)  Exchanging fuel pumps and installing fuel lines; 
(h)  Minor servicing and replacing of carburetors; 
(i)  Emergency wiring repairs; 
(j)  Adjusting and repair of brakes; 
(k)  Minor adjustment of engines, not involving removal of the head and/or crankcase, or racing the motor; 
(l)  Sale of cold drinks and packaged foods, as accessory only to the principal operation. 
    Boarding house: A dwelling in which at least four persons are provided with meals for compensation. 
    Buffer: An area used to visually separate one use from another or to shield or block noise, lights, or other characteristics or features of one use from another. 
    Building: Any structure having a roof supported by columns or walls intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals, chattels or property of any kind. 
    Building line: That line which represents the distance a building or structure must be set back from a lot boundary line or a street right-of-way line or a street centerline according to the terms of this chapter. In all cases the building lines of a lot shall run parallel to such other lines. 
    Building official: The person designated as such by the city manager, and any subordinate, assistant or substitute employed by the city. 
    Building, principal: A building in which is conducted the principal use of the lot on which said building is situated. 
    Care home: A rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, or similar use established and operated on a profit or non-profit basis to provide lodging and/or meals and/or domiciliary care for aged, infirm, chronically ill or convalescent persons. 
    Child care facility: A licensed establishment where seven or more children, other than members of the family occupying the premises, are kept and given care. 
    City: The City of Brunswick, Georgia, a municipal corporation, or the area located within the corporate limits of the City of Brunswick. 
    Clinic: An establishment where medical or dental patients who are not lodged therein overnight are admitted for examination or treatment. 
    Commission: The governing authority of the City of Brunswick, that is, its city commission. 
    Conditional use: A use specifically designated as such in this chapter, that would not be appropriate for location generally or without restriction throughout a given zoning district, but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would in the opinion of the city commission promote the public health, safety, morals, order, comfort, convenience, appearance, prosperity or general welfare. Sometimes referred to as a "special exception." 
    Density: The number of dwelling units per acre of land developed or used for residential purposes. Unless otherwise clearly stated, density requirements in this chapter are expressed in dwelling units per net acre - that is, per acre of land devoted to residential use exclusive of land utilized for streets, alleys, parks, playgrounds, school grounds or other public uses. 
    Drug care facility: A care home, group dwelling, half-way house, rehabilitation center or other facility for the care or treatment of drug or alcohol dependency. 
    Dwelling: A building or portion of a building arranged or designed to provide living quarters for one or more families. 
    Dwelling, one-family: A detached dwelling other than a mobile home designed for or occupied exclusively by one family. 
    Dwelling, two-family: A detached or semi-detached dwelling designed for or occupied exclusively by two families in separate dwelling units living independently of each other on a single lot. 
    Dwelling, group: A building or portion of a building occupied or intended for occupancy by several unrelated persons or families, but in which separate cooking facilities are not provided for such resident persons or families. The term ``group dwelling'' includes but is not limited to a rooming house, apartment hotel, fraternity or sorority house, Y.M.C.A. or Y.W.C.A. A hotel, motel or tourist home shall not be deemed to be a group dwelling as herein defined. 
    Dwelling, multi-family: A dwelling or dwellings on a single lot, designed for or occupied by three or more families living independently of each other, with the number of families in residence not exceeding the number of dwelling units provided. 
    Dwelling, townhouse or row house: One of a series of three or more attached one-family dwelling units on separate lots which may or may not have a common roof, shall not have a common exterior wall and are separated from each other by fire resistive party wall partitions extending at least from the lowest floor level to the roof. 
    Dwelling unit: One or more rooms connected together and constituting a separate, independent housekeeping establishment for use on a basis involving owner occupancy or rental or lease on a weekly, monthly or longer basis, with provision for cooking, eating and sleeping, physically set apart from any other rooms or dwelling units in the same structure. 
    Drive-in: A retail or service enterprise oriented to automobile-driving patrons wherein service is provided to consumers on the outside of the principal building. The term ``drive-in'' includes drive-in restaurants, banks, laundries, food stores, liquor stores or car washes. 
    Family: One or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit, provided that unless all members are related by blood or marriage, no such family shall contain over five persons, but further provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises. 
    Family day care home: A home operated by any person who receives pay for caring for six or fewer children (other than members of the family occupying the premises) for day-time supervision and care. Such a use shall be considered a home occupation. 
    Garage, private: An accessory building or portion of a principal building used only for the private storage of motor vehicles as an accessory use. 
    Garage, public: Any garage other than a private garage which is used for storage, minor repair, rental, servicing, washing, adjusting or equipping of automobiles or other vehicles. 
    Garage, repair: Building and premises designed or used for purposes indicated under ``automobile service station'' and/or major commercial repairs, provided that body work and painting shall be conducted within fully enclosed buildings and provided further that self-propelled vehicles not in safe operating condition shall be stored in fully enclosed buildings. 
    Guest house: Living quarters situated within a detached or semi-detached accessory building located on the same premises with the principal building. Such quarters shall contain no cooking facilities, shall be used only by bona fide non-paying guests or by relatives of the occupants of the premises, and shall not be rented or otherwise occupied as a separate dwelling. 
    Home occupation: An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling for pecuniary gain by members of a family residing in the dwelling, but not including the operation of a tourist home or boarding house; provided that physicians, surgeons, dentists and other members of the medical professions operating as home occupations must receive approval of their sanitary facilities by the Glynn County Board of Health. 
    Hotel: A facility offering transient lodging accommodations in ten rooms or more to the general public. The word ``hotel'' includes the terms ``motel,'' ``inn'' and ``tourist court.'' 
    Junk or salvage yard: A place used for the storage, keeping, abandonment, sale or resale of junk, salvage or scrap material or for the dismantling, demolition, storage or abandonment of automobiles and other vehicles, machinery or equipment, or parts thereof. 
    Loading space, off-street: Space logically and conveniently located for pickups and deliveries, scaled to delivery vehicles expected to be used, and accessible to such vehicles when required off-street parking spaces are filled. 
    Lot: A parcel of land of varying size, which is designated as a single unit of property. Unless clearly indicated otherwise, the word ``lot'' when used alone in this chapter shall mean a ``zoning lot'' as herein defined. 
    Lot, corner: A lot located at the intersection of two or more streets or bounded on two or more adjacent sides by street right-of-way lines. 
    Lot depth: The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
    Lot, interior: A lot other than a corner lot or through lot. 
    Lot of record: An area designated as a separate and distinct parcel of land on a legally recorded subdivision plat or in a legally recorded deed as filed in the official records of the Clerk of Glynn Superior Court. 
    Lot, through: A lot having frontage on two nonintersecting streets, as distinguished from a corner lot. 
    Lot width: The distance between side lot lines measured at the front building line. 
    Lot, zoning: A parcel of land occupied or to be occupied by a principal use or uses, together with such accessory uses, yards and open spaces as are permitted or required under the provisions of this chapter, having frontage on an officially accepted public street and having not less than the minimum area required by these regulations for a lot in the zoning district within which the parcel of land is located. A lot of record may or may not be a zoning lot. 
    Mobile home or manufactured home: A structure built on a permanent chassis, transportable in one or more sections, which is at least ten feet wide and has at least 600 square feet of floor area, with plumbing, heating, air conditioning and electrical systems contained therein, and which is designed to be used as a dwelling when connected to the required utilities. 
    Mobile home park: Premises where spaces are set aside or offered for sale or rent to accommodate four or more mobile homes for use as dwellings. 
    Mobile home space: A plot of ground within a mobile home park designed for the accommodation of one mobile home. 
    Nonconforming use: A building, structure or parcel of land lawfully occupied by a use that does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district in which it is situated. 
    Nonconforming structure: Any structure that exists lawfully under these zoning regulations at the effective date of its adoption or amendment that could not be built under these zoning regulations by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, or requirements other than use concerning the structure. 
    Parking, dedicated on-street: A parking space located directly in front of, or along the side or rear of a parcel that can primarily be used to serve the uses on the abutting, subject parcel. A dedicated on-street parking space can be used to count towards a parcel's minimum parking requirement when: 
(a)  The parking space can clearly be devoted to the abutting parcel, 
(b)  At least 50 percent of the parking space is located along the front, side or rear of the parcel, 
(c)  The parking space is unobstructed by dumpsters or other semi-permanent obstructions, and 
(d)  The parking space will not obstruct city operations. 
    Patio house: A single-family dwelling unit in which a portion of the area required for rear and side yards may be consolidated into one or more garden court spaces within the walls of the dwelling unit, on the condition that a minimum of five feet separates the property lines from the patio house along the side and rear lot lines. 
    Planning staff: The city employees or contractors designated by the city manager to process applications for re-zonings, conditional uses and variances. 
    Professional: A use or occupancy by persons engaged in rendering personal, executive, or administrative services, including accountants, architects, engineers, land surveyors, doctors and other healthcare professionals, lawyers, insurance offices and administrative offices considered professional in character. 
    Sign: A term which means and includes every sign, billboard, poster panel, free-standing ground sign, roof sign, projecting sign, pylon sign, illuminated sign, sign painted on a wall, window, marquee, awning or canopy, and including any announcement, declaration, demonstration, display, ribbon, banner, illustration or insignia used to advertise or promote the interests of any person when the same is placed in view of the general public traveling along a public street right-of-way. 
    Sign area: The area of the face of the sign formed by a perimeter consisting of a series of straight lines enclosing all parts of the sign. The area of a free-standing sign structure is the area of the face on one side only. 
    Sign, business identification: A sign which identifies the name of the business enterprise located on the same premises as the sign and the nature of the business conducted there. Not more than one-third of the area of a business identification sign may be devoted to commodity or service advertising. 
    Sign, business identification pylon: A sign erected on a pole or poles, which identifies only the name or the nature of the business conducted on the premises on which it is located. 
    Sign, directional: A sign containing directional information about public places owned or operated by state, federal or local governments or their agencies, publicly or privately owned natural phenomena, historic, cultural, scientific, educational, or religious sites, or areas having natural scenic beauty or being naturally suited for outdoor recreation, deemed to be in the interest of the travelling public. 
    Sign, illuminated: A sign illuminated by neon, fluorescent or incandescent lighting. 
    Sign, mobile or portable: A sign structure having no permanent attachment to a building or to the ground and which because of its design and use is not intended to become a permanent fixture on the premises where located. Such signs are manifestly designed to be moveable or transportable, whether by wheels, trailer or other means, and are frequently characterized by provisions for changeable copy. 
    Special exception: A use so specifically designated in this chapter, that would not be appropriate for location generally or without restriction throughout a given zoning district but which, if controlled as to number, area, location or relation to the neighborhood, would in the opinion of the board of zoning appeals promote the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. 
    Story: That portion of a building included between the surface of any floor and the surface of the floor next above it, or if there is no floor above it, then the space between the floor and the ceiling next above it. 
    Story, half: A story in which one or more exterior walls intersect a sloping roof not more than two feet above the floor of such story. 
    Street: A public way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. 
    Street centerline: That line surveyed and monumented by the governing body as the centerline of a street, or in the event that no centerline has been so determined, that line running midway between and parallel to the general direction of the outside right-of-way lines of the street. 
    Structure: Anything constructed or erected which requires a fixed location on the ground or which is attached to something having a fixed location on the ground, including but not limited to buildings, mobile homes, signs, walls and fences. 
    Tourist home: A dwelling in which sleeping accommodations in fewer than ten rooms are provided or offered for the use of guests in return for compensation and in which meals may or may not be offered. Any dwelling in which such accommodations are offered in ten or more rooms shall be deemed to be a ``hotel'' as herein defined. The use of a dwelling as a tourist home shall not be considered an accessory use or a customary home occupation. 
    Trailer: Any vehicle or structure capable of moving or being moved over streets and highways on its own wheels or on a flat bed or other carrier, which is designed or utilized to provide temporary or permanent quarters for the conduct of a business, profession, trade or occupation, serve as a carrier of people, new or used goods, products or equipment, or be used as a selling, advertising or display device. 
    Travel trailer: A mobile travel unit on wheels, excluding a mobile home, which is designed to be pulled by or carried on a wheeled mobile vehicle. Included in this definition are pick-up campers, converted or factory assembled camper buses, tents and/or tent trailer or other similar mobile devices. 
    Travel trailer park or campground: Any site, lot, parcel or tract of land upon which travel trailers, travel units or tents are placed in accordance with the requirements of this chapter. 
    Variance: A modification of the strict terms of this chapter granted by the board of zoning appeals where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not as the result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this chapter would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Yard: A required open space located on the same lot as the principal building which is unoccupied and unobstructed from ground to sky except for tree or shrub growth and fences or walls subject to height limitations as indicated, except where encroachments, utilities and accessory uses are expressly permitted. 
    Yard, front: A yard situated between the front building line and the front lot line extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, rear: A yard situated between the rear building line and the rear lot line and extending the full width of the lot. 
    Yard, side: A yard situated between a side building line and a side lot line and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE II. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 

Sec. 23-2-1. - Division into districts. 
    For the purpose of these regulations, the City of Brunswick, Georgia, is hereby divided into 20 districts designated as follows: 
R-9 One-family residential R-6 One-family residential GR General residential OC Office commercial LC Local commercial GC General commercial GCCore General commercial core HC Highway commercial BI Basic industrial GI General industrial CP Conservation-preservation PD-G Planned Development-General PD-TN Planned Development-Traditional Neighborhood MH Mobile home MED Medical LM Limited medical LI Limited industrial CR Commercial recreation GRCore General residential core U.S.17 U.S. 17 Overlay  
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-2-2. - District boundaries. 
    The location and boundaries of each district are as shown on a map entitled "Official Zoning Map of Brunswick and Glynn County, Georgia," heretofore adopted on February 3, 1965, as amended from time to time. Said map, together with the explanatory writing and other entries thereon, consisting of multiple panels, has been and shall continue to be a part of this zoning ordinance until such time that a new and updated map of the city showing the current and correct location and boundaries of each district can be prepared by the city engineer. When such a new map is approved by vote of the city commission, then that new map shall become the official zoning map of the City of Brunswick and automatically replace the previous map as a part of this ordinance. Said new map shall be updated periodically by the city engineer to update it to reflect any re-zonings which may occur in the future and shall be retained permanently in the office of the city engineer. The map of February 3, 1965, as amended, referred to above shall be permanently retained by the city engineer for future reference. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-2-3. - Interpretation of district boundaries. 
    The following rules shall apply where uncertainty exists with respect to the district boundaries as shown on the zoning map: 
(a)  District boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines or right-of-way lines of streets, highways, alleys, railways or public utility easements shall be construed to follow such centerlines or right-of-way lines. 
(b)  District boundaries indicated as approximately following lot or tract lines, whether public or private, shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(c)  District boundaries indicated as approximately following incorporated area or county limit lines, military reservation boundary lines, militia district lines or special district lines, as amended from time to time, shall be construed to follow such lines. 
(d)  District boundaries indicated as approximately following the centerlines, right-of-way or shore lines of streams, rivers, canals, channels or other waterways shall be construed to follow such centerlines, right-of-way lines or shore lines. 
(e)  District boundaries indicated within the area known as the Atlantic Ocean shall be construed to be parallel to, and 500 feet seaward from, adjacent land or marsh shore lines at all times. 
(f)  District boundaries indicated as being approximately parallel to, or extensions of, features or lines listed hereinabove shall be so construed. Distances not specifically indicated on the zoning map shall be determined according to the scale of the map. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-2-4. - Annexation or other adjustments to city limits. 
    The following provisions shall govern when city limit boundaries change by reason of annexation: 
(a)  The zoning district classification which applied to the newly added area when it was under the jurisdiction of the Glynn County Zoning Ordinance shall continue to apply until such time as the city commission may desire to change the classification through normal amendment procedure, provided that the identical zoning district classification, including identical standards and requirements, exists in this chapter. 
(b)  Otherwise, the additional land area incorporated into the city shall be classified R-9 one-family residential until such time as the city commission may desire to change such classification through normal amendment procedure. 
(c)  In all cases where an addition to the city's land area requires adjustment in the zoning district boundaries, such adjustment shall be endorsed upon the zoning map. 
(d)  Zoning decisions with respect to land annexed into the city shall be subject to any valid and applicable contracts between the city and Glynn County which are currently in force at the time of the decision. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE III. - GENERAL REGULATIONS 

Sec. 23-3-1. - Minimum requirements. 
    The various zoning district regulations established and set forth herein are declared to be the minimum requirements necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-2. - Use of land or building. 
(a)  No land or building shall hereafter be used, and no existing building or part thereof shall hereafter be constructed, erected, altered or moved except in conformity with all of the regulations of the zoning district in which it is or will be located. 
(b)  Land uses not expressly permitted within the several zoning districts established by this chapter are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-3. - Height of buildings, measurement. 
    No building structure or appurtenance shall hereafter be constructed, altered or moved so as to exceed the prescribed height limitations for the zoning district in which it is or will be located. The height limitations prescribed in this chapter shall be measured from the average grade elevation at site or from a height of 12 feet above mean sea level, national geodetic vertical datum, whichever is higher. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-4. - Density. 
    No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied in excess of the prescribed density regulations for the zoning district in which it is or will be located. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-5. - Lot occupancy. 
    No building shall hereafter be erected, altered or moved to occupy a greater percentage of lot area than is permitted within the zoning district in which it is or will be located. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-6. - Lot reduction prohibited. 
    No lot shall be so reduced in size that the requirements of this chapter as to total area, lot width, necessary yards or other open spaces, lot area per dwelling unit or other required conditions are not maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-7. - Yard use limitation. 
    No building shall hereafter be erected, altered or moved to create narrower or smaller front yards, side yards, rear yards or other open spaces than required by this chapter for the zoning district in which such building is or will be located. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-8. - Use of substandard lots of record. 
    No permit for the use of any lot which is smaller in total area than the minimum size for the district within which it is located shall be issued unless said lot was legally and properly recorded prior to the passage of this chapter, provided that substandard lots in residential districts shall be used only for single-family residential purposes and construction on any such lot after the passage of this chapter shall be required to meet all other requirements of the district in which it is located, except that if the lot is less than 45 feet in width at the building line, the minimum total side yard shall be at least 20 percent of the lot width with a minimum of three feet for each side measured from the eave of the structure to the lot line. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-9. - Street access. 
    Except as herein provided, no building shall hereafter be erected, constructed, moved or relocated on a lot not located on a publicly dedicated, publicly accepted or publicly maintained street with a right-of-way of not less than 30 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-10. - Classification of streets. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, all public streets in the City of Brunswick are hereby classified as being either controlled access highways, major streets, collector streets or minor streets. The classification of each public street in the city is designated on the zoning map. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-11. - Location of buildings on lots. 
    Every building or use hereafter erected or established shall be located on a lot of record, and every one- and two-family residential structure, except as herein provided, shall be located on an individual lot of record. In all cases, the principal building on a lot shall be located within the area formed by the building lines as outer boundaries, and in no case shall the building infringe beyond the building lines into the respective front, side or rear yards or other setbacks required for the district in which the lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-12. - Corner lots. 
    On lots having frontage on more than one street at an intersection, the minimum front yard requirement may be reduced to one-half the regulated distance on the portion of the lot fronting on the street or streets of lesser importance. However, in no case shall the setback be reduced to less than ten feet. The minimum front yard for the portion of the lot fronting on the street of greater importance shall be provided in accordance with the provisions established by this chapter for the district in which the lot is located. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-13. - Double frontage lots. 
    On lots having frontage on more than one street, but not located on a corner, the minimum front yard shall be provided for that portion of the yard facing the street of greater importance in accordance with the provisions of this chapter while that portion of the yard facing the street of lesser importance shall provide a minimum yard of ten feet in width. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-14. - Front yard requirements. 
    The setback requirements of this chapter shall not apply to any lot where the average setback on other lots already built upon and located wholly or in part within 100 feet of each side of the lot, on the same side of the street and within the same block and zoning district, is less than the minimum required setback. In such case, the setback on the lot may be less than the required setback but not less than the average of the setbacks on such other lots. However, in no case shall the setback be less than ten feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-15. - Nonconforming uses. 
    Any lawfully existing building, structure or use of land which is not a permitted use in the district within which it is located upon the enactment of this chapter into law shall be deemed to be a nonconforming use. Such use may be continued subject to the following conditions: 
(a)  Change. Once changed to a conforming use, no building or use of land shall be permitted to revert to a nonconforming use. Change to another nonconforming use is prohibited. 
(b)  Abandonment. Reestablishment of a nonconforming use after abandonment or discontinuance of use for a continuous period of 365 days is prohibited. 
(c)  Restoration. A nonconforming building may not be reconstructed or structurally altered for continuance as a nonconforming use if the cost of such reconstruction or alteration exceeds 50 percent of its replacement cost less depreciation. Permitted restoration of a nonconforming building shall be fully completed within a six-month period after issuance of the building permit for each restoration. 
(d)  Extension. A nonconforming use or building shall not be enlarged or extended in such a way as to displace a conforming use or building. No nonconforming use or building may be extended to occupy additional land area not utilized for such nonconforming use or building as of the date of enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-16. - Home occupations. 
(1)  Overview. 
(a)  The standards of this article dealing with home occupations are designed to protect and maintain the residential character of a neighborhood while permitting certain limited commercial activities to be carried out in a home. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to carry on a home occupation at a residence in an area of the city zoned R-9, R-6, GR, and PDTD unless the person has applied for and received a license to do so in compliance with this article. Application for a home occupation permit shall be made in writing on forms provided by the city. Applications shall be reviewed and approved by the planning, development and codes department. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for the property owner to knowingly allow a person to use the real estate for a home occupation in violation of this article. 
(d)  All local and state licenses/permits as well as any necessary licenses/permits from any other agency required for the home occupation must be obtained prior to the business being opened. 
(e)  A permit application fee for new home occupation permit shall be required and is nonrefundable. The permit must be renewed annually to remain in effect. 
(2)  Definition. 
    "Home occupation" is defined as any business, profession, occupation, trade or activity conducted within a detached one-family residential building, or an accessory building thereto, which is incidental or secondary to the use of such building for dwelling purposes and which does not change the essential residential character of the building. This definition applies to all zoning districts. 
    A home occupation shall require a written permit and shall be permitted in a single-family dwelling in any residential district provided that the following standards are met: 
(3)  Evaluation standards. 
(a)  The structure or appearance of the exterior of the dwelling shall not be altered or remodeled for home occupational purposes either by color, materials, construction, lighting, or in any other way. 
(b)  The entrance to the home occupation portion of the dwelling shall be from either within the dwelling or through an existing entrance; not through a new outside entrance. 
(c)  No activities shall be allowed and no equipment or material shall be used that would change the fire safety or occupancy classifications of the premises. 
(d)  Not more than 25 percent of the floor area in the residential unit may be used for a home occupation. This is a maximum amount regardless of the number of occupations at any one residence. Additionally, a home occupation may occupy a maximum of 200 square feet of floor area of any accessory building. 
(e)  Hours of operation. Customer visits shall be limited to the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. 
(f)  Any sign or display shall be limited to only one and shall not exceed three square feet in size. It shall carry only the name and occupation of the occupant of the premises. The sign or display shall be non-lighted and non-reflective in nature and shall be attached to the dwelling or accessory building. 
(g)  The interior of the residence shall maintain an operational kitchen, bathroom, and sleeping area and shall have active utility accounts, including water and electricity. 
(h)  The home occupation shall not generate pedestrian or vehicular traffic beyond what is normal to the neighborhood where it is located. 
(i)  There shall be no outdoor display or storage of equipment or material used in the home occupation. 
(j)  A home occupation permit/occupational tax certificate for a home occupation is valid for only the original applicant and is not transferable to any resident, address or any other occupation. Upon termination of the applicant's residency, the home occupation permit shall become null and void. 
(k)  If there are any changes proposed in the dwelling or in the plumbing or the electrical system, appropriate permits will be required. 
(4)  Restriction on sales. The home occupation shall involve the sale of only those goods or services produced on the premises, except in the case of mail order or home marketing services. 
(5)  Mail order or home marketing services. 
(a)  If the home occupation consists of either a mail order business or a home marketing business, the residence will be the mailing address and office only. The business will only take orders at the home and the orders will be filled by direct shipment from factory/warehouse to customer. No inventory beyond samples may be stored on the premises. 
(6)  Catering and food sales. A home occupation providing food catering or food sales must meet all of the requirements of the Georgia Department of Agriculture Food Safety Division Chapter 40-7-19 Cottage Food Regulations. 
(7)  Beauty shops and barber shops. 
(a)  Beauty shops and barber shops are allowed provided customer visits are by appointment only. The business shall consist of no more than one beauty/barber chair and no more than two customers shall be permitted at one time. Beauty shops and barber shops allowed under these provisions shall be registered with the appropriate licensing and inspection authorities. 
(b)  All local and state licenses as well as any necessary permits from the Glynn County Health Department must be obtained prior to the business being opened. 
(8)  In-home childcare. 
(a)  In-home childcare is limited to six children at a time, including the caregiver's own preschool-aged children. 
(b)  No other home occupation permit/occupational tax certificate can be combined with an in-home childcare home occupation permit. 
(c)  Home childcare providers and their employees must also pass a fingerprint check and a preliminary records check to make sure that there is no history of criminal behavior. A background check conducted by the state within 60 days will satisfy this requirement. 
(d)  All local and state licenses as well as any necessary permits from the Glynn County Health Department must be obtained prior to the business being opened. 
(9)  Mobile/On-call businesses. 
(a)  Any business which is primarily conducted off-site, but requires a home office to make appointments outside the home and complete office work such as filing, payroll, scheduling, etc. shall be allowed. 
(b)  The business shall have no customers on site. 
(c)  All local and state licenses as well as any necessary permits from Glynn County must be obtained prior to the business being opened. 
(10)  Impact-related standards. 
(a)  Noise. The maximum noise level for a home occupation is 50 dBA. Noise level measurements are taken at the property line. Home occupations that propose to use power tools or music must document in advance that the home occupation will meet the 50 dBA standard. 
(b)  Deliveries. Truck deliveries or pick-ups of supplies or products, associated with the home occupation, are allowed at the home only between 8:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. 
(c)  Vehicles. No more than one marked vehicle may be used in association with the home occupation. No heavy equipment, semi-tractors, dump trucks, or track vehicles shall be permitted to park on the premises. 
(d)  Parking. Unless otherwise allowed by zoning, no on-street parking of customers shall be permitted at any time. The home occupation shall have necessary parking needed for both residents and customers without using public roads. 
(e)  Prohibited equipment and materials. There shall be no chemical, mechanical or electrical equipment on the premises other than that normally found in a purely domestic residence. Chemical shall also include any chemicals which are not normally found in a purely domestic residence. 
(f)  Nuisance. There shall be no emission of smoke, dust, odor, fumes, glare, vibration, electrical or electronic disturbance detectable at the property line or beyond. 
(g)  Employee. The occupation shall be conducted by members of the family who are actively living in the primary residence and a maximum of one additional employee. 
(11)  Occupations which are not allowed. 
(a)  Motor vehicle and accessory/parts sales, rental, repair and/or painting. 
(b)  Combustion engine repairs or cleaning. 
(c)  Equipment rentals. 
(d)  The assembly, repair, or reconstruction of major household appliances, including refrigerators, freezers, clothes washers, clothes dryers, dishwashers, stoves, heating equipment, and air conditioning equipment. 
(e)  Consignment sales where items are stored on the property. 
(f)  Medical doctors or any practice of physical and/or medical application, including chiropractors or any other uses which involve medical procedures. 
(g)  Dentists. 
(h)  Funeral home. 
(i)  Uses that require the handling of any hazardous, biologically, or toxic materials. 
(j)  No home occupation shall include the manufacture, repair, sale or storage of firearms, ammunition or other items which are regulated by the bureau of alcohol, tobacco and firearms, at the site of the home occupation. 
(k)  Dismantling, junk, scrap, or recycling materials. 
(l)  Outdoor recreational or sporting clinics or activities. 
(m)  Commercial greenhouses or nurseries. 
(n)  Restaurant. 
(o)  Occupation involving explosive materials. 
(p)  Breeding of animals or selling of animals other than domestic animals typically weighing less than 150 pounds at maturity. 
(q)  Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics; pet care services such as animal day cares or kennels of any size. 
(r)  Garage sales/yard sales are not allowed as a home occupation. 
(12)  Consent to inspection. 
(a)  The signature of the applicant upon the application shall grant the consent by the applicant to an inspection of the home occupation premises by the City of Brunswick. 
(b)  The dwelling in which the home occupation is being conducted shall be open for inspection to city personnel during reasonable hours. 
(c)  Failure by the applicant to allow for the inspection of the premises by the code enforcement officer or position(s) designated by the city manager shall be grounds for refusal to grant the permit or to revoke any current permit. 
(13)  Revocation of a home occupation permit/occupational tax certificate. The planning, development and codes director or designee has the authority to revoke a home occupation permit or modify or amend the conditions of a home occupation permit upon determining that the use as operated or maintained creates one or more of the following conditions: 
(a)  A nuisance or other undesirable condition interfering with the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
(b)  A violation of the provisions of this article or any other applicable law or ordinance, or a violation of the conditions imposed upon the home occupation permit. 
(c)  Failure to allow the city to inspect the property during hours of operation. 
(d)  Before revoking a home occupation permit, the city shall give a ten-day written notice to the permit holder addressed or delivered to the premises. The permit holder may appeal the revocation to the city council by filing a written notice of appeal with the city clerk within said ten-day period. The revocation shall be stayed pending the council's decision on the appeal. 
(14)  Penalties. Any person violating this article and/or operating without an occupational tax certificate shall be subject to a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 per violation, by imprisonment for a term not to exceed 30 days or a combination of such fine and imprisonment. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1053, § 1, 1-5-2018) 
Sec. 23-3-17. - Accessory uses permitted. 
    In addition to the principal uses which are designated herein as being permitted within the several zoning districts established by this chapter, it is intended that certain uses customarily incidental or accessory to such principal uses shall also be permitted. For the purposes of this chapter, therefore, each of the following uses is considered to be a customary accessory use and as such may be situated on the same lot with the principal use to which it serves as an accessory: 
(a)  Uses customarily accessory to dwellings: 
(1)  Private garage not to exceed the following storage capacities: 
One- or two-family dwelling: Four automobiles. Multi-family dwelling: Two automobiles per dwelling unit. Group dwelling: One and one-half automobiles per sleeping room.  
(2)  Open storage space or parking area for motor vehicles, provided that such space does not exceed the maximum respective storage capacities listed under subsection (a)(1) above and provided further that such space shall not be used for more than one commercial vehicle, which shall have three-fourths ton or less in capacity, per family residing on the premises. 
(3)  Shed or tool room for the storage of equipment used in grounds or building maintenance. 
(4)  Children's playhouse and play equipment. 
(5)  Private kennel for no more than three dogs or cats over four months old. 
(6)  Private swimming pool and bath house or cabana. 
(7)  Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter in the event of manmade or natural catastrophes. 
(8)  Non-commercial flower, ornamental shrub or vegetable garden, greenhouse or slat house not over eight feet in height. 
(9)  Private boat docks and boat houses. 
(b)  Uses customarily accessory to church buildings: 
(1)  Religious education buildings. 
(2)  Parsonage, pastorium or parish house, together with any use accessory to a dwelling as listed under subsection (a) above. 
(3)  Off-street parking area for the use without charge to members and visitors to the church. 
(c)  Uses customarily accessory to retail businesses, office uses and commercial recreation facilities: 
(1)  Off-street parking or storage area for customers, clients and employees. 
(2)  Completely enclosed building for the storage of supplies, stock or merchandise. 
(3)  Light manufacturing and/or repair facility incidental to the principal use provided that dust, odor, smoke, noise, vibration, heat or glare produced as a result of such manufacturing or repair operation is not perceptible from any boundary line of the lot on which said principal and accessory uses are located and provided such operation is not otherwise specifically prohibited in the district in which the principal use is located. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-18. - Requirements for accessory uses. 
    In any district, all accessory uses operated in structures above ground level, except boat houses, shall observe all setbacks, yard and other requirements set forth for the district in which they are located. No accessory use, except boat houses and boat docks, shall, in any case, be located any closer than five feet to any property line. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-19. - Off-street parking requirements. 
    Areas suitable for parking or storing automobiles in off-street locations shall hereafter be required in all zoning districts, except in the GCCore area, at the time of the initial construction of any principal building or when a structural alteration or other change in a principal building produces an increase in dwelling units, guest rooms, floor area, seating or bed capacity or when a conversion in use occurs. Such off-street parking areas shall have direct access to a street or alley and shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Number of spaces required: 
(1)  One-family dwellings or one-family mobile homes on individual zoning lots: Two spaces unless dedicated on-street parking can be provided. 
(2)  Multi-family dwellings: Two spaces for each separate dwelling unit unless dedicated on-street parking can be provided. 
(3)  Rooming houses, hotels, motels, and other group dwellings: One space for each accommodation plus one space per two employees at maximum employment on a single shift plus one space for each 400 square feet used in lobbies, lounges, cocktail lounges, dining rooms and meeting rooms. 
(4)  Tourist homes: One space for each single or double guest accommodation. 
(5)  Theatres, restaurants, night clubs, boarding houses and other places of public or semi-public assembly: One space for each 70 square feet of patron space or use area and one space per two employees. 
(6)  Hospitals, nursing homes, sanitariums, homes for the aged and similar institutions: One space per four beds plus one space for each staff doctor plus one space per two regular employees at maximum employment on a single shift, except that in the case of hospitals there shall be 20 additional spaces provided immediately adjacent to the emergency room. 
(7)  Offices and clinics for doctors, dentists and drugless physicians: Seven spaces for each doctor plus one space for each employee, except that two spaces for each psychiatrist plus one space for each employee will be required for psychiatrists' offices. 
(8)  Other offices and governmental establishments: One space for each 200 square feet of total floor area. 
(9)  Retail businesses, not otherwise specifically mentioned in this subsection: One space for each 250 square feet of retail floor area. 
(10)  Banks, savings and loan associations and credit unions: One space for each 300 square feet of total floor area. 
(11)  Bowling alleys: Five spaces for each alley. 
(12)  Service and repair establishments, except those specifically mentioned in this subsection: One space for each 200 square feet of floor area not used for storage. 
(13)  Wholesale and industrial establishments, including lumber, brick, coal, junk and supply yards and port facilities: One space per each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift plus sufficient space to park or store all company owned or leased motor vehicles. 
(14)  Automobile service station: Two spaces for each gasoline pump. 
(15)  Automobile, farm equipment, machinery and furniture sales and repair establishments: One space per two employees at maximum employment on a single shift plus one space for each 400 square feet of total floor area. 
(16)  Mortuaries and funeral homes: One space for each 100 square feet of floor area used for chapel purposes plus sufficient space to park or store all company owned or leased motor vehicles. 
(17)  Airport or airfield: 50 spaces. 
(18)  Transportation terminal facilities, railroad stations, bus depots and truck terminals: One space for each 100 square feet of public waiting room floor area plus one space per two regular employees plus sufficient space to park, store, load and unload commercial motor vehicles incidental to the facility. 
(19)  Churches and schools, including both public and private educational institutions: One space per two staff members or employees plus one space per five seats in the principal auditorium as based on total estimated seating capacity. 
(20)  Mobile home parks: Two spaces for each mobile home dwelling unit plus one space per two regular park employees. 
(b)  Amount of area required for each parking space. Including aisles, entrances and exits, each required off-street parking area, lot or other facility shall contain a minimum of 300 square feet of adequate maneuverable space for each automobile to be accommodated. 
(c)  Combination of uses on one lot. If there are a combination of uses on a single lot, such as a restaurant within or adjacent to a motel, the parking requirements for such uses shall be computed separately according to the individual requirements of each use. 
(d)  Location of off-street parking areas. Required off-street parking areas for one and two-family residences shall be located on the same lot as the principal building to be served. Under unusual circumstance and hardship, parking areas for all other permitted uses may be located off-site, provided that the parking area is not more than 400 feet from the premises of the principal building or use to be served by such areas and provided that the owner of the off-site parking areas relinquishes all development rights over his property until such time that parking space is provided elsewhere. 
(e)  Common off-street parking areas. Two or more principal uses may utilize a common area in order to comply with off-street parking requirements, provided that the total number of individual spaces available in such common area is not less than the sum of the spaces required for the individual uses as separately computed in accordance with the provisions of this section and provided that the owner of the common area relinquishes his development rights over the property until such time as parking space is provided elsewhere. 
(f)  Use of public rights-of-way for maneuvering incidental to off-street parking. When determining parking area requirements for individual uses, portions of the public rights-of-way on minor streets may be considered as permissible for maneuvering incidental to parking. On collector streets, major streets and controlled access highways, parking facilities shall provide space outside the public right-of-way for maneuvering incidental to parking. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-20. - Off-street loading areas. 
    Except in the GCCore area, areas suitable for loading and unloading motor vehicles in off-street locations shall hereafter be required at the time of the initial construction of any building or structure used or arranged to be used for commercial, industrial, governmental or multi-family residential purposes. Such off-street loading areas shall have access to a public alley or street and shall be provided and maintained in accordance with the following requirements, the computation of which shall not be included in the off-street parking requirements. 
(a)  Number of spaces required: 
(1)  Retail business uses with less than 2,000 square feet in total floor area: None. 
(2)  Retail business uses with 2,000 to 25,000 square feet in total floor area: One space. 
(3)  Wholesale, industrial, governmental and institutional uses, including public assembly places, hospitals and educational institutions: One space for the first 25,000 square feet of total floor area. For anything in excess of 25,000 square feet, such uses shall provide loading spaces according to the following schedule: 
Square feet No. of Spaces 25,001-99,999 Two 100,000-159,999 Three 160,000-239,999 Four 240,000-349,999 Five Each additional 100,000 or fraction thereof One additional  
;adv=6;(4)  Multi-family residences with fewer than ten dwelling units: None. 
(5)  Multi-family residences with ten to 30 dwelling units: One space. 
(6)  Multi-family residences with more than 30 dwelling units: One space for each 30 dwelling units or fraction thereof. 
(b)  Amount of area required for each loading space. Each off-street loading and unloading space required by the provisions of this chapter shall be at least ten feet wide, 50 feet long and 14 feet high. Such space shall be clear and free of obstructions at all times. 
(c)  Location of off-street loading areas. Required off-street loading and unloading areas shall in all cases be located on the same lot or parcel of land as the structure they are intended to serve. In no case shall the required off-street loading space be considered as part of the area provided to satisfy off-street parking requirements as set forth hereinabove. 
(d)  Adequacy of loading area. All uses, whether specified in this chapter or not, shall provide off-street loading areas sufficient for their requirements. Such spaces shall be adequate so that no vehicle being loaded or unloaded in connection with normal operations shall stand in or project into a public street, walk, alley or way. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-21. - Buffer requirements. 
(a)  Whenever any nonresidential zoning district or use or any MH zoning district abuts a residential zoning lot or district (other than an MH district), a buffer strip shall be installed and/or maintained on the lot with the nonresidential zoning or use or MH zoning, along the lot line abutting the residential lot or district, in compliance with the following requirements: 
(1)  Existing trees and shrubs located between the lot line and building setback line shall not be removed without the express written approval of the building official. 
(2)  A buffer strip shall be planted with shrubs and/or trees so as to produce within one growing season a dense, compact evergreen planting screen which shall be capable of completely concealing from the residential zoning lot or district all work activities, equipment and parking within the less restrictive zoning or use and which shall be further capable of screening at least 75 percent of the vertical surfaces of any nonresidential structure. 
(3)  A landscaping plan identifying all plants to be incorporated in a buffer strip required herein must be approved by the building official prior to any site construction. 
(4)  All required plantings shall be permanently maintained in sound, healthy growing condition and shall be replaced with new plant materials whenever necessary to ensure continued compliance with applicable landscaping requirements. 
(b)  The building official shall be authorized to order the installation of additional plantings whenever he or she deems such additional plantings necessary to comply with the requirements of this section, and to order replacement of any vegetation removed in violation of subsection (a)(1) above. 
(c)  The building official shall be authorized to permit the installation of a wood or masonry fence in lieu of a planted buffer where because of space constraints or other reason the requirement of a planted buffer would not be practical; the materials, location and dimensions of such fence must be approved by the building official. 
(d)  The building official shall be authorized to waive the buffer requirement along street rights-of-way where the installation of a buffer would not be practical because of proximity to the street. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-22. - Curb cuts and other access points. 
    Openings through street curbing commonly referred to as ``curb cuts,'' and as other means of vehicular access to and from private property shall be regulated in the several zoning districts established by this chapter in accordance with the following requirements: 
(a)  Size and spacing of curb cuts and other access points. In no case shall a curb cut or other access point be less than nine feet nor more than 50 feet in length. No two curb cuts or other access points shall be closer than 20 feet from each other except in residential zoning districts. 
(b)  Location of curb cuts and other access points. At street intersections, no curb cut or other access point shall be located closer than (1) 20 feet from the intersecting point of the two street right-of-way or property lines involved (or extensions of such lines in case of a rounded corner) or (2) 25 feet from the intersection of the two curb lines involved (or extensions of such lines in case of a rounded corner), whichever is the least restrictive. 
(c)  Access points in the vicinity of interchanges. In no case shall any curb cut or other access point be located closer than 200 feet to the intersecting point of a street right-of-way line with the right-of-way line of any limited access highway or interchange, including all portions of ramps, acceleration and deceleration lanes, merge lanes and other facilities specifically designed to facilitate traffic movement onto and off the limited access highway. 
(d)  Permits for access onto state-owned rights-of-way. A permit must be obtained from the state department of transportation before curb cuts or any other point of access shall be authorized onto state-owned highway rights-of-way from abutting property. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-23. - Vision clearance at intersections. 
    In all zoning districts established by this chapter, except the GC general commercial or GCCore district, no fence, wall, terrace, sign, shrubbery, planting or other structure or object capable of obstructing driver vision between the heights of three and ten feet above the finished street level shall be permitted on a corner lot within 25 feet of the point of intersection of the street right-of-way lines (or extensions of such lines in case of a rounded corner). 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-24. - Vision clearance at private drives. 
    At the intersection of any private drive or entrance or exit with a public street, no fence, wall, hedge or other planting or sign forming a material impediment to visibility over a height of two and one-half feet shall be erected, planted, placed or maintained. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-25. - Height limitations, exceptions. 
    Notwithstanding the provisions of section 23-3-3 and specific height restrictions prescribed herein, the following structures may exceed the prescribed height limitations except when they would violate the height restrictions of an aircraft approach, transitional or horizontal zone: Church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy, monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, silos, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, masts and aerials. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-3-26. - Nonconforming structures. 
    Where a structure exists lawfully under these zoning regulations at the effective date of its adoption or amendment that could not be built under these zoning regulations by reason of restrictions on lot area, lot coverage, height, yards, location on the lot, or requirements other than use concerning the structure, such structure may be continued so long as it remains otherwise lawful, subject to the following provisions: 
(a)  Any nonconforming structure or portion thereof shall not be enlarged or altered. 
(b)  Should such nonconforming structure or nonconforming portion of structure be destroyed by any means other than as a result of governmental action to an extent of more than 50 percent of its actual replacement cost at time of destruction, it shall not be reconstructed except in conformity with the provisions of these zoning regulations. 
(c)  Notwithstanding the foregoing restrictions as to reconstruction, any residential structure or structures in any residential zone district may be rebuilt after destruction, except when destruction has occurred by the voluntary act of the owner. In the event of such rebuilding, all applicable district requirements, except as identified above, shall be met. 
(d)  Should such structure be moved for any reason for any distance whatever, other than as a result of governmental action, it shall thereafter conform to the regulations for the district in which it is located after it is moved. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE IV. - R-9 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-4-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this article that the R-9 zoning district be developed and reserved for low-to-medium density residential purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy environment for one-family dwellings situated on zoning lots having an area of 9,000 square feet or more, and to discourage any encroachment by commercial, industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the residential character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-4-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any R-9 zoning district: 
(a)  One-family dwelling (other than a mobile home). 
(b)  Elementary, junior or senior level school offering general academic instruction equivalent to the standards prescribed for public schools in Georgia by the state board of education. 
(c)  Institutions of higher learning offering courses leading to an accredited undergraduate diploma or degree. 
(d)  Publicly owned building, facility or land. 
(e)  Unlighted, regulation-size or par three golf courses. 
(f)  Noncommercial horticulture or agriculture, but not including the keeping of poultry or other animals. 
(g)  Accessory use in compliance with the provisions of sections 23-3-17 and 23-3-18. 
(h)  Customary home occupation established under the regulations in section 23-3-16. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-4-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any R-9 zoning district on a conditional basis subject to conditions set forth in section 23-25-4. 
(a)  Church, synagogue, temple and other places of worship, provided that such use is not located on a lot fronting a minor street or alley as designated on the zoning map. 
(b)  Private kindergarten or pre-school nursery, provided that such facility must receive the written approval of the Georgia Department of Family and Children's Services, a copy of which shall be retained in the files of the building official. 
(c)  Public utility substation or sub-installation including water towers, provided that there is neither office nor commercial operation nor storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises. 
(d)  Cemetery, provided that such use consists of a site of at least five acres, has a planted buffer strip around its entire perimeter except for access areas and includes no crematorium or dwelling unit other than for a caretaker. 
(e)  Fairgrounds operated by a public agency or other nonprofit organization, provided that such use is in existence at the time of passage of this chapter. 
(f)  Temporary use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-25-5. 
(g)  Mobile home on a one-year basis at the discretion of the city commission when a documented hardship exists, provided that such use meets all other requirements of this article. Application procedure shall be the same as that for amendments to this chapter. Renewals may be obtained for an additional one-year period at the discretion of the building official if the hardship continues to exist. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-4-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in R-9 zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 9,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 9,000 square feet. 
(c)  Maximum dwelling units per net acre: Four dwelling units. 
(d)  Minimum lot width: 70 feet. 
(e)  Minimum front yard depth: 15 feet. 
(f)  Minimum side yard: Five feet on each side and total no less than 20 percent of the lot width. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard: Ten feet. 
(h)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE V. - R-6 ONE-FAMILY RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-5-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this article that the R-6 zoning district be developed and reserved for medium-density one-family residential purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy environment for one-family dwellings situated on zoning lots of 6,000 square feet or more and to discourage any encroachment by commercial, industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the residential character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-5-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any R-6 zoning district: 
(a)  All uses permitted in the R-9 one-family residential district as shown in section 23-4-2. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-5-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any R-6 zoning district subject to conditions set forth in section 23-25-4: 
(a)  All conditional uses permitted in the R-9 one-family residential district, as shown in section 23-4-3. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-5-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in R-6 zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum area per dwelling unit: 6,000 square feet. 
(c)  Maximum dwelling units per net acre: Seven dwelling units. 
(d)  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
(e)  Maximum front yard depth: 15 feet. 
(f)  Minimum side yard: Five feet on each side and total no less than 20 percent of the lot width. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard: Ten feet. 
(h)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE VI. - GR GENERAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-6-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this article that the GR zoning district be developed and reserved for medium to high-density residential purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy environment for several different types of dwellings and to discourage unwarranted encroachment of commercial, industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the residential character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-6-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any GR zoning district: 
(a)  All uses permitted in the R-9 residential district as shown in section 23-4-2. 
(b)  Accessory use in compliance with the provisions of sections 23-3-17 and 23-3-18. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-6-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses may be permitted in any GR zoning district subject to the provisions set forth in section 23-25-4. 
(a)  All conditional uses permitted in the R-9 residential district as set forth in section 23-4-3 except cemeteries. 
(b)  Public or private care homes, provided that such facilities must receive the written approval of the Glynn County Board of Health, a copy of which shall be retained in the files of the building official, and provided that such use conforms with the provisions of section 23-18-4 pertaining to care homes. 
(c)  Two-family dwelling, including patio dwelling. 
(d)  Multi-family dwelling. 
(e)  Townhouse dwelling. 
(f)  Group dwelling. 
(g)  Boarding house. 
(h)  One-family dwelling, attached. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-6-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in GR zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 
One-family residence: 4,500 square feet One-family residence in the Old Town Brunswick Historic Preservation District: 8,100 square feet (except those blocks between Wolfe Street and Norwich Lane and between F and H Streets are to remain at the 4,500 square foot minimum) Two-family residence: 5,400 square feet Group dwelling: 5,400 square feet Townhouse dwelling: 6,000 square feet Multi-family dwelling: 6,000 square feet Other principle use: 6,000 square feet  
(b)  Minimum lot area per dwelling unit: The minimum area per dwelling unit on a lot shall not be less than indicated by dwelling unit type on the following schedule: 
One-family residence: 4,500 square feet Two-family residence: 2,700 square feet Group dwelling: Not applicable Townhouse dwelling: 1,800 square feet Multiple-family dwelling: According to the following table: TABLE A Lot Area Square Footage Required for Multiple-Family Dwelling Units Unit Type One-Story 2-Story 3-Story 4 or More Efficiency 2,000 1,435 1,410 1,240 One-bedroom 2,000 1,775 1,625 1,438 Two-bedroom 2,650 2,475 2,125 1,825 Three-bedroom 3,525 3,175 2,653 2,200 Four or more bedrooms 4,375 3,975 3,492 2,725 Other principal use Not applicable  
(c)  Maximum dwelling units per net acre: The maximum number of dwelling units per acre shall not exceed the number indicated by dwelling unit type on the following schedule. In instances where the permitted figure is determined to include a fraction, the lesser round number shall apply: 
One-family residence: Nine dwelling units Two-family residence: 16 dwelling units Group dwelling: Not applicable Townhouse dwelling: 24 dwelling units Multiple-family dwelling: According to the following table: TABLE B Permitted Multiple-family Dwelling Units per Net Acre by Unit Type Unit Type One-Story 2-Story 3-Story 4 or More Efficiency 21 30 30 35 One-bedroom 21 24 26 30 Two-bedroom 16 17 20 23 Three-bedroom 12 13 16 19 Four or more bedrooms 9 10 12 15 Other principal use Not applicable  
(d)  Minimum lot width: 
One-family dwelling: 45 feet Two-family dwelling: 60 feet Group dwelling unit: 60 feet Townhouse dwelling: 60 feet Multiple-family dwelling: 60 feet Other principle use: 60 feet measured from the nearest street right-of-way line  
(e)  Minimum front yard: 15 feet. 
(f)  Minimum side yard: Five feet on each side and total no less than 20 percent of the lot width. 
(g)  Minimum rear yard: Ten feet. 
(h)  Maximum building height: 
One-family residence: 35 feet Two-family residence: 35 feet Group dwelling: 60 feet, subject to the approval of the fire chief Multiple-family dwelling: 60 feet, subject to the approval of the fire chief Other principle use: 60 feet, subject to the approval of the fire chief  
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE VII. - OC OFFICE COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-7-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this section that the OC zoning district be developed and reserved for business, office, institutional, specified public, semi-public and residential purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a quiet, compatible and uncongested environment for office-type business or professional firms intermingled with dwellings and certain public or semi-public uses and to discourage any encroachment by unrestricted retail and/or wholesale business establishments, industrial concerns or other uses capable of adversely affecting the specialized commercial institutional and housing character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-7-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any OC zoning district: 
(a)  Business involving the rendering of a personal service, specifically including: 
(1)  Barber shop, beauty shop or combination thereof. 
(2)  Business school or college. 
(3)  Dressmaker, seamstress, tailor. 
(4)  Funeral home or mortuary. 
(5)  Insurance agency. 
(6)  Jewelry and watch repair shop. 
(7)  Medical, dental or chiropractic or other medically oriented office, clinic and/or laboratory. 
(8)  Office building and office for governmental, business, professional or general purposes, but not including any storage, sale, rental or servicing of goods on the premises. 
(9)  Photographic studio. 
(10)  Radio and/or television studio. 
(11)  Real estate agency. 
(12)  School offering instruction in art, music, dancing, drama or similar cultural activity. 
(13)  Secretarial and/or telephone-answering service. 
(14)  Shoe repair shop. 
(b)  Any use permitted in a GR residential district under the conditions and requirements set forth in sections 23-6-4 and 23-6-5. 
(c)  Hotel, tourist home and motel. 
(d)  Private or semi-private club, lodge, union hall or social center. 
(e)  Church. 
(f)  Accessory use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-3-17. 
(g)  Two-family dwelling, including patio dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(h)  Multi-family dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(i)  Townhouse dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(j)  Group dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(k)  Boarding house in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(l)  One-family dwelling, attached in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 9-2-2009) 
Sec. 23-7-3. - Conditional use. 
    The following uses shall be permitted on a conditional use basis in any OC zoning district, subject to the conditions as set forth in section 23-25-4. 
(a)  Pharmacy, apothecary, drug store, book, cigar and/or magazine shop, florist shop, gift shop, and restaurant other than a drive-in, provided that such businesses are located and operated so as to serve primarily nearby offices, tourist homes, apartment buildings and other permitted uses, no outside loud speaker systems are utilized and all lights or lighting arrangements used for purposes of advertising or night operations are directed away from adjoining or nearby residential properties. 
(b)  Community hospitals or clinics, including any function such as cafeterias and laundries which relate directly to the operation of the hospitals or clinics and are contained within the confines of said hospital or clinic, provided such uses are in compliance with the provisions of section 23-17-4. 
(c)  Any educational facilities directly related to an authorized hospital or the Glynn County Board of Health, and under the supervision and control of an authorized hospital or the Glynn County Board of Health, provided such uses are in compliance with the provisions of section 23-17-4. 
(d)  Single or multi-story dormitories or living quarters for the staff and/or student body of an authorized hospital or its related activities, including eating and laundry facilities, provided such dormitories and sleeping quarters are under the supervision and control of an authorized hospital, and provided such uses are in compliance with the provisions of section 23-17-4. 
(e)  Automobile service station provided that operations involving major repairs, body and fender work, painting or the sale or rental of new or used cars or trucks, trailers of any type, or boats, are not conducted on the premises, the stations are located on property fronting on major streets, as designated on the zoning map, all pumps are set back at least 25 feet from the right-of-way line of abutting streets and parking and/or service areas are separated from adjoining residential properties by a suitable planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade. 
(f)  All conditional uses permitted in the GR zoning district, as set forth in section 23-4-3 and subject to all requirements pertaining to that district. 
(g)  Temporary use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-23-5. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 9-2-2009) 
Sec. 23-7-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in OC office commercial zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 4,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 40 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard: Ten feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: None. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: 15 feet. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 60 feet, subject to the approval of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE VIII. - LC LOCAL COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-8-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this section that the LC zoning district be developed and reserved for local or neighborhood oriented business purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a stable, healthy and compatible environment for uses that are located so as to provide nearby residential areas with convenient shopping and service facilities, reduce traffic and parking congestion, avoid the development of "strip" business districts and to discourage industrial and other encroachment capable of adversely affecting the localized commercial character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-8-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any LC zoning district: 
(a)  Retail business involving the sale of merchandise on the premises, in stores having a size of under 6,000 feet, specifically including: 
(1)  Antique store. 
(2)  Appliance, radio, television store. 
(3)  Art supply store. 
(4)  Book, magazine, newspaper shop. 
(5)  Candy store. 
(6)  Clothing store. 
(7)  Drug store or pharmacy. 
(8)  Florist shop. 
(9)  Fruit, nut and/or vegetable store. 
(10)  Gift or curio shop. 
(11)  Grocery store. 
(12)  Hardware store. 
(13)  Hobby and/or toy shop. 
(14)  Household furnishings store. 
(15)  Millinery or hat store. 
(16)  Music store and/or record shop. 
(17)  Notion, general or variety store. 
(18)  Office supply and equipment store. 
(19)  Package liquor store. 
(20)  Paint store. 
(21)  Photographic and camera supply and service store and studio. 
(22)  Shoe store. 
(23)  Sporting goods store. 
(24)  Marina. 
(b)  Business involving the rendering of a personal service or the repair and servicing of small equipment, specifically including: 
(1)  Appliance, radio. 
(2)  Bank, savings and loan association, personal loan agency, and branches. 
(3)  Barber shop, beauty shop, or combination thereof. 
(4)  Bicycle repair and sales shop. 
(5)  Dressmaker, seamstress, tailor. 
(6)  Dry cleaning self-service and/or laundry self-service facility. 
(7)  Furniture repair, upholstering. 
(8)  Insurance agency. 
(9)  Jewelry and watch repair shop. 
(10)  Medical, dental or chiropractic office, clinic and/or laboratory. 
(11)  Office for governmental, business, professional or general purposes. 
(12)  Photographic studio. 
(13)  Public utility business office. 
(14)  Real estate agency. 
(15)  School offering instruction in art, music, dancing, drama or similar cultural activity. 
(16)  Secretarial and/or telephone answering service. 
(17)  Shoe repair shop. 
(18)  Telephone office. 
(19)  Telephone exchange. 
(c)  Radio and/or television station. 
(d)  Private or semi-private club, lodge, union hall or social center. 
(e)  Church. 
(f)  Residential use lawfully existing within the district at the time of adoption of this chapter. 
(g)  Off-street commercial parking lot. 
(h)  Publicly owned and operated building, facility or land. 
(i)  Accessory use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-3-17. 
(j)  Any use permitted in any GR (General Residential) district, in compliance with the provisions of section 23-6-2 unless otherwise set forth herein. 
(k)  Two-family dwelling, including patio dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(l)  Multi-family dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(m)  Townhouse dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(n)  Group dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(o)  Boarding house in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(p)  One-family dwelling, attached in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 9-2-2009) 
Sec. 23-8-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted on a conditional basis in any LC zoning district, subject to the conditions set forth in section 23-25-4. 
(a)  Auto accessory store, provided there is no storage of wrecked automobiles or scrapped or salvaged auto parts on the premises. 
(b)  Automobile service station, provided that operations involving major repairs, body and fender work, painting or the sale or rental of new or used cars or trucks, trailers of any type, or boats, are not conducted on the premises, all pumps are set back at least 25 feet from the right-of-way line of all abutting streets and parking and/or service areas are separated from adjoining residential properties by a suitable planting screen, fence, or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade. 
(c)  Bakery, provided that goods baked on the premises are sold only at retail on the premises. 
(d)  Contractor's office, provided there is no storage of vehicles, equipment or materials on the premises. 
(e)  Delicatessen, restaurant, soda fountain or other eating and/or drinking establishments (other than drive-in establishments), provided that no outside loud speaker systems are utilized, all lights or lighting arrangements used for purposes of advertising or night operations are directed away from adjoining or nearby residential properties, and parking and/or service areas are separated from adjoining residential properties by a suitable planting screen, fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade. 
(f)  Dry cleaning or laundry pick up agency, provided that any laundering, cleaning or pressing done on the premises involves only articles delivered to the premises by individual customers. 
(g)  Meat, fish, and/or poultry shop, provided that no slaughtering be permitted except the killing of fish or poultry and except that the cleaning of fish or poultry may be permitted provided that all permitted killing and cleaning activities are conducted within the principal building enclosure on the premises. 
(h)  Pet shop, provided all animals are housed within the principal building so that no sound is perceptible beyond the premises. 
(i)  Public utility substation or sub-installation, including water or fire towers, provided that such use is enclosed by a painted or chain-link fence or wall at least six feet in height above finished grade, there is neither office nor commercial operation nor storage of vehicles or equipment on the premises and a landscaped strip not less than five feet in width is planted and suitably maintained. 
(j)  Temporary use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-23-5. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 9-2-2009) 
Sec. 23-8-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in LC local commercial zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 3,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 30 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard: Ten feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: None. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: 15 feet. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE IX. - GC COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-9-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this section that the GC zoning district be developed and reserved for general business purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible and economically healthy environment for regionally oriented business, financial, service and professional uses which benefit from being located in close proximity to each other, and to discourage any encroachment by industrial, residential or other uses considered capable of adversely affecting the basic commercial character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-9-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any GC zoning district: 
(a)  Any use permitted in any GR residential district, in compliance with the provisions of section 23-6-2 unless otherwise set forth herein. 
(b)  Retail, wholesale or storage business involving the sale of merchandise on the premises, except those uses which involve open yard storage of junk, salvage, used auto parts or building materials. Open storage shall be permitted under conditions set forth in section 23-9-3(g). 
(c)  Business involving the rendering of a personal service, other than an automobile laundry or an automobile repair garage, which shall be permitted under conditions set forth in section 23-9-3(b) and (e). 
(d)  Seafood processing facilities and/or dock operations involving seafood processing. 
(e)  Private or semi-private club, lodge, union hall or social center. 
(f)  Church. 
(g)  Off-street commercial parking lot or garage. 
(h)  Hotel, tourist home, and motel. 
(i)  Commercial recreation facility, specifically including: 
(1)  Bowling alley. 
(2)  Billiard parlor. 
(3)  Roller or ice skating rink. 
(4)  Theatre, but not including drive-in type of facility. 
(j)  Transportation terminal. 
(k)  Commercial trade or vocational school. 
(l)  Eating and/or drinking establishment, including drive-in or curb service. 
(m)  Radio and/or television station and/or transmission tower. 
(n)  Public utility installation or sub-installation, including water towers. 
(o)  Office building and/or office for governmental, business, professional or general purposes. 
(p)  Accessory use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-3-17. 
(q)  Two-family dwelling, including patio dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(r)  Multi-family dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(s)  Townhouse dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(t)  Group dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(u)  Boarding house in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(v)  One-family dwelling, attached in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 9-2-2009) 
Sec. 23-9-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted on a conditional basis in any GC zoning district, subject to conditions set forth in section 23-25-4. 
(a)  Automobile service station, provided that all pumps are set back at least 25 feet from the right-of-way line of the street and parking and/or service areas are separated from adjoining residential properties by a suitable planting a screen, fence, or wall at least six feet in height above finish grade. 
(b)  Garage for the repair and servicing of motor vehicles, provided that all operations are conducted within a fully enclosed building or buildings, and there is no open storage of wrecked vehicles, dismantled parts, or supplies visible beyond the premises. 
(c)  Newspaper publishing plant, provided that the requirements for parking, loading and unloading conform to those for industrial buildings, as set forth in sections 23-3-19 and 23-3-20. 
(d)  Automobile laundry or washateria, provided that an off-street paved parking area capable of accommodating not less than one-half of hourly vehicle washing capacity awaiting entrance to the washing process is suitably located and maintained on the premises (such space to contain at least 200 square feet per waiting vehicle) and no safety hazard or impediment to traffic movement is created by the operation of such an establishment. 
(e)  Animal hospital and/or boarding facility, provided all boarding arrangements are maintained within a building and no noise connected with the operation of the facility is perceptible beyond the premises. 
(f)  Open yard use for the sale, rental and/or storage of materials or equipment excluding junk or other salvage, provided that such uses are separated from adjoining residential properties by a suitable planting screen, fence, or wall at least six feet in height above finish grade. 
(g)  Community hospitals or clinics, including any function such as cafeterias and laundries which relate directly to the operation of the hospitals or clinics and are contained within the confines of said hospital or clinic, provided such uses are in compliance with the provisions of section 23-17-4. 
(h)  Any educational facilities directly related to an authorized hospital or the Glynn County Board of Health, and under the supervision of said hospital or the Glynn County Board of Health, provided such uses are in compliance with the provisions of section 23-17-4. 
(i)  Single or multi-story dormitories or living quarters for the staff and the student body of an authorized hospital or its related activities, including eating and laundry facilities, provided such dormitories and sleeping quarters are under the supervision and control of an authorized hospital, and provided such uses are in compliance with the provisions of section 23-17-4. 
(j)  Public or private care homes, provided such facilities conform with the requirements of the Georgia State Board of Health and receive the written approval of the Glynn County Board of Health and the state fire marshal prior to the issuance of any permits for construction and operation, copies of such approvals to be attached to the building permit and to be retained in the files of the building official and provided further that such use conforms with the provisions of section 23-17-4 pertaining to care homes. 
(k)  Temporary use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-23-5. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 9-2-2009) 
Sec. 23-9-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in GC general commercial zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 2,500 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width, measured at the building line: 25 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard, measured from the nearest abutting street right-of-way line: Ten feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: None. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: None. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 60 feet, subject to the approval of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE X. - GCCORE GENERAL COMMERCIAL CORE DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-10-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this article that the GCCore zoning district be developed and reserved for downtown business purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formulation and continuance of a compatible and economically healthy environment for generally oriented business, financial, service and professional uses which benefit from being located in close proximity to each other, and to discourage any encroachment by uses considered capable of adversely affecting the basic commercial character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-10-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any GCCore zoning district: 
(a)  Any use permitted in any GC zoning district subject to the conditions of section 23-9-2. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-10-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted on a conditional basis in any GCCore zoning district. 
(a)  Any use permitted on a conditional basis in any GC district subject to the conditions of section 23-9-3 and section 23-25-4. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-10-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in GCCore districts shall be required to meet all standards set forth in this chapter for uses permitted in GC zoning districts, except that all front yard requirements, as well as all off-street parking and loading requirements shall be waived. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XI. - HC HIGHWAY COMMERCIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-11-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this section that the HC zoning district be developed and reserved for commercial uses which primarily render a service or cater to tourists, vacationers, truckers, and the traveling public in general. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible environment for highway oriented uses, insure adequate and properly designed means of ingress and egress, and to discourage any encroachment by industrial, residential or other uses capable of adversely affecting the specialized commercial character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-11-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any HC zoning district. 
(a)  Any use permitted in any GC zoning district, subject to standards set forth in this section. 
(b)  Commercial recreation facility including drive-in theatres, but not including miniature auto racing tracks. 
(c)  Two-family dwelling, including patio dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(d)  Multi-family dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(e)  Townhouse dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(f)  Group dwelling in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(g)  Boarding house in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(h)  One-family dwelling, attached in compliance with section 23-6-4. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1012, § 1, 9-2-2009) 
Sec. 23-11-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted on a conditional basis in any HC zoning district, subject to the conditions set forth in section 23-25-4. 
(a)  Any use permitted on a conditional basis in any GC zoning district, subject to the conditions of section 23-9-3. 
(b)  Truck terminal, provided that paved acceleration and deceleration lanes at least ten feet in width and 100 feet in length, respectively, are furnished and maintained where trucks enter or leave terminal sites, no safety hazard or impediment to traffic movement is produced as a result of such operation and sites for such facilities have direct access to major streets or controlled access highways. 
(c)  Temporary use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-23-5. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-11-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in HC highway commercial zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 6,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: None is required except on corner lots and lots adjacent to any residential district. Commercial buildings and structures shall provide a minimum ten feet setback on corner lots and a minimum 20 feet setback where adjacent to a residential zone district. Zero setback can only be utilized where the adjacent parcel is within the same development or strip center. If a setback is provided where none is required, the side yard setback shall be a minimum of five feet in width between the buildings. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: 15 feet. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XII. - BI BASIC INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-12-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this section that the BI zoning district be developed and reserved for basic or primary types of industrial uses which involve extensive manufacturing, processing or assembly operations and/or serve as large employment centers. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible environment for industries which require sizable tracts of land and/or employ large numbers of workers, protect and reserve undeveloped areas in Glynn County which are suitable for such industries and to discourage any encroachment by residential, commercial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the basic industrial character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-12-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any BI zoning district: 
(a)  Any industrial use which involves manufacturing, processing or assembly operations, or the storage and sale of heavy materials, products or equipment; but not including junk or salvage yards or uses which may cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazards, dangerous radiation or other conditions objectionable to nearby areas, except under conditions as specified in section 23-12-3. 
(b)  Warehouse. 
(c)  Research or experimental laboratory. 
(d)  Transportation terminal. 
(e)  Public building, facility or land, other than a school, playground, park, care home or cultural facility. 
(f)  Public utility installation. 
(g)  Animal hospital and/or boarding facility. 
(h)  Agricultural farm containing ten or more acres. 
(i)  Horticultural nursery containing ten or more acres. 
(j)  Bulk storage of petroleum or petroleum products. 
(k)  Dredging, land fill or the extraction of natural materials. 
(l)  Radio and/or television station and/or transmitting tower. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-12-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted on a conditional basis in any BI zoning district, subject to the conditions set forth in section 23-25-4. 
(a)  Retail or wholesale business or service, provided such business or service is incidental to a permitted industrial use and located on the same premises. 
(b)  Truck terminal, provided that paved acceleration and deceleration lanes at least ten feet in width and 100 feet in length, respectively, are furnished and maintained where trucks enter or leave terminal sites, no safety hazard or impediment to traffic movement is produced on any access road, and sites for such facilities have direct access to major streets or controlled access highways. 
(c)  Watchman or caretaker's one-family or two-family dwelling, provided that such dwelling is located on the premises of a permitted industrial, terminal, laboratory or warehouse use, and the head of the household is employed by the industry as a watchman or caretaker, and accessory uses for such dwelling in compliance with subsection 23-3-17(a). 
(d)  Dwelling incidental to a permitted agricultural or horticultural use, provided that such related dwellings are occupied only by persons employed directly on the premises, and accessory uses for such dwelling in compliance with subsection 23-3-17(a). 
(e)  Private recreation facility, provided such facility is incidental to a permitted use and is located on the same premises. 
(f)  Garage or shop for the repair and servicing of motor vehicles, equipment or machine parts, provided that any open yard storage incidental to such an operation conforms to the provisions of subsection (h) and no objectionable sound, vibration, heat, glare or electrical disturbance is created which is perceptible beyond the premises. 
(g)  Any industrial use which may produce injurious or obnoxious noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard, dangerous radiation or other objectionable conditions as a result of its operations, provided that such objectionable condition shall not adversely affect adjoining properties and such use is located at least 200 feet away from any abutting property line. 
(h)  Open yard use for the sale, rental and/or storage of new, used or salvaged materials, or equipment, provided that such use is conducted in a manner that it will not adversely affect adjoining properties and no burning of materials or products is conducted on the premises except by means conducted approved by the city engineer of Brunswick. 
(i)  Temporary use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-23-5. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-12-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in BI basic industrial zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: Five acres. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: None. 
(c)  Minimum front yard: 30 feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: None, except that when the property abuts another zoning district, 30 feet shall be required. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: None, except that where the property abuts another zoning district, 30 feet shall be required. 
(f)  Maximum building height: Subject to the approval of the chief of the fire department of the City of Brunswick. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XIII. - GI GENERAL INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-13-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this section that the GI zoning district be developed and reserved for general industrial purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible environment for all types of industrial, warehouse, terminal, laboratory and open yard storage operations or concerns and to discourage any encroachment by residential developments or other uses capable of adversely affecting the industrial character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-13-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any GI zoning district: 
(a)  Any use permitted in the BI basic industrial zoning district is shown in section 23-12-2. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-13-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any GI zoning district, subject to the conditions set forth in section 23-25-4. 
(a)  Any use permitted on a conditional basis in a BI basic industrial district, subject to the conditions set forth in section 23-12-3. 
(b)  Automobile service station, provided all pumps are set back at least 25 feet from abutting street right-of-way lines. 
(c)  Temporary use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-23-5. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-13-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in GI general industrial zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 2,500 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 25 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard: 20 feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: None, except that when the property abuts another zoning district, 20 feet shall be required. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: None, except that when the property abuts another zoning district, 20 feet shall be required. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 60 feet, subject to the approval of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XIV. - CP CONSERVATION-PRESERVATION DISTRICTS 

Sec. 23-14-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this article that the CP zoning district be established and maintained to preserve and/or control development within certain land, marsh and/or water areas of the City of Brunswick which serve as wildlife refuges, possess great natural beauty or are of historical significance, are utilized for recreational purposes, provide needed open space for the health and general welfare of the city's inhabitants, or are subject to periodic flooding. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to reserve such areas for the purposes outlined herein and to discourage any encroachment by residential, commercial, industrial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the relatively undeveloped character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-14-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any CP zoning district: 
(a)  Private boat dock or boat house. 
(b)  Boat marina. 
(c)  Bait house. 
(d)  Public utility line, fire or water tower or substation. 
(e)  Publicly owned and/or operated park, open space, recreational facility or use, and the equipment necessary for servicing the users. 
(f)  Farm for the growing of rice or other agricultural products, including timber. 
(g)  Wildlife refuge, including one-family dwelling units of caretakers employed to maintain and protect the refuge. 
(h)  Swimming beach. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-14-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following use shall be permitted in any CP zoning district on a conditional basis, subject to conditions set forth in section 23-25-4. 
(a)  Cemetery, with or without chapel, provided that such use consists of a site of at least ten acres, has a planted buffer strip around its entire perimeter except for areas and includes no crematorium or dwelling unit other than for a caretaker. 
(b)  Museum or exhibit area in conjunction with an area or use of recognized historical, aesthetic or educational significance, provided that no commercial activities other than the possible collection of an admission fee, if any, are associated with said museum or exhibit area. 
(c)  Dredging, land fill or the excavation of natural materials, provided that such use does not block, alter, or divert the flow of a major stream, river or other such drainageway and provided further that plans for the alteration of any lands zoned CP, conservation-preservation must be approved by the commission of the City of Brunswick in writing before such alteration in land shall be permitted. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-14-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in CP zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard: 20 feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: Ten feet on each side. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: None, except that when the property abuts another zoning district, ten feet shall be required. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XV. - PD-G PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-GENERAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-15-1. - Intent of planned development-general district. 
    It is the intent of this district that the PD-G zoning district be reserved for the establishment and continuance of shopping centers, group housing projects, planned industrial developments, medical centers, urban renewal projects and similar types of large-scale compatible-use developments. Also encouraged are uses or groups of uses considered by the commission to be logical and worthy, in the public interest, of inclusion in a PD-G district, and further, to encourage the development of such uses or groups of uses according to the requirements and standards of this article. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation of such planned developments when and as appropriate and to permit the greatest latitude possible with respect to internal site planning considerations and the location of these developments within the City of Brunswick in the best interests of the long-range development plans of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-15-2. - Specific requirements. 
    In order to qualify for a planned development-general zoning classification, a proposed planned development-general must first meet the following specific requirements: 
(a)  The site utilized for planned development-general must contain an area of not less than three acres. 
(b)  The site must have direct access to at least one street. 
(c)  The area proposed shall be in one ownership, or if in several ownerships, the application for amendment to this chapter shall be filed jointly by all of the owners of the area included in the master plan. 
(d)  A suitable master plan shall be submitted by the developers for review and approval by the city commission. The master plan shall be drawn to scale (one inch = 50 feet; or one inch = 30 feet) by a registered civil engineer, registered land surveyor, registered landscape architect or licensed architect showing the exact dimensions of the parcel or parcels of land under consideration and shall include the following where applicable: 
(1)  All property dimensions, platting and street systems, proposed building sites and sizes, types of use proposed for buildings, plans for the screening and protection of abutting properties, means of ingress and egress, access and circulation arrangements, off-street parking and loading facilities, proposed reservation or dedication for streets, open spaces and other public facilities. If requested, one-foot vertical contour intervals shall be indicated on the site plan. 
(2)  The name of the development and the developers, a north arrow, the date of field survey, tract boundary lines, dimensions, bearings, angles, reference points to at least two permanent monuments, average ground elevation, and FEMA flood zone information. 
(3)  If the proposal includes the subdivision of land for any purpose or the provision of new public streets, any additional information required with the submittal of preliminary plats under the subdivision regulation of the City of Brunswick shall be included and the master plan shall be processed simultaneously under the subdivision regulation and as a part of the application for a planned development-general district classification, as provided for in this chapter. 
(4)  A conceptual landscape plan is required to be submitted with the master plan. 
(e)  A written report shall be submitted by the developers for review by the planning and appeals commission and review and approval by the city commission. Such report shall explain the type, nature, intent and characteristics of the proposed development and shall specifically include the following where applicable: 
(1)  A general description of the proposal. 
(2)  A detailed legal description of the location of the site. 
(3)  Proposed standards for development, including restrictions on the use of the property, density standards, building heights, yard requirements and restrictive covenants. 
(4)  Proposed dedication or reservation of land for public use, including streets, easements, parks and school sites. 
(5)  Exceptions or variations from the requirements of this chapter, if any are being requested. 
(6)  Plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities. 
(7)  Tables showing the total number of acres in the proposed development and the percentage designated for each proposed type of land use, including public facilities. 
(8)  Plans for open space, courts, walks and common areas. 
(9)  Plans for parking, loading, access ways, signs, and means of protecting and screening adjacent areas from lighting and other potentially adverse effects. 
(10)  A statement defining the manner in which the planning and appeals commission and city commission is to be assured that all improvements are to be installed and maintained. 
(11)  Tabulations showing the number and density of dwelling units by type, if any, and other data that the commission may require. 
(f)  In all PD-G projects, the general regulations set forth in article III shall govern unless relief is granted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 3, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-15-3. - Administrative procedures with regard to PD-G zoning districts. 
(a)  Any request pertaining to the establishment of a PD-G zoning district shall be considered a proposed amendment to this chapter and shall be administered and processed in accordance with the regulations set forth in article XXVI entitled amendments, of this chapter. 
(b)  All data set forth in section 23-15-2 shall be submitted to the planning development and codes department staff and subsequently forwarded to the planning and zoning appeals commission with the recommendations of the planning development and codes department staff. Said recommendation shall then be forwarded to the planning and zoning appeals commission. If approved by the PDC and planning and zoning appeals commission, the information shall be placed in front of the city commission to be adopted as an amendment to this chapter, which shall establish the standards of development for that particular planned development-general district. 
(c)  All further development shall conform to the standards adopted for the district, regardless of any changes in ownership. Any proposed change in the standards or plan after adoption as part of this chapter, shall be treated as an amendment to this chapter and must be considered in accordance with normal amendment procedures set forth in article XXVI of this chapter. Appeals based on hardship or an alleged misinterpretation of this chapter by city staff shall be processed in accordance with procedures set forth in article XXVII entitled appeals, conditional use permits, and variances how taken. 
(d)  In any event where it is determined by the city commission that development in the planned development-general district is not in accordance with the standards adopted for that district, the city commission shall be empowered to amend this chapter to place part of or all the property in the planned development-general district in its prior zoning classification, or any other more appropriate zoning classification. 
(e)  Before approval of a planned development-general project the city commission may require a contract with safeguards satisfactory to the city attorney guaranteeing completion of the development plan within a period of time to be specified by the commission, which shall not exceed five years unless extended by the city commission for due cause shown. Such guarantee may include the submission of a performance bond in an amount as set by the city commission. 
(f)  The violation of any provision of the plan once adopted as a part of this chapter as a PD-G district under the provisions provided herein, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(g)  All PD-G projects shall follow the preliminary and final plat procedures listed in the Brunswick Subdivision Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-15-4. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use proposed by the developer and considered by the city commission as being compatible to other nearby uses within and without the district and in keeping with the intent of the PD-G district may be permitted in such district upon approval of the city commission. 
(b)  The developer shall prepare a list of proposed uses for submission with his application. After approval by the commission, the list or portions thereof approved shall be adopted as a part of the regulations applying to that particular PD-G district. 
(c)  Thereafter, the uses permitted in the district shall be restricted to those listed, approved and adopted according to the procedures set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-15-5. - General design criteria and development standards. 
(a)  Overall site design should be harmonious, in terms of landscaping, enclosure of principal and accessory uses, size, street patterns and use relationships. Variety in building types, heights, facades, setbacks and size of open spaces shall be encouraged. 
(b)  Densities per acre for residential dwelling units shall not exceed those set forth for GR districts. 
(c)  Yard and other dimensional requirements for each PD-G district may be set by the city commission, upon recommendation of the planning, development and codes department staff and the planning and appeals commission. The following criteria shall serve as a general guide for requirements set for uses proposed for location in a PD-G district: 
(1)  GR district standards shall serve as minimum requirements for residential uses. 
(2)  The most restrictive standards specified elsewhere in this chapter as they apply to commercial, industrial and institutional uses shall serve as minimum requirements for such uses located in PD-G districts. 
(d)  Parking, loading and other requirements for each PD-G district may be set by the city commission. The standards of article III, sections 23-3-19 and 23-3-20, shall serve as a general guide to parking and loading requirements for uses proposed for location in a PD-G district. 
(e)  Where development abuts a separate single-family district, buildings and activities, other than one- or two-family dwellings, must be set back a sufficient distance from the separating property line or district boundary line, not less than 30 feet for multi-family residential, public or institutional uses or 50 feet for all commercial or industrial uses to insure the absence of any objectionable effects on or from abutting districts. 
(f)  In the case of commercial and industrial uses, the distances separating all buildings and activities from surrounding residential districts should in fact be great enough to constitute a reasonable buffer. Loading docks and truck maneuvering areas and terminals, where possible, should be further removed from residential lot lines than buildings. 
(g)  Property lines abutting residential districts must be screened by a buffer except in the following instances: 
(1)  Where one- and two-family dwellings within the PD-G district are on property immediately adjoining a residential district, then no buffer shall be required. 
(2)  Where multi-family dwellings and townhouses within the PD-G district are on property immediately adjoining multi-family dwellings or townhouses in a residential district, then no buffer shall be required. 
(3)  In addition, all storage yards or outdoor display spaces must be enclosed by a buffer strip except for access points. 
(h)  Within a PD-G district, the design should include buffers suitable for screening residential areas from institutional, commercial or industrial uses when a danger of incompatibility appears to exist. 
(i)  Lighting facilities shall be arranged in a manner which will protect the highways and neighboring properties from direct glare or hazardous interference of any kind. 
(j)  Sign requirements may be set by the city commission, following recommendation by the planning, development and codes department staff and the planning appeals commission. 
(k)  In PD-G districts, areas used for parking or loading or as traffic ways, shall be physically separated from public streets by suitable barriers against unchanneled motor vehicle ingress or egress. Access points shall generally conform to standards set forth in section 23-3-22, with the following exceptions: 
(l)  Shopping centers, other individual commercial, industrial, institutional and multi-family uses shall have not more than two access points to any one public street, unless unusual circumstances demonstrate the need for additional access points. 
(m)  Where possible, all access points to a public street from shopping centers, other individual commercial, industrial, institutional and multi-family uses shall be located at least 100 feet from the intersection of any street lines and shall be designed in a manner conducive to safe ingress and egress. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-15-6. - Special requirements for districts. 
    In addition to the general criteria set forth elsewhere in this article, projects submitted as proposed PD-G districts shall meet whatever standards are deemed suitable to the particular request by the commission, upon recommendation by the planning staff. The maximum height of all buildings in PD-G shall be 60 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XVI. - PD-TN PLANNED DEVELOPMENT-TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-16-1. - Intent of planned development-traditional neighborhood district. 
    It is the intent of the PD-TN district to: 
(a)  Encourage mixed-use, compact development that is pedestrian in scale, sensitive to the environmental characteristics of the land, and facilitates the efficient use of services within the City of Brunswick; 
(b)  Have residences, shopping, employment, and recreational uses located within close proximity with each other and efficiently organized to provide for the daily needs of the residents; 
(c)  Provide for a range of housing types within pedestrian-oriented, human-scale neighborhoods; and 
(d)  Provide efficient, interconnected circulation systems for pedestrians, non-motorized vehicles, and motorists that serve to functionally and physically integrate the various land use activities. 
    The planned development-traditional neighborhood provisions can be utilized in two ways: 
(a)  These provisions can be applied as a zone district to create new neighborhoods. This zone district will be labeled "PD-TN" for planned development-traditional neighborhood district. 
(b)  The planned development provisions can also be used as a conditional use to promote appropriate infill as specified in section 23-16-11. The conditional use will be labeled "PD-TN Infill" for planned development-traditional neighborhood infill. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-16-2. - Specific requirements. 
    In order to qualify for a planned development-traditional neighborhood zoning classification, a proposed planned development-traditional neighborhood must first meet the following specific requirements: 
(a)  The site utilized for planned development-traditional neighborhood must contain an area of not less than one acre. 
(b)  The site must have direct access to at least one street. 
(c)  The area proposed shall be in one ownership, or if in several ownerships, the application for amendment to this chapter shall be filed jointly by all of the owners of the area included in the master plan. 
(d)  A suitable master plan shall be submitted by the developers for review and approval by the city commission. The master plan shall be drawn to scale (one inch = 50 feet; or one inch = 30 feet) by a registered civil engineer, registered land surveyor, registered landscape architect or licensed architect showing the exact dimensions of the parcel or parcels of land under consideration and shall include the following where applicable: 
(1)  All property dimensions, platting and street systems, proposed building sites and sizes, types of use proposed for buildings, plans for the screening and protection of abutting properties, means of ingress and egress, access and circulation arrangements, off-street parking and loading facilities, proposed reservation or dedication for streets, open spaces and other public facilities. If requested, one-foot vertical contour intervals shall be indicated on the site plan. 
(2)  The name of the development and the developers, a north arrow, the date of field survey, tract boundary lines, dimensions, bearings, angles, reference points to at least two permanent monuments, average ground elevation, and FEMA flood zone information. 
(3)  If the proposal includes the subdivision of land for any purpose or the provision of new public streets, any additional information required with the submittal of preliminary plats under the subdivision regulation of the city shall be included and the master plan shall be processed simultaneously under the subdivision regulation and as a part of the application for a planned development-traditional neighborhood district classification, as provided for in this chapter. 
(4)  A conceptual landscape plan is required to be submitted with the master plan. 
(e)  A written report shall be submitted by the developers for review and approval by the city commission. Such report shall explain the type, nature, intent and characteristics of the proposed development and shall specifically include the following where applicable: 
(1)  A general description of the proposal. 
(2)  A detailed legal description of the location of the site. 
(3)  Proposed standards for development, including restrictions on the use of the property, density standards, building heights, yard requirements and restrictive covenants. 
(4)  Proposed dedication or reservation of land for public use, including streets, easements, parks and school sites. 
(5)  Exceptions or variations from the requirements of this chapter, if any are being requested. 
(6)  Plans for the provision of utilities, including water, sewer and drainage facilities. 
(7)  Tables showing the total number of acres in the proposed development and the percentage designated for each proposed type of land use, including public facilities. 
(8)  Plans for open space, courts, walks and common areas. 
(9)  Plans for parking, loading, access ways, signs, and means of protecting and screening adjacent areas from lighting and other potentially adverse effects. 
(10)  A statement defining the manner in which the commission is to be assured that all improvements are to be installed and maintained. 
(11)  Tabulations showing the number and density of dwelling units by type, if any, and other data that the commission may require. 
(f)  In all PD-TN projects, the general regulations set forth in article III shall govern unless relief is granted by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-16-3. - Administrative procedures with regard to PD-TN zoning districts. 
(a)  Any request pertaining to the establishment of a PD-TN zoning district shall be considered a proposed amendment to this chapter and shall be administered and processed in accordance with the regulations set forth in article XXVII entitled amendments, of this chapter. 
(b)  All data set forth in section 23-15-8 shall be submitted to the planning, development and codes department staff and the planning appeals commission and when necessary, subsequently forwarded to the city commission with the recommendations of the planning, development and codes department staff and the planning appeals commission. If approved by the city commission, all information pertaining to the proposal shall be adopted as an amendment to this chapter, which shall establish the standards of development for that particular planned development-traditional neighborhood district. 
(c)  All further development shall conform to the standards adopted for the district, regardless of any changes in ownership. Any proposed change in the standards or plan after adoption as part of this chapter, shall be treated as an amendment to this chapter and must be considered in accordance with normal amendment procedures set forth in article XXVII of this chapter. Appeals based on hardship or an alleged misinterpretation of this chapter by city staff shall be processed in accordance with procedures set forth in article XXVI entitled appeals, conditional uses and variances, how taken. 
(d)  In any event where it is determined by the city commission that development in the planned development-traditional neighborhood district is not in accordance with the standards adopted for that district, the city commission shall be empowered to amend this chapter to place part of or all the property in the planned development-traditional neighborhood district in its prior zoning classification, or any other more appropriate zoning classification. 
(e)  Before approval of a planned development-traditional neighborhood project the city commission may require a contract with safeguards satisfactory to the city attorney guaranteeing completion of the development plan within a period of time to be specified by the city commission, which shall not exceed five years unless extended by the city commission for due cause shown. Such guarantee may include the submission of a performance bond in an amount as set by the city commission. 
(f)  The violation of any provision of the plan once adopted as a part of this chapter as a PD-G district under the provisions provided herein, shall constitute a violation of this chapter. 
(g)  All PD-TN projects shall follow the preliminary and final plat procedures listed in the Brunswick Subdivision Ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-16-4. - Permitted uses. 
(a)  Any use proposed by the developer and considered by the city commission as being compatible to other nearby uses within and without the district and in keeping with the intent of the PD-TN district may be permitted in such district upon approval of the city commission. 
(b)  The developer shall prepare a list of proposed uses for submission with his application. After approval by the city commission, the list or portions thereof approved shall be adopted as a part of the regulations applying to that particular PD-TN district. 
(c)  Thereafter, the uses permitted in the district shall be restricted to those listed, approved and adopted according to the procedures set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-16-5. - General design standards. 
(a)  Use. 
(1)  The entire land area of the PD-TN district shall be divided into walkable blocks, streets, and lots and optional natural or greenbelt areas. 
(2)  Blocks shall generally be 450 feet by 180 feet to extend the existing grid street pattern. 
(3)  The minimum lot size for all PD-TN uses shall be 221/2 feet in width by 90 feet in length. 
(4)  Similar land categories shall generally enfront across streets. Dissimilar categories shall abut at rear lot lines. Corner lots which front on streets of dissimilar use shall be set back the same as the adjacent use with the lesser setback. 
(5)  Large-scale, single uses (conference spaces, theaters, athletic facilities, etc.) shall occur behind or above habitable street-front space. 
(6)  Prohibited uses: Chemical manufacturing, storage or distribution as a primary use; enameling, painting or plating, except artist's studios; carting, moving, or hauling terminal or yard; prisons, detention centers, or half-way houses; manufacturing, storage, or disposal of hazardous waste materials; scrap yards; mobile homes; kennels; sand, gravel, or other mineral extraction; and any use which produces the following adverse impacts: noise at a level greater than typical street or traffic noise, offensive vibration, emission of dust, smoke, odors, or noxious solids, liquids, or gases. 
(7)  Discouraged uses: Any commercial use which encourages patrons to remain in their automobiles while receiving goods or services (except service stations). A drive through may be appropriate if its intrusion along a block face is limited. To limit intrusion, any drive through lane should be no wider than ten feet in width and only one lane per commercial establishment is allowed to interrupt a block face. An alley or secondary street shall provide the second point of ingress/egress for the drive through. 
(8)  Accessory structures may be used for rental housing on attached and detached residential lots. 
(9)  All uses shall be conducted within completely enclosed buildings unless otherwise specified. 
(10)  The mixing of attached and detached housing and commercial is encouraged. 
(b)  Lots and buildings. 
(1)  All lots shall share a frontage line with a street or square. 
(2)  All buildings, except accessory structures, shall have their main entrance opening onto a street, square, or park. 
(3)  Stoops, open colonnades, open porches, balconies, and bay windows may encroach up to 12 feet into front setbacks. 
(c)  Streets and alleys. 
(1)  Streets shall provide access to all tracts and lots. 
(2)  All streets and alleys shall terminate at other streets within the neighborhood and connect to existing and projected through streets outside the development. 
(3)  There shall generally be a continuous network of alleys to the rear of lots within the PD-TN district. 
(4)  Utilities shall run along alleys wherever possible. 
(5)  If provided, street lamps shall be installed on both sides of the street a maximum of 100 feet apart. 
(6)  The extension of existing streets and rights-of-way shall generally maintain the same dimensions as the existing historic street while new streets and rights-of-way are encouraged to differ in dimension and each street shall be individually detailed. 
(7)  Steady and even build-to lines shall be established along all streets and public space frontages, determining the width desired for each street or public space. A minimum percentage build-out at the build-to line shall be established along all streets and public square frontages. 
(8)  The long axis of the street shall have appropriate termination with either a public monument, specifically designed building facade, or a gateway to the ensuing space. 
(d)  Parking. 
(1)  Parking lots shall generally be located at the rear or at the side of buildings and shall be screened from the sidewalk by low walls, fences or hedges. Parking spaces can be located under buildings or under portions of buildings. 
(2)  Parking lots and parking garages shall not abut street intersections, be adjacent to squares or parks, or occupy lots which terminate a vista. 
(3)  Primary street frontages shall have no vehicular entries, for properties with another street frontage. Properties with a single-frontage on a primary street shall be limited to a maximum of two single lane-width vehicular entries separated by a minimum of 20 feet. 
(4)  Adjacent parking lots shall have vehicular connections via an alley or internally. 
(5)  On-street parking directly enfronting a lot shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirement of that lot. One parking space credit shall be given for every space in front of the lot that is over 50 percent of the length of the parking space. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-16-6. - Civic design standards. 
(a)  Use. 
(1)  Civic lots shall consist of the following uses: parks, squares, greenbelts, streets and alleys, community buildings including meeting halls, libraries, post offices, schools, religious buildings, recreational facilities, museums, performing art buildings, pavilions, bridges, market structures, and municipal buildings. 
(2)  Civic use lots shall generally be within or adjacent to a square or park or on a lot terminating a street vista. 
(3)  Large scale recreational uses such as multiple game fields shall be located on the perimeter of neighborhoods. 
(4)  Each new neighborhood 20 acres in size or greater shall contain as its central focus, at least one square or park no smaller than one-half acre, and no greater than three acres. This square shall be within 900 feet of the geographic center of the neighborhood. 
(5)  Neighborhoods along waterfronts shall provide park and square requirements along the waterfront. 
(6)  Squares, parks, and other natural amenities shall have at least 50 percent of their perimeter abutting street rights-of-way unless otherwise described on the site plan. 
(b)  Lots and buildings. 
(1)  Balconies shall be permitted to encroach up to eight feet into a civic use tract. 
(2)  All lots share a frontage line with a street or square. All buildings shall have their main entrance opening to a street or square (except accessory structures). 
(3)  Civic use buildings shall not be subject to setback limitations. 
(4)  The minimum height of the main level shall be 12 feet from floor to ceiling. 
(c)  Parking. 
(1)  Off-street parking for civic uses shall occur at the rear or side of the building. 
(2)  On-street parking directly en-fronting a lot shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirement for each on-street space that is 50 percent of the required parking space size. 
(3)  The developer shall demonstrate the provision of adequate parking for public use tracts containing squares and parks. Shared parking shall be encouraged. 
(4)  Parking lots on civic use tracts shall be graded, compacted, and landscaped, but may be left unpaved or paved with grass-ring paving. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-16-7. - Business design standards. 
(a)  Use. 
(1)  Business lots shall contain retail, office, residential, hotel, bed and breakfast inns (see "tourist home"), private clubs, child daycare and entertainment uses. 
(2)  Uses may be mixed within the same structure and/or on the same lot. 
(3)  Residential uses are not permitted on the main level of business buildings. 
(b)  Lots and buildings. 
(1)  Business buildings shall not require setbacks from front or side lot lines. 
(2)  Business buildings shall have their facade built directly on the lot line along 100 percent of its length. 
(3)  Business buildings shall not cover more than 70 percent of the lot area. 
(4)  The maximum height shall be five levels not to exceed 60 feet in height to be measured to the eave. 
(5)  The minimum height shall be two levels. 
(6)  The minimum height of the main level shall be 12 feet from floor to ceiling. 
(c)  Parking. 
(1)  No less than 75 percent of the parking places shall be to the rear of the building. 
(2)  For businesses, on-street parking directly enfronting a lot shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirement for each on-street space that is 50 percent of the required parking space size. 
(3)  All business uses shall have parallel or diagonal parking on street. 
(4)  The required number of parking spaces may be reduced by demonstrating the possibility of shared parking. 
(5)  The parking requirements may be suspended for retail uses of 2,000 square feet or less. 
(6)  There shall be a minimum of one parking space per 500 square feet of building space for nonresidential uses, one space per room of lodging, and one space per each two bedrooms of residential use. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-16-8. - Shopfront design standards. 
(a)  Use. 
(1)  Shopfront lots shall contain retail, office and residential uses. 
(2)  At least 50 percent of the building area shall be designated for residential use. 
(3)  Residential uses are not permitted on the main level of shopfront buildings. 
(b)  Lots and buildings. 
(1)  Buildings on shopfront lots shall have the facade built directly on the property line along at least 70 percent of its length. The unbuilt portion of the property line shall have a street wall directly upon it. 
(2)  Buildings on shopfront lots shall have no setback from at least one side lot line. 
(3)  Buildings on shopfront lots shall cover no more than 70 percent of the lot area. 
(4)  The maximum height shall be four levels not to exceed 45 feet in height measured to the eave. 
(5)  The minimum height shall be two levels. 
(6)  The minimum height of the main level shall be 12 feet from floor to ceiling. 
(c)  Parking. 
(1)  No less than 75 percent of the parking places shall be to the rear of the building. 
(2)  For shopfronts, on-street parking directly enfronting a lot shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirement for each on-street space that is 50 percent of the required parking space size. 
(3)  All shopfront streets shall have parallel or diagonal parking on street. 
(4)  The required number of parking spaces may be reduced by demonstrating the possibility of shared parking. 
(5)  The parking requirements may be suspended for retail uses of 2,000 square feet or less. 
(6)  There shall be a minimum of one parking space per 500 square feet of building space for nonresidential uses, one space per room of lodging, and one space per each two bedrooms of residential use. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-16-9. - Attached home design standards. 
(a)  Use. 
(1)  Attached home lots shall contain single family and multi-family residential uses, and limited business uses such as a coffee house. 
(2)  Limited business uses shall be restricted to a maximum of 400 square feet in area. 
(3)  An accessory building is permitted on each lot which may be used as a rental unit. 
(4)  One hundred percent of the building area above the main level shall be residential. 
(b)  Lots and buildings. 
(1)  Buildings on attached residential lots shall be set back between zero and 15 feet from the frontage line, and frontage lines shall be constant for a street. 
(2)  Buildings on attached residential lots shall have no required setbacks from side lot lines. 
(3)  Buildings on attached residential lots shall be set back no less than 30 feet from the rear lot line, except accessory structures may have five feet setback. 
(4)  Buildings on attached residential lots shall cover no more than 70 percent of the lot area. 
(5)  Roof slope, if pitched, shall have a minimum six in 12 pitch. 
(6)  The maximum height shall be four levels not to exceed 45 feet in height measured to the eave. 
(7)  The minimum height shall be two levels. 
(8)  The minimum height of the main level shall be nine feet from floor to ceiling. 
(c)  Streets and alleys. 
(1)  Attached residential lots shall have their rear lot lines coinciding with an alley or another street. 
(2)  Attached residential lots shall enfront on streets having a minimum right-of-way of 46 feet consisting of two ten-foot travel lanes, seven-foot parallel parking on both sides, and six-foot sidewalks. Curb radius shall not exceed ten feet. 
(d)  Parking. 
(1)  All off-street parking places shall be to the rear of the building or under the building. Access shall be by an alley only. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum of one parking space per 500 square feet of building space for nonresidential uses, and one per room of lodging, and per each two bedrooms of residential use. 
(3)  On-street parking of at least 50 percent of a standard size parking space shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-16-10. - Detached home design standards. 
(a)  Use. 
(1)  Detached home lots shall contain single family and multi-family residential uses. 
(2)  An accessory building is permitted on each lot which may be used as a rental unit. 
(3)  One hundred percent of the building area above the main level shall be residential. 
(b)  Lots and buildings. 
(1)  Buildings on detached residential lots shall be set back between zero and 25 feet from the frontage line. 
(2)  Buildings on detached residential lots shall be set back from the side lot lines equivalent to no less than five feet on each side. The entire setback may be allocated to one side. 
(3)  Buildings on detached residential lots shall be set back no less than 30 feet from the rear lot line, except accessory structures may have five feet setback. 
(4)  Buildings on detached residential lots shall cover no more than 60 percent of the lot area. 
(5)  Roof slope shall have a minimum six in 12 pitch. 
(6)  The maximum height shall be three levels not to exceed 35 feet in height measured to the eave. 
(7)  The minimum height shall be two levels. 
(8)  The minimum height of the main level shall be nine feet from floor to ceiling. 
(c)  Streets and alleys. 
(1)  Detached residential lots shall have their rear lot lines coinciding with an alley or another street. 
(2)  Detached residential lots shall enfront on streets having a minimum right-of-way of 46 feet consisting of two ten-foot travel lanes, seven-foot parallel parking on both sides, and six-foot sidewalks. Curb radius shall not exceed ten feet. 
(d)  Parking. 
(1)  All off-street parking places shall be to the rear or side of the building or under the building. Where access is through the frontage, garages or carports should be located a minimum of 20 feet behind the front facade. 
(2)  There shall be a minimum of one parking space per 500 square feet of building space for nonresidential uses, and one per room of lodging, and one per each two bedrooms of residential use. 
(3)  On-street parking of at least 50 percent of a standard size parking space shall count toward fulfilling the parking requirement. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-16-11. - PD-TN infill. 
    The intent of the PD-TN infill conditional use is to allow the appropriate infill of buildings based on the five building types, i.e. civic, business, shopfront, attached home, and detached home. These building types can be placed in the existing zone districts according to Table C. The height limitations listed in Table C keep the proposed infill building types compatible with the height limitations in the existing zone districts. 
TABLE C 
BUILDING TYPE Civic Business Shopfront Attached Home Detached Home ZONE DISTRICT GC-CORE ? 
(60' max.) ? 
(60' max.) ? 
(60' max.) ? 
(60' max.) GC ? 
(45' max.) ? 
(45' max.) ? 
(45' max.) OC ? 
(45' max.) ? 
(45' max.) ? 
(45' max.) ? 
(45' max.) LC ? 
(35' max.) ? 
(35' max.) ? 
(35' max.) ? 
(35' max.) GR ? 
(35' max.) ? 
(35' max.) ? 
(35' max.) ? 
(35' max.)  
    The infill parcels under PD-TN infill shall meet the general design standards in section 23-16-5 and the design standards listed for the selected building type. For example, a Shopfront building type proposed for a parcel in the GC zone district must follow the shopfront design standards listed in section 23-16-8 and the applicable General Design Standards listed in section 23-16-5. The conditional use requested in this example is a PD-TN infill conditional use for a Shopfront type building (PDTN infill/shopfront). The applicant must adhere to section 23-25-4 and section 23-27-2 for all application and processing requirements for conditional uses. 
    PD-infill shall be exempted from the required design standards in the following instances: 
(a)  Detached home types may be one story in height. 
(b)  Attached and detached home types shall not have a minimum main level height. 
(c)  Infill shall only occur in the general residential (GR) zone district on lots of record. 
    The planned development provisions shall be in addition to the provisions of the zoning districts in which the property is located. Where inconsistencies or conflicts exist between provisions of the PD-TN ordinance (either PD-TN or PD-TN infill) and provisions of the underlying zoning, the provisions of the PD-TN ordinance shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
ARTICLE XVII. - MH MOBILE HOME DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-17-1. - Intent of district. 
    The intent of the MH mobile home district is to provide a sound and healthy residential environment sufficient to meet the unique needs of inhabitants living in mobile homes, to protect mobile home parks from encroachment by incompatible uses and to encourage the consolidation of mobile homes into mobile home parks. Any mobile home and/or mobile home park within the City of Brunswick shall henceforth be located in conformance with the regulations set forth herein. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-17-2. - General provisions. 
    Unless otherwise set forth herein, mobile homes shall be permitted only in an officially approved MH district for which a certificate of occupancy has been issued in accordance with the requirements of the building code of the City of Brunswick. In addition to mobile homes, other uses may be permitted in MH zoning districts as may be needed, in the opinion of the commission, to serve the residents of that particular MH district exclusively. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-17-3. - Mobile home park plan. 
    The mobile home park shall conform to the following requirements: 
(a)  The park shall be no less than four acres in size and shall be located on a well-drained site properly graded to insure rapid drainage and freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
(b)  The mobile home park shall not contain more than 15 mobile home units per acre. 
(c)  Mobile home spaces shall be provided consisting of an average of not less than 2,800 square feet of area, each space to be at least 30 feet wide and clearly defined. 
(d)  Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space that there shall be a minimum of 15 feet of clearance between mobile homes, provided that with respect to mobile homes parked end-to-end, the end-to-end clearance may be less than 15 feet but shall not be less than ten feet. No mobile home shall be located closer than ten feet from any building within the park or from an property line bounding the park. 
(e)  Mobile homes shall be so harbored on each space so that there will be a minimum front yard setback of not less than 20 feet between the mobile home and the abutting driveway. 
(f)  In addition to the space requirements for each mobile home unit as noted in subsection (c) above, each mobile home park shall have a minimum area of 20,000 square feet set aside for common open space; in the case of a park larger than the minimum four acres or in the case of expansion of the park, 2,000 square feet of common open space shall be added for each mobile home unit after the one-hundredth unit. 
(g)  All mobile home spaces shall abut upon a paved surface driveway of not less than 20 feet in width, which shall have unobstructed access to a street; all mobile home spaces shall be serviced with all-weather-surface walkways of not less than three feet in width. 
(h)  A suitable buffer screen shall be located along the lot lines of the park meeting the same density and screening requirements set forth in section 23-3-21. 
(i)  Off-street parking, loading and other requirements shall conform to the standards set forth in article III. 
(j)  Plans for driveways, drainage and utilities shall be reviewed by the city engineer, who shall advise the planning staff and the commission of his findings in writing. 
(k)  Plans for an MH district shall be submitted to the Glynn County Board of Health for review and comment prior to recommendation by the planning staff. An application for an MH zoning district classification shall not be granted unless the board of health determines that all local and state codes pertaining to health and environmental sanitation in mobile home parks have been met by the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-17-4. - Mobile home subdivisions. 
    If spaces within a proposed mobile home park are to be offered for sale, lots proposed for sale must be recorded in compliance with the subdivision ordinance of the City of Brunswick. Application for subdivision may be processed in conjunction with the administrative review procedure required under this chapter to obtain authorization to develop the mobile home park. Whether spaces are proposed for sale, rental, or lease, the design of the park shall comply with the standards set forth in this article. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-17-5. - Revocation of license. 
    The city manager may revoke any license to maintain and operate a mobile home park when the licensee has been found guilty by a court of competent jurisdiction of violating any provision of this chapter. after such conviction, the license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to conviction have been remedied and the park is being maintained and operated in full compliance with the law. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-17-6. - Posting of certificate of occupancy. 
    The certificate of occupancy shall be conspicuously posted in the office or on the premises of the mobile home park at all times. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-17-7. - Existing mobile home parks. 
(a)  Mobile home parks existing at the time of the effective date of Ordinance No. 492 of the City of Brunswick, adopted February 3, 1965, as amended by Ordinance No. 517, adopted June 15, 1966, must comply at a minimum with the requirements for mobile home parks as set forth in said ordinance or the same shall be subject to removal, except that under the procedures set forth for processing special exceptions, under section 23-24-5, the following may be permitted: 
(1)  A site may be less than four acres in size, as required in subsection 23-16-3(a), provided however that in no case shall the site contain less than two and one-half acres. 
(2)  Common open space may be less than 20,000 square feet, as required in subsection 23-17-3(f), provided however that a minimum of 400 square feet of landscaped common open space per mobile home must be required. 
(b)  Existing mobile home parks not in conformance with the provisions of this section (with the exception of those requirements waived above) shall be considered as nonconforming uses, and shall be governed by the provisions regulating such uses under section 23-3-17. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XVIII. - MED MEDICAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-18-1. - Intent of district. 
    In view of the unique nature of hospitals, their land needs, and their effect on surrounding properties, it is the intent of the MED district that specific areas be set aside to permit hospitals and allied services, that such areas be protected against encroachment from nonrelated and incompatible uses, that provisions be made for the possible expansion of hospitals and allied services and that to the greatest possible extent, surrounding land uses and properties be stabilized against any possible detrimental effects that might be created by the proximity of the hospital and allied services. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-18-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any MED zoning district: 
(a)  Community hospitals or clinics, including any functions such as cafeterias and laundries which relate directly to the operation of the hospitals or clinics and are contained within the confines thereof. 
(b)  Any health center, clinic and/or medical laboratory. 
(c)  Any educational facilities directly related to an authorized hospital or the Glynn County Board of Health, and under the supervision and control of an authorized hospital or the Glynn County Board of Health. 
(d)  Single- or multi-story, dormitories or living quarters for the staff and/or student body of an authorized hospital or its related activities, including dining and laundry facilities, provided such dormitories and sleeping quarters are under the supervision and control of an authorized hospital. 
(e)  Any other publicly owned building, facility or land. 
(f)  Public utility installation, including water or fire towers, except those installations directly relating to railroads and their operation. 
(g)  Private or public care homes, provided such facilities conform with the requirements of the Georgia State Board of Health and provided plans for such facilities receive the written approval of the Glynn County Board of Health prior to the issuance of any permits for construction and operation, copies of such approval to be retained in the files of the building official. 
(h)  Multi-family dwelling. 
(i)  One- or two-family dwellings. 
(j)  Townhouse dwellings. 
(k)  Professional offices or office buildings restricted to the use of recognized medical professions including but not limited to the following: 
(1)  Physicians and surgeons. 
(2)  Dentists. 
(3)  Optometrists and oculists. 
(4)  Chiropodists and podiatrists. 
(5)  Osteopaths. 
(6)  Chiropractors. 
(l)  The following retail uses: 
(1)  Pharmacies, apothecaries, and/or drug stores. 
(2)  Restaurants and snack bars, but not drive-in establishments. 
(3)  Flowers and/or gift shops. 
(m)  The following uses as accessory uses to a previously listed permitted use: 
(1)  Any use accessory for a dwelling, as shown in subsection 23-3-17(a) of this chapter. 
(2)  Off-street parking or storage space for vehicular parking and loading, under the provisions set forth in subsection 23-3-17(c). 
(3)  Structures designed and used for purposes of shelter for protection from man-made or natural catastrophes. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-18-3. - Prohibited uses. 
    The following uses are specifically prohibited in any MED zoning district: 
(a)  Package liquor stores, bars or any other outlet involved in the wholesale or retail sale of package liquor, beer, wine, or any alcoholic beverages for consumption on or off the premises. 
(b)  Privately operated commercial garages or repair shops. 
(c)  Gasoline service stations. 
(d)  Night clubs or cabarets. 
(e)  Bowling alleys, skating rinks, or other commercial recreational or entertainment facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-18-4. - Other requirements. 
(a)  Community hospitals or community hospital complexes including the hospital and related functions and services, such as institutions, laboratories, dormitories, schools, clinics, special care facilities, etc., on a single site and under the control of an authorized hospital and/or Glynn County Board of Health. 
Minimum lot size: Four acres. 
Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet. 
Minimum side yard setback: 25 feet. 
Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet. 
Maximum building height: Subject to the approval of the fire chief. 
(b)  Public or private care homes. 
Minimum lot size: One acre. 
Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet. 
Minimum side yard setback: 15 feet. 
Minimum rear yard setback: 25 feet. 
Maximum building height: Subject to the approval of the fire chief. 
(c)  Health center, clinic or laboratory, on separate site from hospital. 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback: Five feet on each side and total of 20 percent of lot width. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(d)  Educational facilities related to hospital and/or Glynn County Board of Health but on separate site from hospital. 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback: Five feet on each side and total of 20 percent of lot width. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(e)  Dormitories and/or living quarters for staff and/or student body of an authorized hospital or related activities, under control of an authorized hospital, but not located on same site as hospital. 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 6,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback: Five feet on each side and total of 20 percent of lot width. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet or higher subject to the approval of fire chief. 
(f)  Other publicly-owned buildings, facilities or land. Permitted to operate under conditions as deemed necessary in the best interest of the general public. 
(g)  Public utility installations. Permitted to operate under conditions as deemed necessary in the best interest of the general public. 
(h)  Multi-family dwelling. Permitted in compliance with standards set forth in article VI. 
(i)  Two-family dwelling. Permitted in compliance with standards set forth in article VI. 
(j)  One-family dwelling. Permitted in compliance with standards set forth in article V. 
(k)  Professional office or office building. 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum front yard setback: Five on each side and total of 20 percent of lot width. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(l)  Permitted retail uses. 
(1)  Minimum lot size: 5,000 square feet. 
(2)  Minimum lot width: 60 feet. 
(3)  Minimum front yard setback: 25 feet. 
(4)  Minimum side yard setback: Five feet on each side and total of 20 percent of lot width. 
(5)  Minimum rear yard setback: 15 feet. 
(6)  Maximum building height: 35 feet. 
(m)  Accessory uses. Permitted to locate anywhere on site of principal use in compliance with provisions of article III. 
(n)  Property lines abutting residential districts must be screened by a buffer strip, except in the following instances: 
(1)  Where one- and two-family dwellings within the MED district are on property immediately adjoining a residential district, then no buffer shall be required. 
(2)  When multi-family dwellings and townhouses within the MED district are on property immediately adjoining multi-family dwellings or townhouses in a residential district, then no buffer shall be required. 
(o)  Off-street parking, loading and other requirements shall conform to the standards set forth in article III. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XIX. - LM LIMITED MEDICAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-19-1. - Intent of district. 
    The intent of the LM district is the same as that of the MED district, except that the LM district is intended to give more particular consideration to the effect of medical and related uses on adjacent and nearby residential properties. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-19-2. - Uses and other requirements. 
    The LM district shall be governed by the same regulations set forth in article XVII hereinabove, except that the following different provisions shall apply in the LM district: 
(a)  Maximum building height shall be limited to one story for all uses. 
(b)  A buffer strip shall be placed along all side and rear lot lines abutting property in residential zoning districts. 
(c)  Street access to and from properties in LM districts shall be restricted to frontage and along collector streets, major streets, or controlled access highways as set forth on the official zoning maps. 
(d)  Off-street parking, loading and other requirements shall conform to the standards set forth in article III, provided that all off-street parking shall be provided on private property. 
(e)  The uses for allied services on lots abutting property in residential zoning districts shall be restricted to professional offices for the use of recognized medical professions - that is, for doctors' offices - and retail and other hospital-allied uses shall not be allowed. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XX. - LI LIMITED INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-20-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this article that the LI limited industrial zoning district, be reserved and developed for light industrial uses which are not significantly objectionable in terms of noise, odor, fumes, etc., to surrounding properties. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of a compatible environment for uses generally classified to be light industrial in nature, protect and reserve undeveloped areas in the City of Brunswick which are suitable for such industries and to discourage encroachment by those residential, commercial or other uses capable of adversely affecting the basic industrial character of the district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-20-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any LI zoning district: 
(a)  Research or experimental laboratory. 
(b)  Transportation terminal. 
(c)  Public building, facility, or land. 
(d)  Public utility installation. 
(e)  Agricultural farm containing ten or more acres. 
(f)  Horticultural nursery containing ten or more acres. 
(g)  Radio and/or television station and/or transmission tower. 
(h)  Repair garage. 
(i)  Office building and/or offices for governmental, business, professional or general purposes. 
(j)  Commercial trade or vocational school. 
(k)  Off-street commercial parking lot or garage, as well as off-street parking or storage area for customer, client or employee-owned vehicles. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-20-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted on a conditional basis in any LI zoning district, subject to the conditions set forth in section 23-25-4: 
(a)  Any industrial use which involves manufacturing, processing, assembly, or storage operations, provided that the same does not involve any junk or salvage operations, there is no open storage or junk or salvage materials, any noise, vibration, smoke, gas, fume, odor, dust, fire hazard, dangerous radiation or other injurious or obnoxious conditions related to the operation are not sufficient to create a nuisance beyond the premises. 
(b)  Warehouse or other storage facility, provided that there is no open storage of junk or salvage materials of any type in conjunction with the operation. 
(c)  Wholesale business outlet, provided that there is no open storage of junk or salvage materials of any type in conjunction with the operation. 
(d)  Automobile service station, provided that all pumps are set back at least 15 feet from the right-of-way line of any street there is no open storage of any type in conjunction with the operation. 
(e)  Animal hospital and/or boarding facility, provided all boarding arrangements are maintained within a building and no noise connected with the operation of the facility is discernible beyond the premises. 
(f)  Retail business, provided such business is incidental to a permitted use, is located on the same premises as a permitted use and involves no open storage of any type. 
(g)  Truck terminal, provided that paved acceleration and deceleration lanes at least ten feet in width and 100 feet in length, are furnished and maintained where trucks enter or leave terminal sites located adjacent to major streets or controlled access highways no safety hazard or impediment to traffic movement is produced on any access road and no open storage of any type is conducted in connection with the operation. 
(h)  Watchman or caretaker's one-family or two-family dwelling, provided that such dwelling is located on the premises of a permitted use and the head of the household is employed by the industry as a watchman or caretaker, and accessory uses for such dwelling in compliance with subsection 23-3-17(a). 
(i)  Dwelling incidental to a permitted agricultural or horticultural use, provided that such related dwellings are occupied only by persons employed directly on the premises, and accessory uses for such dwelling in compliance with subsection 23-3-17(a). 
(j)  Temporary use in compliance with the provisions of section 23-23-5. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-20-4. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in LI limited industrial zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: One acre. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: 25 feet. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: 25 feet. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 60 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XXI. - CR COMMERCIAL RECREATION DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-21-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this article that the CR zoning district be developed and reserved for commercial and recreational purposes. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage the formation and continuance of recreational facilities in Brunswick, to enact criteria under which such facilities may be operated for pecuniary gain in Brunswick and to discourage encroachment by any other land use which might adversely affect or destroy the recreational character of this district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-21-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any CR zoning district: 
(a)  Watchman or caretaker's one-family dwelling, provided that such dwelling occupies a minimum lot area of 6,000 square feet, is located on the premises of a permitted use and the head of the household is employed by the recreational facility as a watchman or caretaker, and accessory uses for such dwelling in compliance with subsection 23-3-17(a). 
(b)  Commercial riding stable, zoo, or similar commercial institution for the keeping of animals, provided that such use is located in a zoning lot of not less than two acres and no building or enclosure for animals is located closer than 100 feet from any property line. 
(c)  Community fairground, circus, carnival, racetrack, or place of large public assembly, provided that such use is located on a site of not less than five acres. 
(d)  Travel trailer park and/or campground, subject to the following provisions: 
(1)  Such facility shall be reserved for the exclusive use of recreational type vehicles and/or tents. 
(2)  No tenant shall be permitted to remain in the facility for more than 30 consecutive days. 
(3)  Plans for the facility shall be submitted to the city engineer for review and approval. 
(4)  Written approval for the sanitation provisions of the facility shall be obtained from the Glynn County Board of Health, a copy of which shall be retained in the files of the building official. 
(e)  Restaurant or dining area for the preparation and serving of food and drink and facilities for the purchase of normal household supplies not including furniture and appliances, provided that not more than ten percent of the area is utilized for such activities. 
(f)  Other land uses not specified elsewhere in this chapter which are deemed by the commission to be in accord with the intent of the CR district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-21-3. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in CR zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: One acre. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 100 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard: 25 feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: None, except that where the property abuts a residential area, 30 feet shall be required. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: None, except that where the property abuts a residential area, 30 feet shall be required. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 60 feet, subject to the approval of the fire chief. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XXII. - GR GENERAL RESIDENTIAL CORE DISTRICT 

Sec. 23-22-1. - Intent of district. 
    It is the intent of this district that the general residential core district be reserved for primarily multi-family residential development in the area described and delineated by resolution as the downtown development area. The regulations which apply within this district are designed to encourage medium- to high-density multi-family development within the downtown area in an effort to provide suitable and affordable housing in immediate proximity to the central business district. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-22-2. - Permitted uses. 
    The following uses shall be permitted in any GR core zoning district. 
(a)  Multi-family dwellings. 
(b)  Townhouse dwellings, subject to the requirements of section 23-21-4. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-22-3. - Conditional uses. 
    The following use shall be permitted on a conditional basis in any GR core zoning district: 
(a)  Public and private care homes. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-22-4. - Townhouse-Special requirements. 
(a)  The regulations as contained in this section shall be applied to townhouses where permitted outright in any district. 
(b)  Site plan and design criteria, general. 
(1)  Townhouses may be appropriately intermingled with other types of housing. 
(2)  The front shall not form long, unbroken lines of row housing but shall be staggered at the front building line, singly, in pairs or in threes, by at least ten feet. 
(c)  Site plan and design criteria, details. 
(1)  Not more than ten contiguous townhouses nor fewer than three shall be built in a row with front line conforming to the requirements of subsection 23-21-4(b)(2) above. 
(2)  Minimum width for the portion of the lot on which each townhouse is to be constructed shall be 16 feet. 
(3)  Minimum lot area on which each townhouse is to be constructed shall be 1,244 square feet. 
(4)  Separation requirements: No portion of a townhouse or accessory structure in or related to one group of contiguous townhouses shall be closer than 20 feet to any portion of a townhouse or accessory structure related to another group or to any building outside the townhouse area. 
(5)  Yards. No front, side, or rear yard as such is required in connection with any townhouse, except that the nearest point of each building shall be at least five feet from the nearest right-of-way line of abutting streets. Each townhouse shall have on its own lot one rear or side yard, private and reasonably secluded from view from streets or from neighboring property. Such yard shall not be used for any accessory building. 
(6)  Grouped parking facilities. Insofar as practicable, off-street parking facilities shall be grouped in bays, either adjacent to streets or in the interior of blocks. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-22-5. - Other requirements. 
    Unless otherwise specified elsewhere in this chapter, uses permitted in GR core zoning districts shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 
Townhouse dwelling: As specified in section 23-21-4. 
Multi-family: 10,000 square feet. 
Care home: One acre. 
(b)  Minimum land area per dwelling unit: 
Townhouse dwelling: As specified in section 23-21-4. 
Multi-family: 1,244 square feet. 
Care home: Not applicable. 
(c)  Maximum dwelling units per acre: 
Townhouse dwelling: As specified in section 23-21-4. 
Multi-family: 35 dwelling units. 
Care home: Not applicable. 
(d)  Minimum lot width: 
Townhouse dwelling: In compliance with the provisions of section 23-6-4. 
Multi-family: 75 feet. 
Care home: 100 feet. 
(e)  Minimum yards for permitted and conditional uses: A minimum of five feet on all yards and a maximum not to exceed that required for the same uses in section 23-6-5. Yards are to be determined during site plan review by the commission based upon site characteristics, right-of-way requirements, adjacent zoning and land use. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 60 feet. 
(g)  Minimum off-street parking: 
Multi-family and row housing: 
1.0 space per one bedroom unit. 
1.25 spaces per two bedroom unit. 
1.5 spaces per three bedroom unit. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XXII-A. - LIBERTY HARBOR HEIGHT OVERLAY 

Sec. 23-22A-1. - Liberty Harbor Height Overlay District. 
    There is hereby established a height overlay to be known as the "Liberty Harbor Height Overlay District." 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-22A-2. - Permitted uses unaffected. 
    The overlay does not alter permitted and conditional uses allowed within the overlay district but follows the underlying zoning districts as to uses. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-22A-3. - Overlay boundary. 
    The boundaries of said overlay shall be as depicted on the map captioned "Liberty Harbor Height Overlay District" as revised October 12, 2005, which is incorporated (as Exhibit M) into the Liberty Harbor PD and Height Overlay application, and which is incorporated herein by reference and made a part of this article. The City of Brunswick Master Zoning Map shall be amended and marked to reflect the boundaries of the overlay. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-22A-4. - Maximum height limitation. 
    Construction in the Liberty Harbor Height Overlay District shall conform to the maximum height limitations as reflected on the October 12, 2005 map, Revised Exhibit M "Liberty Harbor Height Overlay" attached to and made a part of the Liberty Harbor PD and Height Overlay application. As depicted on said map, the northern portion of the overlay (shaded in purple cross-hatching on said Revised Exhibit M) shall be subject to a roof height maximum of 60 feet while the southern portion, shaded by red cross-hatching, shall be subject to a maximum roof height of 250 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XXII-B. - PARKWOOD VILLAGE PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (TRADITIONAL NEIGHBORHOOD) HEIGHT OVERLAY 

Sec. 23-22B-1. - Creation of Planned Development-Overlay. 
    There is hereby created a new zoning district to be known as the Parkwood Village PD-TN Height Overlay. It is created pursuant to the provisions of the City Code's PD-TN ordinance (Article XVI of the Code, sections 23-16-1 et seq.). 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-22B-2. - Overlay boundary. 
    The Parkwood Village PD-TN Height Overlay District shall have as boundaries Parkwood Avenue on the north, US Highway 17/Glynn Avenue on the east, Kaiser Avenue on the south and Springdale Road in the west, as depicted in the five page visual Concept Plan set consisting of sheets PD-TN-1 through PD-TN-4 (all dated November 21, 2005) and PD-TN-5 (November 22, 2005), prepared by architect Larry Evans, all of which are incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-22B-3. - Plan and contract. 
    The application for PD-TN district and height overlay, the staff report dated December 14, 2005, and the November 22, 2005, planned development text contain and establish the standards and restrictions applicable to this new district and are expressly adopted by reference and incorporated in this chapter as fully as if repeated verbatim herein. Only uses and construction consistent with the afore-mentioned plans and the five sheets of the visual conceptual plan referred to in section 23-22B-2 above shall be permitted. The owners and developers if the Parkwood Village project shall follow the said plans and shall obtain permission from the city commission before undertaking any construction or allowing any use not allowed in said plans. Compliance with article XV of this Zoning Code and adherence to the drawings and plans referred to hereinabove are required by this chapter and shall constitute contractual obligations of the owners and developers. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XXIII. - U.S. 17 OVERLAY 

Sec. 23-23-1. - Intent of overlay. 
    It is the intent of this overlay to create a parkway along U.S. 17 from Spur 25 to the Sidney Lanier Bridge in order to improve the visual and economic condition along this section of U.S. 17. A parkway is a wide, scenic road planted with trees. This corridor is deemed by the city commission to be important because so many visitors get their first impression of Brunswick while driving along U.S. 17. The scenic vistas of the marsh are inherently and economically valuable to the public, and visual clutter impedes aesthetically and economically favorable development of the parkway area. The visual quality of the corridor and the general nature of development along the corridor must be improved to encourage visitors to explore more of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-23-2. - Parkway development concepts. 
    The comprehensive plan generally describes the U.S. 17 Parkway concept as a roadway with long vistas over the marsh and including heavily landscaped intersections at 4th Avenue, Gloucester Street, and the Torras Causeway. To supplement these elements the comprehensive plan recommends limiting curb cuts and establishing landscape and signage requirements for private development along the parkway. The concept does not alter permitted and conditional uses but follows the underlying zoning districts as to uses. Zoning districts are not altered by this overlay. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-23-3. - Overlay boundary. 
    Generally, all lots fronting U.S. 17 from Spur 25 to the Sidney Lanier Bridge are included in the U.S. 17 Overlay (U.S.17-O). The overlay boundary extends from the U.S. 17 right-of-way onto the adjacent parcel for a distance not to exceed either, a) a maximum of 250 feet from U.S. 17 or b) a maximum depth of one parcel if the parcel adjacent to U.S. 17 is less than 250 feet in depth. In all cases, the overlay boundary shall be a minimum of 100 feet in depth except for lots of record. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-23-4. - Permitted uses. 
    All uses permitted in the underlying zoning district shall be permitted in the U.S. 17 overlay. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-23-5. - Conditional uses. 
    All uses permitted on a conditional basis and subject to the conditions set forth in the underlying zone district shall be permitted on a conditional basis in the U.S. 17 overlay subject to the conditions set forth in section 23-24-4. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-23-6. - Curb cuts. 
    The recent improvements to U.S. 17 provided the existing parcels with sufficient access. The greatest concern is the addition of curb cuts along the southern portion of the parkway, between Gloucester Street and the Sidney Lanier Bridge. This portion of the parkway maintains expansive views of the marshes and has few intersections or curb cuts. To maintain the visual quality of the entire parkway, curb cuts shall be limited where possible; instead of creating curb cuts, it is recommended that adjacent parcels interconnect and share existing access points to U.S. 17. Along that portion of the parkway specifically existing between Gloucester Street and the Sidney Lanier Bridge, additional curb cuts are prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-23-7. - Landscape requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. The purpose of requiring canopy trees to be planted along the U.S. 17 Parkway is to promote the community's image, beautify the roadway, and establish the parkway concept. The addition of canopy trees in conjunction with coordinated signage requirements can yield an immediate and deeply needed improvement to the U.S. 17 Parkway corridor. 
(b)  Canopy tree location and spacing. Canopy trees shall be planted a minimum of 40 feet and a maximum of 50 feet on center and shall be located in the front setback parallel to the U.S. 17 Parkway. Lots with a width of 100 feet or less shall provide at least one canopy tree, lots with a width of 150 feet or less shall provide at least two canopy trees, and so on. Relief can be granted by staff for driveways, utilities and other unmovable obstructions. 
(c)  Canopy tree requirements Canopy trees shall be a minimum of ten feet in height, with a four- to five-foot spread, and a two-inch caliper trunk at time of planting. 
Table A 
RECOMMENDED CANOPY TREES Botanical Name Common Name Quercus Phellus Willow Oak Celtis Laevigatta Hackberry Quercus virginiana Live Oak*  
;adv=6a;*(particularly "high rise" version) 
    Existing trees 18 inches in caliper or greater and located in the front setback may count towards the tree requirement. All plantings shall be installed free from disease in a manner that ensures the availability of sufficient soil and water for healthy growth and which is not intrusive to underground utilities. Dead or diseased trees shall be removed. Replacement trees shall be provided for any required trees which die or are removed for any reason and shall meet all minimum standards and conform to these regulations. 
(d)  Canopy tree substitution. Due to the existence of utility lines along the U.S. 17 Parkway, understory trees may be substituted for canopy trees. A grouping of three or more palm trees shall be considered equivalent to one canopy tree. Palms shall have a minimum of ten feet of clear trunk at time of planting. Two understory trees shall be considered equivalent to one canopy tree. Understory trees shall be a minimum of eight feet in height, with a three- to four-foot spread, and a one and one-half-inch caliper trunk at time of planting. 
Table B 
RECOMMENDED UNDERSTORY TREES Botanical Name Common Name Multiplier Sabal palmetto Cabbage Palmetto 3 Magnolia stellata Star Magnolia 2 Magnolia soulangiana Saucer Magnolia 2 Ligustrum lucidum Ligustrum (tree-form) 2 Ilex vomitoria Yaupon Holly 2 Ilex opaca American Holly 2 Juniperus virginiana Red Cedar 2 Lagerstroemia fuariei, or L. indica Crepe Myrtle (large varieties) 2 Goadonia alatamaha Gordonia 2 Cornus florida Flowering Dogwood 2 Cercis Canadensis Eastern Redbud 2  
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-23-8. - Signage requirements. 
(a)  Purpose. Increased numbers and size of signs distract the attention of motorists and interfere with traffic safety. More importantly, the indiscriminate erection and maintenance of signs seriously detracts from the enjoyment and pleasure in the natural scenic beauty of the city and, in turn, injuriously affects the economic well-being of the citizenry. The purpose of limiting signage is to increase traffic safety, enhance the scenic beauty of the U.S. 17 Parkway and improve the economic viability of this commercial corridor. 
(b)  Applicability. The requirements of this section shall apply to all signs constructed, placed, or replaced after December 15, 2004, in the U.S. 17 overlay and these requirements are in addition to article 24 of the this chapter. Provided, this chapter shall not preclude the replacement of any existing non-conforming sign which is damaged or destroyed by casualty (such as fire, wind, flood or vandalism) where the loss was not caused by the owner; in such event, if the sign is replaced the non-conformity may not be increased or varied (for example, a five hundred square foot sign that is 25 feet in height could not be replaced by a 600 square foot sign, nor by 150 feet in height). 
(c)  Signage limitations. 
(1)  Freestanding signs. 
a.  The maximum size and heights of freestanding signs in the U.S. 17 overlay shall be as follows: 
Table C 
F R O N T A G E 0 - 150 ft. 151 - 499 ft. Over 500 ft. U.S. 17 Overlay Max. Area 48 square feet per side 60 square feet per side 80 square feet per side Max. Height 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet Max. Number of Signs 1 1 2 Min. Distance from R.O.W. 10 feet 10 feet 10 feet  
b.  Lots serving five or more tenant spaces are permitted up to a 25 percent increase in the area of freestanding sign as permitted in subsection a., above. 
c.  Signs greater than 24 square feet are required to be monument signs. 
d.  The size of the support structure for any monument sign shall not exceed the size of the sign face by more than 25 percent of one side. 
(2)  Service station signs. Gasoline service stations and other establishments selling gasoline shall be permitted additional signs as follows: 
a.  One gasoline and/or self-service/full service sign per pump island. The sign shall have a maximum of eight square feet in surface area per side, a total aggregate of 16 square feet and shall be secured to each pump island. The gasoline sign shall not count toward the total maximum signage permitted in this section. 
b.  Each gasoline pump shall be permitted to display only the brand name or logo of the gasoline and shall not exceed the face of the pump. 
(3)  Tenant directory signs. 
a.  Tenant directory signs shall be permitted in multi-building, multi-tenant professional, office, and/or business centers. 
b.  One tenant directory sign up to 32 square feet in surface area per side shall be permitted per street frontage. 
c.  Tenant directory signs shall not count toward the total maximum signage permitted in this section. 
d.  Tenant directory signs shall not be located within any yard setback. 
e.  The base of the tenant directory sign shall be landscaped. 
f.  Only the name of the business and the address shall be permitted on tenant directory signs. Logos are not permitted. 
g.  The tenant directory sign must be located at least 25 feet from any adjacent right-of-way. 
(4)  Outdoor drive-through menu boards. 
a.  Outdoor drive-through menu boards are signs associated with drive-through restaurants which list the type and price of food items offered for sale at the establishment. 
b.  Outdoor drive-through menu boards shall not count toward the total maximum signage permitted in this section, if they are not visible from any street right-of-way. If a menu board is visible from a street right-of-way, it shall count toward the maximum attached signage. 
c.  New outdoor drive-through menu boards shall be no more than 32 square feet per side in size and shall be designed, located, and landscaped so that to the degree feasible, they are not to be visible from any street right-of-way. The base of the menu board shall be landscaped and/or incorporated into the landscaping plan. 
(5)  Directional signs. 
a.  One sign per direction per entrance pertaining to private, unofficial traffic signs, or private parking sign shall be permitted. 
b.  The sign shall have a maximum of two square feet in surface area per side, with a total aggregate of four square feet. The directional sign shall be a maximum of two and on-half feet high and limited to directional and warning messages only. 
c.  Directional signs shall not count toward the total signage permitted in this section. In addition to the directional message (symbols or words), only the name of the business or address shall appear on the directional sign. 
(6)  Off-premises signs. 
a.  The minimum distance between any off-premises signs shall be 1,250 feet as measured parallel to the roadway centerline and along both sides of U.S. 17. In addition, off-premises signs must be a minimum distance of 300 feet from any other off-premises signs measured as a radius from closest point to closest point and to include signs that are not in the overlay boundary. 
b.  The maximum size of any off-premises signs installed after December 15, 2004 shall be 400 square feet. 
c.  The maximum height of any off-premises signs installed after December 15, 2004 shall be 35 feet. 
d.  Multi-message off-premises signs with rotating faces (such as tri-vision) are prohibited and off-premises signs existing before December 15, 2004 cannot be converted to a multi-message sign with rotating faces. 
e.  No off-premises signs shall be located on the east side of U.S. 17 from the Torras Causeway to the Sidney Lanier Bridge and no off-premises signs shall be located on the west side of U.S. 17 from Talmadge Avenue to the Sidney Lanier Bridge. 
(7)  Roof signs. Roof signs are not permitted. 
(8)  Stationary or abandoned vehicle signs. Commercial vehicles, other than standard passenger vehicles, shall be parked as far from the street as reasonably possible during non-business hours if such vehicles bear a commercial message. This is to avoid the vehicle serving as a freestanding sign. 
(9)  Sign material and design. The design, color, location, and illumination of signage shall be compatible with the overall design of the development. Flashing signs and signs with visually moving parts or messages are prohibited except as allowed in subseection 23-24-13(q), subsection 23-24-13(r), and subsection 23-24-13(s). 
(10)  Lighting. 
a.  The background of internally-illuminated cabinet signs shall be completely opaque. 
b.  Any light from any illuminated sign, or flood light or spot light used to illuminate a sign, shall be shaded, shielded, or directed so that the light intensity or brightness shall not interfere with the safe vision of motorists or bicyclists as determined by the building official. For spot-lit signs, the sign base and/or proposed landscaping shall be designed to conceal the base of the light fixture to the extent feasible. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-23-9. - Parking requirements. 
    The parking requirement shall be one parking space per each 300 square feet of retail or office area in structures less than 15,000 square feet in size. 
    The parking requirement shall be one parking space per each 200 square feet of retail or office area in structures equal to or greater than 15,000 square feet in size and the maximum number of parking spaces shall be limited to 150 percent of the minimum number of spaces required. Limiting the maximum number of parking spaces precludes large users from creating an overabundance of parking that is seldom used and is inconsistent with the parkway concept. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-23-10. - Other requirements. 
    Construction permitted in the U.S. 17 overlay shall be required to conform to the following standards: 
(a)  Minimum lot area: 5,000 square feet. 
(b)  Minimum lot width: 50 feet. 
(c)  Minimum front yard: Ten feet. 
(d)  Minimum side yard: Five feet. 
(e)  Minimum rear yard: Ten feet. 
(f)  Maximum building height: 45 feet. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XXIV. - SIGNS AND ADVERTISING DEVICES 

Sec. 23-24-1. - Findings and purpose. 
(a)  The City Commission of Brunswick finds that signs provide an important medium through which persons may convey a variety of commercial and non-commercial messages. Regulation of the size, location, placement, illumination and certain features of signs is necessary to enable the public to receive such messages without difficulty and confusion, to improve the general attractiveness of the city, to take advantage of the city's natural and historic environment, to protect property values, to facilitate sage travel through the city, to facilitate the identification and location of residences and businesses in the city in the event of police, fire, or other emergencies, and to avoid the aesthetic blight and nuisance that would occur from the proliferation of signs in the absence of reasonable controls. Accordingly, it is the intention of the city commission to establish regulations governing the display of signs so as to: 
(1)  Balance the rights of persons to convey their messages through signs and the right of the public to be protected against the unrestricted proliferation of signs in the city. 
(2)  Enhance the economy and the business and industry of the city by promoting the reasonable, orderly and effective display of signs; 
(3)  Further the objectives of the city's comprehensive plan; 
(4)  Protect the public health, safety, and welfare; 
(5)  Reduce traffic and pedestrian hazards; 
(6)  Maintain the historical image of the city; 
(7)  Preserve and enhance natural vistas throughout the city; 
(8)  Protect property values by minimizing the possible adverse effects and visual blight caused by signs; 
(9)  Promote signs which are compatible with their surroundings; 
(10)  Insure proper maintenance, for safety and structural soundness, as well as appearance and attractiveness of signs. 
(b)  Inasmuch as it is generally inappropriate for government to determine the content of expression that will be allowed on signs, particularly in regard to non-commercial signs, it is the intent of the city commission that this chapter be enforced such that signs carrying non-commercial messages be approved, disapproved and regulated entirely without regard to the content to be posted on the sign. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this article and for provisions in other articles which relate to signage, certain terms and words are defined below; the singular number shall include the plural and the plural the singular and the word "shall" is mandatory rather than directory. 
    Advertising device means any structure, product sample, or device erected or placed for the purpose of acting as an advertisement or for the purpose of displaying advertising situated upon or attached to real property. 
    Aggregate sign area means the area of all signs on a parcel, excluding the area of one face of all double-faced signs. 
    Animated sign means a sign with action, motion, changing letters or changing colors, which requires electrical energy. 
    Area of a sign/sign area means the smallest square, rectangle, triangle, or circle which encompasses the entire sign, inclusive of the display surface and any border or trim, but excluding the base, apron, supports and other structural members. For double-faced signs only the larges display face shall be measured in computing sign area. 
    Awning sign means a sign located on a canopy, awning, or other roof-like cover extending before a doorway or window as a shelter or for beautification of the building. 
    Building official means the person or persons designated as such by the city manager pursuant to chapter 5 of the City Code. 
    Banner means a sign, with or without character, letters, illustrations, or ornamentation, applied to cloth, paper, plastic or fabric or any kind with only such material for backing. 
    Department or office means the city building official's office. 
    Director means the building official or his or her designee. 
    Display surface or face means the face or part of a sign which can be used to carry or display copy or a message. 
    Double-faced sign means a sign which has two display areas placed back to back against each other or where the interior angle formed by the display areas is 60 degrees or less, where on face is designed to be seen from one direction and the other face from another direction. 
    Electronic display screen means a sign, or portion of a sign, that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages as text and/or image(s) wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. 
    Electronic message board means a sign, or portion of a sign, that uses changing lights to form a sign message or messages as text wherein the sequence of messages and the rate of change is electronically programmed and can be modified by electronic processes. 
    Flashing sign means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits marked changes in lighting effects. 
    Freestanding sign means a sign securely affixed to a steel, wooden, stone or masonry support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support, such as monument or stanchion signs; sometimes referred to as a "ground sign." 
    Height of sign means the distance in vertical feet from the ground to the highest point of the sign, including any border, trim, light or structural component thereof. 
    Home occupation sign means a wall sign used to identify a home occupation in compliance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
    Identification sign means a sign used to depict the name of a building where the sign is located or otherwise identify such building. The name and/or address may be included in another signage type. 
    Illuminated sign, direct means a sign illuminated by an external light source directed primarily toward such sign. 
    Incidental sign means a sign, generally for informational purposes, that has a purpose secondary to the use of the lot on which it is located, such as "no parking," "no trespassing," "entrance," "exit," "loading only," and other directional signs. Such signs shall not exceed two square feet in area or three feet in height above the existing grade, and they shall count towards the aggregate allowed. 
    Inflatable sign means a sign that is either expanded to its full dimensions or supported by gasses contained within the sign, or sign parts, at a pressure greater than atmospheric pressure. 
    Large sign means a sign with a sign area greater than 32 square feet. 
    Mansard sign means a sign painted on, attached to or hung from a marquee, i.e., a roofed structure attached to and supported by a building and projecting over public or private sidewalks or rights-of-way. 
    Mobile billboard sign means an off-site advertising sign mounted on a vehicle or trailer that can become part of traffic flow or be parked at specific locations. Neither vehicles or trailers which advertise the company of their primary use nor campaign signs are considered mobile billboards. 
    Monument sign means a freestanding sign mounted directly on the ground, or on a base which is directly on the ground, without use of a pole, pier, post, pylon or stanchion. 
    Nonconforming sign means any sign which does not conform to the provisions of this article. 
    Off-premises sign means a sign which advertises goods, products, facilities or services not located on the premises where the sign is located or directs persons to premises other then that upon which the sign is located. 
    On-premises sign means a sign located on the premises where the advertised product, service, goods, facilities, or other subject matter is located. 
    Parcel means a separate tax unit of real property as reflected in Glynn County real estate records. 
    Permittee means the person and/or entity owning (or who will own if a permit is issued) the sign structure on which a sign is erected, or in the event of a lease of rights to erect or maintain a sign, the leaseholder or other holder of such rights to erect or maintain the sign. The permittee may or may not be the owner of the land on which the sign is or will be erected. In the event a sign is removed by a holder of such a lease, easement or private license, no person shall be deemed a permittee as to the removed sign without securing a new permit under the then-current rules and standards unless specific provision is made for replacement of such sign elsewhere in this ordinance. 
    Portable sign means a sign that can be moved from place to place that is not permanently affixed to a building, structure or the ground, including but not limited to: 
(a)  Signs mounted or painted on trailers or other vehicles which are parked in such a manner as to serve the purpose of an advertising device; 
(b)  Signs designed to be transported by trailer or wheels; 
(c)  Signs with wheels removed; 
(d)  Signs with chassis or support constructed without wheels; 
(e)  A-frame or t-frame signs; 
(f)  Menu, sandwich or sidewalk type signs (except as permitted in subsection 23-24-13(t)); 
(g)  Searchlight stands; 
(h)  Hot air, forced air, or gas filled balloons, or other inflatable advertising devices; and 
(i)  Arrow signs with or without reader boards and with or without illumination. 
    Roof sign means a sign projecting over or above the coping or parapet of a flat roof or over or above the ridge of a gable, hip, or gambrel roof, and supported by or attached to said roof. 
    Sandwich board sign means a non-illuminated portable sign consisting of two flat surfaces joined at one end. 
    Sign means a device or representation for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. 
    Sign face means that portion of a sign that is or can be used for purposed of carrying the intended message. 
    Stanchion sign means a freestanding sign mounted on one or more poles, piers, posts, or pylons set in the ground and of sufficient strength and size to support the message portion of the structure which rests upon or is supported by such poles or other members. 
    Swinging or projecting sign means a sign projecting more than six inches from the outside wall or walls of any building upon which it is located. 
    Temporary sign means a sign of a non-permanent nature. 
    Trailer sign means any sign mounted on wheels and that may be moved from one location to another. 
    Wall sign means a sign fastened, placed or painted upon or parallel to the exterior wall of the structure itself, whether front, rear or side of the structure. 
    Window sign means a sign installed flush with or upon the inside or outside of a window and intended to be viewed from the outside. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-3. - Permits required. 
(a)  Except as specifically excluded from the provision of this chapter, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, construct, enlarge, replace, display, substantially change, or erect a sign in the city without having first obtained a sign permit. 
(b)  Existing signs which are legal immediately prior to adoption of this chapter and which would be required to obtain a permit under this article if they had been newly erected after enactment of this article must register with the building official within 90 days of the effective date of this ordinance. The information provided for registration will be the same information required in a permit application under the following section of this chapter, but no fee shall be required. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-4. - Application information. 
    Applications for sign permits required by this chapter shall be filed by the sign owner of the owner's agent with the city building official. The application shall describe and set forth, at a minimum, the following: 
(a)  The street address of the property upon which the sign is to be located and a plat map of the property which bears an indication of the proposed location of the sign and any other existing or proposed signs, as well as all property lines and set-back lines; 
(b)  The aggregate area for all existing signs and for all proposed signs on the parcel; 
(c)  The full names and residence/domicile addresses of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located; 
(d)  Documentation of the consent of the landowner, or the landowner's agent, granting permission for the placement of the sign; 
(e)  Name, address, phone number, and business license number of the contractor who will or did erect the sign; 
(f)  The type of sign to be erected, the area of the sign, the height of the sign, the shape of the sign, and an explanation of how the sign is to be mounted or erected; 
(g)  If an off-premises sign, the distance of the sign from any off-premises sign in any direction within 1,500 feet from any part of the sign structure; 
(h)  The size and dimensions of the parcel on which the sign is to be placed; 
(i)  The full legal name, residence/domicile address and phone number of the proposed permittee, and the name and address of the registered agent for services of process of any permittee who is not a natural person; 
(j)  Construction plans and engineering wind tolerance certification for any sign having a display area greater than 100 square fee. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-5. - Time for consideration. 
    The city shall process all sign permit applications within 30 business days of the building official's actual receipt of a fully completed application and such sign permit fee as may be established from time to time by vote of the city commission. The building official shall give notice to the applicant/owner of the decision of the city by hand delivery or by mailing a copy of the notice to the address of the applicant/proposed permittee on the permit application on or before the 30th business day after the department's receipt of the application. If mailed, notice shall be deemed to have been given upon the date of mailing in conformity with this section. If the city fails to respond in writing within the 30-day period, the permit shall be deemed to have been granted. If the building official finds that conditions or stipulations are required to make the sign legally acceptable, the permit shall only be approved subject to the applicant's written agreement to such conditions. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-6. - Denial and revocation. 
(a)  Procedure. The city shall deny permits to applicants who submit applications for signs that do not comply with the provisions of this chapter, or which fail to comply with applicable building codes (including, but not limited to, any wind or hurricane resistance requirements) or other applicable local, state, or federal laws; or any applicants who submit incomplete applications or applications containing any false material statements. Violations of any provisions of this chapter will be grounds for terminating a permit granted by the city for the erection of a sign. Should it be determined that a sign permit was issued pursuant to an incomplete application or an application containing a false material statement, or that a permit has been erroneously issued in violation of this chapter, or that a sign has been erected contrary to the terms of the permit, the building official shall revoke the permit. Should the city deny a permit application, the reasons for denial shall be stated in the notice provided for by section 23-24-5 above. Any application denied and later re-submitted shall be deemed to have been submitted on the re-submittal date, instated of on the initial submission date. No permit shall be revoked or denied except for due cause as hereinafter defined. 
(b)  Hearing officer review. In the event of a denial or a revocation, the applicant/permittee shall be granted an opportunity for review before a hearing officer to be designated by the city. If applicant desires such a hearing, applicant must deliver a written request for such review with the building official no later than ten business days following mailing of the decision to be reviewed. The applicant will be given at least ten business days' written notice of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing, with a statement of the reason for the denial of the application or revocation of the permit. "Due cause" is any of the following: violation of the provision of this chapter or any other city ordinance or any state or federal law; or erroneous issuance of a permit which should not have been issued under the terms of this chapter; or erecting or building a sign which does not conform to the information contained in the application; or failure to maintain the sign as required by this chapter; or submission of an incomplete application or an application containing false material statements. The hearing officer may reschedule the hearing by agreement of the parties or for good cause shown. The hearing officer shall render a decision in writing within ten business days of the hearing, and a notice of the decision shall be forwarded to the applicant/owner as provided below. 
(c)  Appeal. An individual whose permit application has been denied or whose permit has been revoked may appeal the decision of the hearing officer or the city manager provided they file written notice of an appeal with the city manager within ten business days of the date that written notice of the hearing officer's decision is either hand delivered to the permittee or mailed to the address shown for the applicant/owner on the application or such other address as permittee advises the department in writing to send notices pursuant to this chapter. Such appeal shall be considered by the city manager at a hearing within 20 business days of the date the city manager received the notice of appeal, with applicant to be mailed notice of the time, date and place of hearing at least ten business days prior to the date initially set for the hearing. By agreement of the parties or for good cause shown, as determined by the city manager, and upon reasonable notice, the appeal hearing may be re-scheduled for a later date at the earliest time convenient to appellant and the city. The city manager shall cause any decision he/she reaches on the appeal to be memorialized in writing and a copy hand delivered or mailed to the applicant at applicant's address of record within ten business days of the hearing. 
(d)  Review by city manager. In the event an applicant/permittee whose permit has been denied or revoked is dissatisfied with the decision of the city manager, they may petition for writ of certiorari as provided by law. 
(e)  Review at request of city. The building official shall have the right to city manager review of any hearing officer decision under subsection (c) above by following the same procedure for requesting review as would an applicant/permittee as set forth in subsection (d), above. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-7. - Permit expiration. 
    A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed and installed within six months after the date of issuance. No refunds will be made for permits that so expired. If a person desires to erect a sign after the permit is expired, a new application will be required and will be subject to the regulations in effect at the time of the new application. A new application fee will be required. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-8. - Fees. 
    The cost of a sign permit shall be established from time to time by vote of the city commission and shall be payable in addition to any building permit or historic preservation certificate of appropriateness fees required. Differing fees for different categories of signs may be so established. A written list of applicable fees shall be maintained in the building official's office. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-9. - Prohibited signs. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited throughout the city: 
(a)  Roof signs; 
(b)  Animated signs and flashing signs; 
(c)  Signs on publicly owned or maintained right-of-ways other that publicly owned or maintained signs; 
(d)  Window signs which exceed 30 percent of the window area; 
(e)  Signs which contain words, pictures, or statements which are obscene, as defined by O.C.G.A. § 16-12-80; 
(f)  Signs which simulate an official traffic control or warning sign or hide from view any traffic sign, signal or public service sign; 
(g)  Signs which emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with ordinary hearing; 
(h)  Signs which interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic; 
(i)  Signs which obstruct the orderly flow of pedestrian traffic on any sidewalk or public walkway; 
(j)  Signs erected by nailing, fastening or affixing the sign in any manner to any tree, post, curb, utility pole, or other structure located on any public right-of-way except as may otherwise be provided herein; 
(k)  Signs which emit any visible smoke, steam, vapor, particles, or odor into the air; 
(l)  Signs which emit any sound which can be heard at any place outside of the parcel on which the sign is erected; 
(m)  Signs which interfere with or obstruct entry or egress through any door or window required or designed for access to or egress from any building; 
(n)  Use of any parked vehicle or boat as an advertising device except that a licensed automobile or boat dealer may display such vehicles or boats as are held by the dealer as stock for retail sale or for lease; 
(o)  Fluttering ribbons and banners. Fluttering ribbons and banners and similar devices are prohibited, except the flags of governments and their agencies; 
(p)  Mobile billboard signs; 
(q)  Portable signs. Commercial vehicles, other than standard passenger vehicles, shall be parked as far from the street as reasonably possible during non-business hours if such vehicles bear a commercial message; 
(r)  Inflatable signs. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-10. - Residential district restrictions. 
    Other than residential subdivision entrance signs allowed under section 23-24-11 below, parcels zoned residential shall not have an aggregate sign area greater than 15 square feet. Signs in residential zoning districts shall not exceed five feet in height above the grade level of the nearest adjacent. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-11. - Residential subdivision entrance signs. 
    Platted residential subdivisions having more than two parcels may erect one monument sign at each entrance to the subdivision. Such sign shall not exceed a height of ten feet above the grade level of the nearest adjacent street. Such entrance signs shall not count toward the maximum allowable aggregate signage on the parcel. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-12. - Maximum height restrictions. 
    The following height restrictions shall be applicable to signs located in nonresidential zoning districts: 
(a)  No free-standing sign except those in the highway commercial zone district shall exceed 35 feet in height above the grade level of the nearest adjacent street or road; 
(b)  No free-standing sign located in the remaining commercial districts, medical district (not to include limited medical), and industrial districts shall exceed 25 feet in height above the grade level of the nearest adjacent street or road; 
(c)  No monument sign shall exceed ten feet in height above the grade level of the nearest adjacent street or road; 
(d)  All sign heights shall be measured from grade level of the nearest adjacent street or road, and alteration of the ground level (as by fill, paving, use of raised platform, or any other means) on which the sign is located shall not provide any additional height allowance. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-13. - General size and location requirements. 
(a)  No free-standing sign may be located within 30 feet of any street intersection (in relation to the right-of-way lines of the intersecting streets) unless a) the structure of the free-standing sign is no more than 12 inches in width and b) a clear area is provided between two feet and seven feet above grade where no sign base or sign display area may be located; 
(b)  No sign shall be erected on any building, fence, or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner, and as permitted under the provisions of this chapter; 
(c)  Large off-premises signs shall only be allowed on parcels that are located in a general commercial, highway commercial, or industrial zoned district and their size shall be limited to a maximum display area of 600 square feet; 
(d)  Large off-premises signs shall not be located within 1,250 feet of any other existing large off-premises sign, measured along the center-line of any roadway upon which the sign locations have frontage, from the point on the center-line perpendicular to the part of each sign structure closest to the other sign. The separation requirement applies to all large off-premises signs along a given roadway without regard to which side of the street they are located; 
(e)  Large off-premises signs shall not be located so that any part of the sign structure is within a radius of 300 feet in any direction of any existing large off-premises sign, nor shall they be located within a 300-foot radius of a residential zoned property or conservation-preservation zoned property, nor shall they be located within such a 300-foot radius of any officially designated historic preservation district or officially designated historic landmark or any public park, square or playground. 
(f)  No free-standing sign shall exceed 250 square feet in display area in any zoning district (with the exception of large, off-premises signs); 
(g)  The maximum aggregate sign area allowed on any parcel in any district shall be as follows: General residential, R-6, and R-9, residential zones may have an aggregate up to 15 square feet; Limited Medical may have up to 32 square feet; local commercial, office commercial, and general commercial-CORE may have up to 100 square feet; industrial, medical, and commercial districts other than local commercial and office commercial may have up to 500 square feet; planned development districts may have up to 500 square feet unless otherwise specified in the city approved PD master plan, other districts may have up to 15 square feet. Large off-premises signs, where allowed, shall be separately considered for aggregate sign area purposes. Parcels may have aggregate sign area of large off-premises signs, where allowed, in addition to other classes of signs, not to exceed 300 square feet. 
(h)  No free-standing sign having a display area greater than 32 square feet shall be located within 300 feet of any officially designated Historic preservation district, any officially designated historic landmark, or any public park, square or playground; 
(i)  (1)  Wall sign area for buildings that are located along Highways 17, 303, Spur 25, and Altama Avenue, is based on a function of setback and width in feet of the longest side of the building facing a parking lot, private drive, or road. The total square footage of wall signage shall be determined by multiplying one square foot by the total lineal feet in width of the building or legally occupied tenant space and the total wall sign area shall not exceed the permitted maximums established by the following table; 
Table D 
Setback from right-of-way of structure to which wall sign will be affixed Area maximum per building or tenant space 0 feet to 199.9 feet 100 square feet 200 feet to 399.9 feet 200 square feet 400 feet or greater 300 square feet  
(2)  All businesses or legally occupied tenant spaces that are in buildings less than 32 feet in width are allowed a wall sign that is no greater than 32 square feet in display area. 
(3)  All other wall signs shall not exceed 32 square feet in display area nor shall they exceed 60 feet in gross sign area, including sign display area. 
(j)  Wall signs shall not project out over any public sidewalk, street, walkway, park or square; 
(k)  Awning and canopy signs may not project more than four feet out from the building face; 
(l)  No wall, awning or canopy sign shall have a height greater than 20 feet above grade level of the nearest adjoining street; 
(m)  No part of any awning or canopy sign, nor any part of any flag, temporary banner or pennant, may be located at a height lower than seven feet above any public sidewalk or right-of-way or other public property; 
(n)  No marquee, awning, canopy or wall sign display area may be greater than ten feet from top to bottom or 20 feet in width. 
(o)  Free-standing signs shall have a minimum separation distance of 200 feet between free-standing signs located on the same parcel. This separation requirement shall not apply to incidental signs. 
(p)  One "For Sale" or "For Rent" sign per street frontage. Signs for residentially zoned property shall not exceed six square feet in area per face with a height maximum of five feet in height. Signs for non-residentially zoned property shall not exceed 32 square feet per face with a height maximum of eight feet in height. Signs shall be removed immediately after the property is sold or rented. 
(q)  Electronic display screens are prohibited in the city with the following exceptions: 
(1)  The addition of an electronic display screen to a new or existing large, off-premises sign located in a zone district other than Highway Commercial is prohibited; 
(2)  Electronic display screens shall only be permitted on parcels that abut the following rights-of-way: Highways 17, 303, Spur 25, and Altama Avenue, and in no case shall electronic display screens be located on the east side of U.S. 17 from the Torras Causeway to the Sidney Lanier Bridge nor on the west side of U.S. 17 from Gloucester Street to the Sidney Lanier Bridge; 
(3)  Electronic display screens shall only be incorporated into a) new, large, off-premises signs or b) large, off-premise signs that were in existence and permitted prior to June 30, 2007; 
(4)  Electronic display screens shall not exceed 400 square feet in display area, and only one electronic display screen may be utilized per large, off-premise sign face; 
(5)  Signs containing an electronic display screen shall not be located within 5,000 feet of another sign containing an electronic display screen located on the same side of the roadway; 
(6)  New signs containing an electronic display screen shall not be located within 1,250 feet from existing large off-premises signs measured along the center-line of any roadway upon which the sign locations have frontage, from the point on the center-line perpendicular to the part of each sign structure closest to the other sign. The separation requirement applies to all large off-premise signs along a given roadway without regard to which side of the street they are located. The 1,250-foot separation requirement applies to new signs containing electronic display screens and does not apply to large, off-premises signs in existence and permitted prior to June 30, 2007 that are converted to contain an electronic display screen. Converted signs shall not have a display area greater than the display area of the preexisting sign and the height of the converted sign shall not be higher than the height of the preexisting sign; 
(7)  Signs containing an electronic display screen shall not be located within a 300-foot radius of residential zoned property, conservation-preservation zoned property, officially designated historic preservation district, or public park, square or playground; 
(8)  Each transitional change between messages shall occur immediately and without any transitional effects including, but not limited to scrolling, flashing, dissolving, fading, uncovering, wiping or any effect that conveys motion or animation; 
(9)  Each message shall remain fixed for at least ten seconds; 
(10)  If the city finds an electronic display screen to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or to otherwise interfere with the safe operation of a motor vehicle, then, upon the city's request, the owner of the sign shall promptly and within not more than 48 hours reduce the intensity of the sign to a level acceptable to the city; and 
(11)  The owner of any existing or nonconforming electronic display screen sign shall have until June 30, 2007, to bring the electronic display screen sign into compliance with subsections 23-24-13(q)(8), (q)(9), and (q)(10) and to request a permit from the city. 
(r)  Electronic message boards are prohibited in the city with the following exceptions; 
(1)  The addition of an electronic message board to a new or existing free standing sign located in a zone district other than Highway Commercial (HC) or General Commercial (GC) is prohibited (except as expressly permitted in subsection 23-24-13(s)); 
(2)  Signs containing an electronic message board shall not be located within an officially designated historic preservation district; 
(3)  No electronic message board shall be constructed or maintained within 50 feet of any dwelling or residential zoning district; 
(4)  Electronic message boards shall only be permitted on parcels that abut the following rights-of-way: Highways 17, 303, Spur 25, and Altama Avenue, and in no case shall electronic message boards be located on the east side of U.S. 17 from the Torras Causeway to the Sidney Lanier Bridge nor on the west side of U.S. 17 from Gloucester Street to the Sidney Lanier Bridge; 
(5)  Electronic message boards shall only be incorporated into free-standing signs that are a) new or b) that were in existence and permitted prior to June 30, 2007 and are in conformance with sections 23-23 and 23-24 of the zoning ordinance; 
(6)  Electronic message boards may be double-faced and the display area for any individual face shall not exceed 50 square feet in area. One electronic message board is permitted per parcel; 
(7)  No portion of an electronic message board shall exceed 15 feet in height above the grade level of the nearest adjacent street or road; 
(8)  Each transitional change between messages shall occur immediately and without any transitional effects including, but not limited to scrolling, flashing, dissolving, fading, uncovering, wiping or any effect that conveys motion or animation; 
(9)  Each message shall remain fixed for at least 15 seconds; 
(10)  Electronic message boards must be monochromatic and the entire display area is counted towards the total sign allowance for a parcel; 
(11)  If the city finds an electronic message board to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or to otherwise interfere with the safe operation of a motor vehicle or that illumination from the electronic message board causes a nuisance to any nearby residential district, then, upon the city's request, the owner of the sign shall promptly and within not more than 48 hours reduce the intensity of the sign to a level acceptable to the city; and 
(12)  The owner of any existing or nonconforming electronic message board sign shall have until June 30, 2007, to bring the electronic message board sign in compliance with subsections 23-24-13(r)(8), (r)(9) and (r)(11) and to request a sign permit from the city. 
(13)  An electronic fuel price panel may be used to display fuel prices on a parcel where fuel is dispensed to the public. Electronic fuel price signs shall have a maximum character height of 24 inches and the electronic fuel price panel display area shall not exceed 22 square feet per sign face. 
(s)  The use of electronic message boards to display community events is prohibited in the city with the following exceptions; 
(1)  Churches and schools shall be permitted one permanent community events sign to display public events and the electronic message board shall have no more than two faces; 
(2)  Signs containing an electronic message board shall not be located within an officially designated historic preservation district; 
(3)  Electronic message boards used to display community events must be stationary and only used for community events; no commercial advertisement is permitted with the electronic message board; 
(4)  Each transitional change between messages shall occur immediately and without any transitional effects including, but not limited to scrolling, flashing, dissolving, fading, uncovering, wiping or any effect that conveys motion or animation; 
(5)  Each community events message shall remain fixed for at least one hour; 
(6)  Electronic message boards must be monochromatic and the entire display area is counted towards the total sign allowance for a parcel; 
(7)  The electronic message board portion of any community events sign shall not exceed 24 square feet in display area per sign face and no portion of an electronic message board shall exceed 15 feet in height above the grade level of the nearest adjacent street or road when located in commercial districts; 
(8)  The electronic message board portion of any community events sign shall not exceed 12 square feet in display area when located in residential districts, however, the maximum electronic message board display area may be increased up to, and in no case greater than, 24 square feet in display area on a conditional basis subject to conditions set forth in section 23-25-4; 
(9)  Signs in residential districts shall not exceed five feet in height, however, the maximum height of a sign containing an electronic message board may be increased up to, and in no case greater than, ten feet in height on a conditional basis subject to conditions set forth in section 23-25-4; 
(10)  If the city finds an electronic message board to cause glare or to impair the vision of the driver of any motor vehicle or to otherwise interfere with the safe operation of a motor vehicle or that illumination from the electronic message board causes a nuisance to any nearby residential dwelling, then, upon the city's request, the owner of the sign shall promptly and within not more than 48 hours reduce the intensity of the sign to a level acceptable to the city; and 
(11)  The owner of any existing or nonconforming electronic message board sign shall have until June 30, 2007, to bring the electronic message board sign in compliance with subsections 23-24-13(s)(3), (s)(4), (s)(5), and (s)(10) and to request a sign permit from the city. 
(t)  Sandwich board signs are regulated as follows: 
(1)  Sandwich board signs are only allowed in the GC-CORE zone district and a sign permit is required; 
(2)  Sandwich board signs shall not exceed four feet in height or 12 square feet in display area per each of the two allowable sides; 
(3)  One sandwich board is allowed per licensed business; 
(4)  Sandwich boards may be displayed when the store is open for business and must be stored inside the business overnight; 
(5)  Sandwich boards cannot be lighted or powered by any means; 
(6)  Sandwich boards can only be displayed on sidewalks directly in front of the advertised business; and 
(7)  Sandwich boards shall be placed to allow a minimum of 42 inches of clearance on the sidewalk for passersby. 
(u)  Temporary signs must obtain a temporary sign permit and are regulated as follows: 
(1)  Each licensed business may request a temporary sign permit for up to four separate occurrences within a calendar year; 
(2)  Temporary signs can be displayed for a period not to exceed two weeks per occurrence; 
(3)  A one week minimum time period shall transpire between temporary sign occurrences; 
(4)  Each temporary sign occurrence shall be limited to a maximum of 300 square feet of displayed signage; 
(5)  Temporary signs may include banners, pennants, fluttering ribbons, inflatables and other wall mounted or free-standing signage; 
(6)  Temporary signs shall meet the requirements in subsection 23-24-13(m); and 
(7)  Temporary signs shall be dismantled and removed during tropical storms and hurricanes. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-14. - Construction standards. 
(a)  All signs for which a permit is required under this ordinance shall be constructed and maintained in accordance with all applicable building codes. 
(b)  Signs for which a permit is not required under this ordinance and which are constructed of degradable material may be posted for a maximum of 60 days unless replaced with another sign of the same material. Any such replacement signs may be posted for a maximum of 60 beyond the original 60-day period. 
(c)  All freestanding signs with a display area greater than 100 square feet must be constructed to withstand winds of at least 120 miles per hour; in the event any other applicable code or regulation calls for wind tolerance in a greater amount, then such greater amount shall apply as the standard under this chapter as well. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-15. - Nonconforming signs. 
(a)  The owner/ground leaseholder of any nonconforming sign which was legally in place at the time of adoption of this chapter shall register the sign with the city within the period prescribed in section 23-24-3 above. Registered nonconforming signs shall not be allowed to remain once deterioration of or damage to the sign renders it a hazard or unsightly and the owner/ground leaseholder fails to correct the condition after notice from the building official. 
(b)  No change in the structure, size, shape, or design of a nonconforming sign shall be allowed except to bring nonconformity into conformity with this chapter. 
(c)  No change may be made to a nonconforming sign that increases or enlarges or changes the nature of the nonconformity. 
(d)  A nonconforming sign may not be replaced with another nonconforming sign except in the event of changed conditions beyond the control of the owner/ground leaseholder warrant the sign's replacement, in which event the building official must be notified and a new sign permit obtained prior to replacement. Nonconforming signs which have not been registered in accordance with section 23-24-3 above may not be replaced with another non-conforming sign - the new permit which is required will be controlled by the sign regulations in effect at the time of application. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-16. - Variances. 
    Variances may be sought and considered by use of the same variance procedures as are provided for variances generally under the city zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-17. - Exemptions. 
(a)  The terms of this chapter shall not apply to signs erected by a public officer or employee in the performance of official duties, including, but not limited to, public notices, safety signs, danger signs, traffic and street signs, memorial plaques, and historical markers; 
(b)  Non-illuminated signs, having a display area of less than eight square feet, provided they are not located in a public right-of-way, shall not be subject to the permit requirements of section 23-24-3; 
(c)  Window signs installed for the purpose of viewing from outside the premises shall not require a permit and shall count toward the aggregate sign area limitations of this chapter; 
(d)  Numerals displayed for purposes of identifying the address of a parcel shall not count toward the maximum sign area and do not require a permit or registration; 
(e)  Seasonal display located outside of the public right-of-way that are erected for a maximum of 30 days no more than twice a year do not require a permit. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-18. - Illumination. 
    Illumination for signs shall not cast light on adjoining property or shine in such a manner as to cause traffic interference. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-19. - Enforcement and penalties. 
    The provisions of this sign ordinance may be enforced by the building official or his or her designee. Additionally, it may be enforced by civil court action brought by the city manager or city attorney in the name of the City of Brunswick. Citations may be issued for violations of this chapter by the building official or his or her designee as well as by such other city employees as the city manager may from time to time designate. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-24-20. - Coordination of provisions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be in addition to and cumulative of the City of Brunswick's Historic Preservation Ordinance. In the event the Historic Preservation Ordinance requires any action with respect to a proposed sign, such as obtaining a certificate of appropriateness from the historic preservation board, then separate compliance with those requirements must be had in addition to obtaining any permit required hereunder. Approval of a sign permit application by the building official does not constitute approval by the historic preservation board. Further, the provisions of this chapter and the U.S. 17 Overlay and Planned Development - Traditional Neighborhood District articles of the City Zoning Ordinance shall be read together to give effect to all where possible; in the event of conflict, provisions of those articles control over the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XXV. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

Sec. 23-25-1. - Zoning administration officer. 
    The department designated by the city commission as the Planning Development and Codes (PDC) Department of the City of Brunswick shall administer and enforce this chapter. The duties shall include reviewing plans, inspecting premises and issuing building permits, sign permits and certificates of occupancy for uses, signs and structures that meet the requirements of this chapter and other applicable regulations. All records pertaining to each request processed by the PDC department shall be kept on file and open for public inspection in the office of the PDC department. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-25-2. - Building permits. 
(a)  Prior to the issuance of a building permit or sign permit, the PDC department shall assure that the work proposed will conform in all respects to this chapter and other applicable regulations including the building code and the flood damage control ordinance. 
(b)  The PDC department may require such information from the applicant as is necessary to determine the conformity of the proposal with this chapter and other applicable regulations. In addition to information specifically required by the Building Code, plans accompanying applications shall include the number of dwelling units each residential building is designed to accommodate, the setback lines of buildings on the lot and on adjoining lots, the number, layout and dimensions of proposed parking spaces, if any, and the locations and dimensions of points of ingress and egress from abutting public streets or alleys. Where a proposed structure will be located in an area of special flood hazard as shown on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM), the application shall include elevation data certified by a registered land surveyor or licensed architect specifying average ground elevation at site and the proposed elevation of the structure for the purpose of compliance with the flood damage control ordinance. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-25-3. - Certificate of occupancy. 
    The Building Official shall issue certificates of occupancy in accordance with the requirements of the building code upon a determination that the building or other structure as constructed or the change in occupancy as proposed conforms in all respects to this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-25-4. - Conditional use permits. 
(a)  Conditional use permits as provided for in this chapter are declared to possess characteristics which require certain controls in order to insure compatibility with other uses in the district within which they are proposed for location. 
(b)  Conditional uses shall be permitted subject to a determination by the city commission, upon recommendation from the planning and appeals commission that conditional use(s) conforms to all regulations set forth herein and elsewhere in this chapter, with particular reference to those requirements established for those districts in which it is proposed for location. 
(c)  Applications for permission to build, erect or locate a conditional use shall be submitted and processed in accordance with the regulations set forth in section 23-26-4. 
(d)  Permits authorizing conditional uses shall be valid only for that particular use and shall expire if the conditional use or operations pertaining thereto shall cease for more than six continuous months for any reason. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-25-5. - Temporary uses. 
    The building official is authorized to issue a temporary certificate of occupancy for temporary uses, as follows: 
(a)  Carnival or circus for a period not to exceed 21 days subject to the approval of the city commission. 
(b)  Religious meeting in a tent or other temporary structure in HC, GC, BI, GI and LI districts for a period not to exceed 60 days. 
(c)  Open lot sale of Christmas trees in LC, HC, GC, GCCore, BI, GI and LI districts for a period not to exceed 45 days. 
(d)  Real estate sales office in any district for a period not to exceed one year, provided no cooking or sleeping accommodations are maintained in the structure. 
(e)  Contractor's office and equipment sheds in any district for a period of one year, provided that such office be placed on the property to which it is appurtenant. 
(f)  All temporary certificates of occupancy may be renewed provided that it is determined that said use is clearly of a temporary nature, will cause no traffic congestion and will not continue or create a nuisance. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-25-6. - Penalties. 
    A violation by any person of any provision of this chapter or of any order of the building official authorized by this chapter shall be a misdemeanor, and upon conviction thereof such person shall be punished as provided for in the Charter of the City of Brunswick. Each day such violation continues shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-25-7. - Remedies. 
    In case any building, sign or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, moved or maintained, or any building, sign, structure or land is used or is proposed to be used in violation of this chapter, the PDC director, building official, city attorney or other appropriate authority of the city or any aggrieved property owner who would be specially damaged by such violation may institute an action for injunction or other appropriate relief to prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, conversion, movement maintenance or use, or to correct or abate such violation, or to prevent the occupancy of the building, structure, or land. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1055, § 2, 3-21-2018) 
ARTICLE XXVI. - APPEALS, CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS, AND VARIANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), adopted March 21, 2018, amended article XXVI in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article XXVI, §§ 23-26-1-23-26-3, pertained to appeals, conditional uses and variances. See Code Comparative Table for complete derivation. 

DIVISION 1. - DEFINITIONS 

Sec. 23-26-1. - Definitions. 
    Annexation: Annexation is the process by which a parcel of land is transferred from the jurisdiction of unincorporated Glynn County to the jurisdiction of the City of Brunswick. 
    Applicant: A property owner or their authorized representative who has petitioned the city for approval of an application under the terms of this article. 
    Application: A petition for approval of an application under the terms of this article. 
    Concept plan: A document submitted with an application regulated by this article upon which the applicant has shown the intended development and its design. Approval of the application request shall not constitute approval of the concept plan; said plan must be adjusted according to the requirements listed for submittal of civil plans or building plans and reviewed by the appropriate departments for permitting. 
    Condition of zoning approval: A requirement adopted by the governing body at the time of approval of a rezoning, conditional use or zoning of annexed lands; placing greater or additional requirements or restrictions on the property than provided in this Code in order to reduce an adverse impact of the request and to protect the public health, safety, or general welfare. 
    Conditional use permit: A use which is not automatically permitted by right, but which may be permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific requirements of this Code. 
    Director: The Director of the Brunswick Department of Planning, Development and Codes. 
    PAC: The Planning and Appeals Commission of the City of Brunswick. 
    PDC department: The Planning, Development and Codes Department of the City of Brunswick. 
    PD: A planned development district within the City of Brunswick. 
    Presiding official: The person chairing a meeting of the planning commission or the governing body in their official capacity. 
    Rezoning: An amendment to the official zoning map, or an amendment to an overlay zone boundary, that changes the zoning district or overlay zone of one or more properties specified in an application. Rezoning also includes applications to change conditions of zoning approval. 
    Text amendment: An amendment to articles of this Code. 
    Variance: A relaxation of the terms of this title where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property and not the result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this Code would result in unnecessary and undue hardship, or practical difficulty. 
    Zoning change: See definition for "rezoning." 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
DIVISION 2. - ZONING CHANGES AND CONDITIONAL USE PERMITS 

Sec. 23-26-2. - Generally. 
    The official zoning map, and overlay zone maps, may be amended from time to time and zoning amendments may be approved for specific properties by the governing body under the procedures in this chapter. In addition, changes in the conditions of approval pertaining to a specific rezoning or conditional use permit approval may also be approved by the governing body following the procedures in this chapter. The procedures for conditional use permits, which may be approved for specific properties, shall also be as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-3. - Initiation. 
    An application for a rezoning or conditional use permit for any property or properties in the city may be initiated by the governing body, planning and appeals commission, owner of the property, or some other person(s) given authorization by property owner to file said application. 
    Any applicant wishing to submit an application for rezoning or conditional use permit must schedule an appointment with the planning, development and codes department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director or his or her designee unless it meets the requirements of this section. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
    Any applicant wishing to file an application for a zoning change related to a planned development zoning district must schedule a conference with the PDC department staff at least 15 days prior to filing an application and shall also submit the additional application materials specified in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-4. - Requirements for submittal. 
    All applications for a rezoning or conditional use permit shall at a minimum consist of the following: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the PDC department on the department's application forms. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. A fee shall not be charged if the governing body or the planning commission initiate the application. 
(c)  Plat or boundary survey. A plat or boundary survey of the property or properties involved in the application. Provide one scaled and folded copy, and one 8.5"×11" or 11"×17" reproducible size copy. 
(d)  Legal description. A paper copy and an electronic copy of the legal description of the property that corresponds with the property or properties shown on the submitted boundary survey/plat. 
(e)  Written narrative. A written narrative should indicate at a minimum: 
(1)  The purpose of the request, proposed use, economic and environmental impacts as well as overlay zones or protection areas in which the property is located. 
(2)  Any planned developments shall include a narrative which fully describes the concept plan and must include at a minimum the proposed use, setbacks, right-of-way widths, building heights, signage, whether the applicant wishes the city to maintain the road(s) as well as identify any overlay zones or protection areas that may affect the use. 
(f)  Architectural renderings. Architectural renderings for any proposed new construction or exterior alterations of the existing structure(s), including at a minimum: 
(1)  Roof pitch; 
(2)  Materials to be used on exterior; 
(3)  Basic landscaping proposed; and 
(4)  Building elevations. 
If the architectural rendering is in a color format or is larger than an 11"×17" size copy, ten copies of the colored or large-scale rendering must be submitted with the completed application. 
(g)  Concept plan. An application for a rezoning or conditional use permit approval related to a residential subdivision, multi-family, or nonresidential use or zoning district shall be accompanied by a concept plan if any new construction is proposed or alteration of the site is required under the site or development design standards of this Code. An as-built survey (rather than a concept plan) indicating the most current development conditions must be submitted with those applications regarding existing developments that are not to be altered. The concept plan shall meet the requirements of section 23-26-5. The applicant shall submit ten scaled and folded copies, folded to fit into an 8"×10" size envelope, and one 11"×17" reproducible copy. 
(h)  Traffic impact analysis. Any application for a rezoning or conditional use permit which can be reasonably expected to generate 1,000 vehicle trip ends during a single day and/or more than 100 vehicle trips during the morning or afternoon peak hours shall submit a traffic impact analysis as specified in division 4, traffic impact analysis. 
(i)  Development of regional impact. Any application for a rezoning or conditional use permit and development approval that meets or exceeds the thresholds established by the state department of community affairs shall be considered a development of regional impact (DRI), and as such, shall comply with the procedures set forth in division 5, development of regional impact. 
    The director may request information in addition to that specified in this section when considered necessary for review of the application by the governing body or Planning Commission. 
    Anyone filing an application may be exempt from the above submittal requirements of this section, provided the application is for rezoning to an R-9 or R-6 zoning district, does not involve a subdivision development, and includes the fee, plat or boundary survey, legal description and written narrative. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-5. - Concept plan requirements. 
    Applications for a rezoning or conditional use permit shall at minimum include thereon the information specified in this section. 
(a)  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner. 
(b)  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant. 
(c)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(d)  Proposed use of the property. 
(e)  Location (land district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
(f)  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
(g)  Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain, if any, shall be outlined. 
(h)  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
(i)  The proposed project layout including: 
(1)  For subdivisions, a professional stamped rendering showing approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the front building setback line on each lot. 
(2)  For multi-family and nonresidential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas and driveways. 
(j)  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
(k)  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
(l)  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
(m)  The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
(n)  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-6. - Special application requirements for planned developments. 
    Applications for rezoning to the planned development (PD) district, or applications for a zoning amendment of an existing PD; shall in addition to the other requirements specified in this chapter, include the following: 
(a)  Binding concept plan. Unless specifically approved otherwise, the concept plan shall become a condition of zoning approval and must be followed. 
(b)  Architectural elevations. Applications shall include perspective front, side, and rear elevation drawings of representative building types. These drawings shall indicate general architectural characteristics. If the PD is approved, architectural elevations submitted as part of the application shall be considered binding unless specifically noted otherwise in the approval. 
(c)  Land uses and development summary. The application shall include a list of all land uses proposed to be included in the PD, the total land area devoted to each of the land uses proposed, the percentage of the total land area within the PD devoted to each proposed land use, the number of residential units by type, floor area for each type of dwelling unit (typical, or a range as appropriate), density, and the total square footage of buildings devoted to non-residential uses. In addition, the application shall contain a development schedule indicating the approximate dates for beginning and completing the project, or each phase if the development is to be phased, and the extent of development and types of land uses in each phase. 
(d)  Dimensional requirements. The application shall contain all dimensional requirements that are proposed to apply within the PD, including minimum lot sizes, minimum lot widths, maximum building coverage, front, side and rear building setbacks, and maximum heights. Such proposed dimensional requirements shall be presented in a table on the development plan or in the written text accompanying the application. The application should indicate dimensional provisions for those items specified in said table, to the extent they apply to the uses proposed. 
(e)  Improvement requirements comparison. The application shall contain descriptions of improvements to be constructed within the PD, such as but not limited to street types, right-of-way widths, pavement widths, sidewalk locations and dimensions, and other improvements. Such proposed improvements shall be presented in a table on the development plan or in the written text accompanying the application that shows the proposed improvements in comparison with improvements that would be required otherwise without approval of a PD. To the extent they can be shown at the time of development plan approval, environmental quality standards should be incorporated in the development application, particularly as they relate to storm water runoff, stream protection, and tree protection. 
(f)  Private restrictions. PDs that have commonly owned facilities and space shall have private restrictions and covenants established which shall be subject to the approval of the city attorney and the director. The developer of a PD involving commonly owned facilities and space shall submit, along with the development plan application, a declaration of covenants, conditions, and restrictions and articles of incorporation and by-laws for the property owners or home owners association. The declaration shall confer membership to the owner of property subject to assessment by the association, provide for voting rights in the association with suggestions for the division of power between the developer and the property owners, and provide for maintenance assessments, among other things. The director may waive the requirements of this paragraph when, in his or her opinion, an applicant submits a letter that demonstrates his or her intent to comply with these requirements and addresses any particular issues associated with maintenance of common grounds. 
(g)  Community benefit statement. The applicant shall submit a written statement identifying the relative benefits that will accrue to the community as a result of the property being developed under PD provisions. Benefits to the community include mixed land uses that reduce vehicle trips, open spaces provided and linked to larger open space networks, natural features retained, and quality architectural designs provided. This statement is a developer's opportunity to define why the PD proposal merits approval and how it will serve the community better than a conventional development. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-7. - Notice of public hearing in newspaper. 
    Before the governing body may take final action on a proposed rezoning or conditional use permit application, the planning and appeals commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing before the PAC, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The published notice shall be prepared by the planning, development and codes department and shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, the proposed rezoning or conditional use requested, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the PAC. Notice of the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the governing body shall also be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-8. - Notice of public hearing by sign on property. 
    At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, the city shall post a sign or signs stating the date, time and place of the public hearing before the planning and appeals commission, the present zoning classification and the proposed zoning change or the proposed conditional use permit. One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the rezoning or conditional use permit has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. Notice of the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the governing body shall also be provided. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-9. - Special notice requirements. 
    Pursuant to the specific requirements of the Zoning Procedures Law (O.C.G.A. 36-66-6), when a proposed rezoning or conditional use permit application relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, the director shall ensure that the additional requirements of O.C.G.A. 36-66-6 are met as follows: 
(a)  Public hearings shall be held at least six months and not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on the zoning decision. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-10. - Investigations and staff recommendation. 
    Within a reasonable period of time after acceptance of a complete application, the director or his/her designee may send the application or notice thereof out for review by the city's development review team (DRT) and any other internal municipal departments and external agencies as may be appropriate. Any written comments received in a timely manner as a result of such review shall be submitted for consideration to the planning and appeals commission and governing body, or summarized in a submitted memorandum. Any such comments shall become public records. 
    The director or his/her designee shall investigate and make a recommendation with respect to the matters enumerated in this Code section regarding a rezoning or conditional use permit application. Any such investigation and recommendation shall if in writing be made available to the applicant and planning and appeals commission prior to its public hearing and shall become public records. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-11. - Planning and appeals commission hearing and recommendation. 
    The planning and appeals commission shall convene a public hearing on the rezoning or conditional use permit application as provided in the public notice. The public hearing shall follow policies and procedures which govern calling and conducting public hearings established in this Code. The PAC shall have 65 calendar days from the date of its public hearing within which to submit its recommendation on the rezoning or conditional use permit application. The board may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. The recommendations of the PAC shall have an advisory effect only and shall not be binding on the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-12. - Criteria to consider for applications. 
    The planning and appeals commission and the governing body shall consider the following standards in considering any rezoning, zoning amendment, or Conditional Use Permit application, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(a)  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan? 
(b)  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(c)  Will the proposed use adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(d)  Are their substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
(e)  Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
(f)  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the comprehensive plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
(g)  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-13. - Additional procedures and criteria for planned developments. 
    In addition to the requirements for a rezoning or conditional use specified in this Code, approval proceedings for PD rezoning/zoning amendment and development approval shall include the following: 
(a)  Preapplication conference. At least 15 calendar days prior to filing a formal application for a PD, the applicant is required to confer with the director or his/her designee in order to review the general character of the plan and to obtain information on the nature and extent of the proposed development. 
(b)  Criteria for approval. In considering and acting upon applications for PDs, the planning and appeals commission and the governing body shall consider and base their recommendation and decision, respectively, on the following criteria (not all inclusive), and any other factors it may consider appropriate in reaching such a decision: 
(1)  Consistency with the Comprehensive Plan of the city. 
(2)  The extent to which the proposed mix of land uses is appropriate in terms of location and character. 
(3)  The extent to which the development is compatible with surrounding properties. Compatibility can be achieved by ensuring that the overall scale and design of development does not overwhelm or otherwise detract from the established character of the neighborhood or surroundings. The PD zoning district is not intended to allow for the intrusion of incompatible land uses into single-family neighborhoods that create negative land use impacts. 
(4)  The extent to which the proposed architectural features of buildings within the development are harmonious. 
(5)  The adequacy of open spaces, play areas and recreation facilities that are provided for the needs of the development occupants. 
(c)  Revisions. Amendments to approved planned development rezoning and development applications, including those approved prior to the adoption of this chapter, shall be permitted but governed by this chapter. 
(d)  Land development plans. Upon approval of a PD rezoning and development application by the governing body, the developer may apply for land development permit approval. 
(e)  Permits and certificates. No building permit or certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a building, structure, or use, nor shall any excavation, grading, or land disturbance applications be approved, for any planned development that has not been approved in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. The director shall authorize the issuance of building permits for buildings and structures in the area covered by the approved development if they are in substantial conformity with the approved development, after improvements are installed in accordance with applicable improvement requirements, and if found to be in conformance with all other applicable regulations. The director shall authorize the issuance of a certificate of occupancy for any completed building, structure, or use located in the area covered by the planned development approval if it conforms to the requirements of the approved development and all other applicable regulations. After completion of a planned development, the use of land and construction, modification, or alteration of any buildings, structures, or uses within the area covered by the planned development shall continue to be regulated by the approved development plan. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-14. - Additional criteria to consider for conditional use permit applications. 
    The planning and appeals commission and the governing body shall consider the following standards in considering any conditional use permit application, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(a)  The type of street providing access to the subject property is adequate to serve the proposed conditional use permit. 
(b)  Access into and out of the property adequately provides for traffic and pedestrian safety, the anticipated volume of traffic flow, and access by emergency vehicles. 
(c)  Public facilities such as schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection are adequate to serve the conditional use permit. 
(d)  Refuse, service, parking and loading areas on the property are located and screened to protect other properties in the area from such adverse effects as noise, light, glare or odor. 
(e)  The hours and manner of operation of the conditional use permit have no adverse effects on other adjacent or surrounding properties. 
(f)  The height, size and location of the buildings or other structures proposed on the property are compatible with the height, size or location of buildings or other structures on neighboring properties. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-15. - Withdrawal and waiting period for reapplication. 
    A rezoning or conditional use permit application may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or entity initiating such a request upon notice to the director, up until the public hearing by the planning and appeals commission is closed. 
    If the applicant withdraws the application prior to the publication of notice for public hearing before the board, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the director without restriction on the refiling of a proposed zoning change or conditional use permit on the property in the future. 
    If the applicant withdraws the application after notice has been published or is irretrievably set for publication but the application has not been heard by the planning and appeals commission, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the director and an application for rezoning or conditional use permit on the property may not be resubmitted for six months from the date of withdrawal. 
    If the request for withdrawal is made at the planning and appeals commission public hearing on the case, the request may be approved by a majority vote of the PAC, but an application for a rezoning or conditional use permit on the property may not be resubmitted for six months from the date of withdrawal. 
    If the request for withdrawal is made by the applicant following the planning and appeals commission public hearing, the application shall remain on the governing body public hearing agenda and the withdrawal request shall be considered for approval or denial, with or without prejudice, by the governing body. 
    If denied, a rezoning or conditional use permit request affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of six months from the date of denial. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-16. - Notice of public hearing by the governing body. 
    The governing body shall hold a public hearing on the rezoning or conditional use permit application. If the planning and appeals commission makes a recommendation on the rezoning or conditional use permit application at the date of its public hearing or within a time frame sufficient for the public hearing by the governing body to be held as scheduled, the governing body shall proceed with the advertised public hearing. 
    If the planning and appeals commission does not make a recommendation on the rezoning or conditional use permit application before the scheduled and advertised public hearing to be held by the governing body, the city clerk shall schedule a new date for the public hearing by the governing body and will provide notice of said rescheduled public hearing at least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing. Said notice shall be accomplished by notice in a newspaper of general circulation in the city, posting of a sign on the property, and notice to adjacent property owners just the same as required by this chapter for the initial application. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-17. - Revision of concept plan. 
    A concept plan that is part of a rezoning or conditional use permit application may be revised and resubmitted by the applicant during the process, but in no event shall a revised concept plan resubmitted by an applicant be accepted or considered less than ten calendar days prior to the public hearing by the governing body. At its discretion, the governing body may refer an application involving a concept plan revised after its consideration by the planning and appeals commission back to the planning and appeals commission for additional study and recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-18. - Action by governing body. 
    No action shall be taken on a rezoning or conditional use permit application by the governing body until it has received a recommendation by the planning and appeals commission, or upon the expiration of the 65-day review period of the PAC. In rendering a decision on a rezoning or conditional use permit application, the governing body shall consider all information supplied by the applicant, the director, and the PAC, any information presented at the public hearing of the PAC, and information gained at its own public hearing. 
    After conducting a public hearing, in taking action on an application, the governing body may: 
(a)  Approve the application as submitted by ordinance which requires two readings for a rezoning application and one reading for a conditional use permit application. 
(b)  Approve the application with conditions which requires two readings for a rezoning application and one reading for a conditional use permit application. 
(c)  Deny the proposal, which shall not require a second reading. 
(d)  Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting. 
(e)  Refer the application back to the planning and appeals commission for further consideration, with notice of public hearings before the PAC and governing body, the same as required for the initial application. 
(f)  Refer the application back to the planning and appeals commission for further consideration, without the requirement to hold public hearings and provide notice thereof. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-19. - Decisions involving constitutional challenges. 
    In ruling on any rezoning in which the applicant has brought a constitutional challenge to the existing zoning classification, the governing body shall pay particular attention to the following criteria which have been applied by state courts in zoning matters: 
(1)  Existing uses and zoning of the subject and nearby property; 
(2)  The extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; 
(3)  The extent to which the destruction of property values, if any, promotes the healthy, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
(4)  The relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship, if any, imposed upon the individual property owner; 
(5)  The suitability of subject property for zoned purposes; 
(6)  The length of time the property, if vacant, has been vacant as zoned considered in the context of land development in the areas and the vicinity of the property. 
    The existing zoning classification shall be considered presumptively valid and it shall be the responsibility of the applicant to present evidence that rebuts this presumption. If the governing body determines, from the evidence presented, that the existing zoning classification is unduly burdensome to the applicant and is not offset by the considerations of the public's health, safety, morals and general welfare, and considerations of the integrity of this Code and of the official zoning map, the governing body may impose upon said property any appropriate zoning classification, including conditions, which might be consistent with these considerations, the Comprehensive Plan, and the criteria described in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-20. - Incorporation clause. 
    This chapter is intended to comply with the provisions of the Georgia Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66 et seq., which Act is incorporated by reference in its entirety into this Code. Where any provision of this chapter is in conflict with any provision of the law, the law shall control. Or where this chapter is incomplete in having failed to incorporate a provision necessarily required for the implementation of the law, such provision of the law, so as to meet the mandate of the law, shall be fully complied with, except that where an application to annex property into the city is initiated by the governing body, only those notice requirements and public hearing procedures set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4(d) shall be required for zoning of property to be annexed into the city, notwithstanding any other procedures or requirements set forth in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
DIVISION 3. - ANNEXATIONS 

Sec. 23-26-21. - Generally. 
    An area proposed for annexation into the city shall first be considered for zoning prior to its annexation. Consideration of the zoning shall be subject to the same procedures, standards, and requirements for any rezoning as contained in this Code, except as specifically modified by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-22. - Initiation. 
    An application for annexation for any property or properties contiguous to the city may be initiated by the governing body, planning and appeals commission, owner of the property, or some other person(s) given authorization by property owner to file said application. Unless initiated by the governing body or the PAC, all such applications shall be initiated by the owner of a majority interest in the property affected. 
    Any applicant wishing to submit an application for annexation must schedule an appointment with the planning, development and codes department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director unless it meets the requirements of this section. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
    Any applicant wishing to file an application for a planned development zoning district must schedule a conference with the PDC department staff at least 15 days prior to filing an application and shall submit the additional application materials required for a PD district as outlined in this chapter for a zoning change application. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-23. - Withdrawal and waiting period for reapplication. 
    Any applicant wishing to withdraw a proposed annexation request shall comply with the withdrawal procedures as outlined in this chapter for rezoning applications and conditional use permit with the exception that there shall be no waiting period for reapplication upon withdrawal or denial of an annexation request. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-24. - Requirements for submittal. 
    Applications for annexation shall include the following requirements: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the department of planning, development and codes on the department's application forms. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. A fee shall not be charged if the governing body or the planning and appeals commission initiate the application. 
(c)  Letter of cost estimate. A letter of cost estimate must be obtained from the Glynn Brunswick Joint Water and Sewer Commission if an applicant wishes to have the city share in the cost of sanitary sewer line extension. 
(d)  Plat or boundary survey. A plat or boundary survey of the property or properties involved in the application. Provide one scaled and folded copy, and one 8.5"×11" or 11"×17" reproducible size copy. 
(e)  Legal description. A paper copy and an electronic copy of the legal description of the property that corresponds with the property or properties shown on the submitted boundary survey/plat. 
(f)  Written narrative. A written narrative should indicate at a minimum: 
(1)  The purpose of the request, proposed use, economic and environmental impacts as well as overlay zones or protection areas in which the property is located. 
(2)  Any planned developments shall include a narrative which fully describes the concept plan and must include at a minimum the proposed use, setbacks, right-of-way widths, building heights, signage, whether the applicant wishes the City to maintain the road(s) as well as identify any overlay zones or protection areas that may affect the use. 
(g)  Architectural renderings. Architectural renderings for any proposed new construction or exterior alterations of the existing structure(s), including at a minimum: 
(1)  Roof pitch; 
(2)  Materials to be used on exterior; 
(3)  Basic landscaping proposed; and 
(4)  Building elevations. 
If the architectural rendering is in a color format or is larger than an 11"×17" size copy, 15 copies of the colored or large-scale rendering must be submitted with the completed application. 
(h)  Concept plan. An application for annexation approval related to a residential subdivision, multi-family, or nonresidential use or zoning district shall be accompanied by a concept plan if any new construction is proposed or alteration of the site is required under the site or development design standards of this Code. An as-built drawing (rather than a concept plan) indicating the most current development conditions must be submitted with those applications regarding existing developments that are not to be altered. The concept plan shall meet the requirements of section 23-3-5. The applicant shall submit 15 scaled and folded copies, folded to fit into an 8"×10" size envelope, and one 11"×17" reproducible copy. 
(i)  Traffic impact analysis. Any annexation application which can be reasonably expected to generate 1,000 vehicle trip ends during a single day and/or more than 100 vehicle trips during the morning or afternoon peak hours shall submit a traffic impact analysis as specified in division 4, traffic impact analysis. The cost of conducting the traffic impact analysis as well as any improvements put forth in the recommendations shall be the financial responsibility of the applicant. No application shall be accepted nor advertised for a public hearing by the planning department until such time as the transportation impact study, if required, has been completed and submitted to the planning, development and codes department. 
(j)  Development of regional impact. Any annexation application that would result in a zoning or development approval that meets or exceeds the thresholds established by the state department of community affairs shall be considered a development of regional impact (DRI), and as such, shall comply with the procedures set forth in division 5, development of regional impact. 
    The director may request information in addition to that specified in this section when considered necessary for review of the application by the governing body or planning and appeals commission. 
    Anyone filing an application may be exempt from the above submittal requirements of this section, provided the application is for annexation with a zoning classification of a residential district does not involve a subdivision development, and includes the fee, plat or boundary survey, legal description and written narrative. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-25. - Specifications for concept plans. 
    The concept plan shall show the following, as appropriate to the annexation requested: 
(a)  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(c)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(d)  Proposed use of the property. 
(e)  Location (land district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
(f)  Location map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Location maps must be drawn at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide. 
(g)  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
(h)  Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain, if any, shall be outlined. 
(i)  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
(j)  The proposed project layout including the following: 
(1)  For subdivisions, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the front building setback line on each lot; 
(2)  For multi-family and non-residential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, and driveways. 
(k)  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
(l)  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
(m)  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
(n)  The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
(o)  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-26. - Special application requirements for planned developments. 
    Applications for annexation with a zoning classification of PD, planned development district shall in addition to the other requirements specified in this chapter include those additional application materials required for a PD district as outlined in article XV and article XVI. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-27. - Process for annexation. 
    In addition to the process and procedures for a rezoning or conditional use permit request as outlined in this Code, there are additional steps to be taken when processing applications for annexation. 
(a)  Upon or following the date of notice to the county of the proposed annexation as required under O.C.G.A. 36-36-6, the governing body shall initiate the zoning of the property to be annexed or consider an application for a zoning submitted by or on behalf of the owner of such property under the provisions of this chapter. 
(b)  The planning commission and the governing body shall conduct their public hearings on the zoning prior to the annexation of the land into the city. Notice of such hearing shall be provided under the provisions of this Code for a rezoning or conditional use permit; provided further that the notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the county. 
(c)  If the annexation request is denied, any action by the governing body on the zoning shall be null and void. 
(d)  Furthermore, there are mandatory reports required that must be submitted to local, state and federal agencies. Such reports and documents shall be prepared by and submitted by the PDC department on behalf of the applicant. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-28. - Criteria to consider for annexation. 
    The planning and appeals commission and the governing body shall consider the following standards in considering any annexation proposal, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal. In addition, any application that proposes a change in the conditions of approval previously established by the governing body through action on an annexation shall be reviewed in light of the standards set forth in this section, as appropriate. 
(a)  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
(b)  Will the proposed use adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
(c)  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the Comprehensive Plan? 
(d)  Are their substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
(e)  Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public facilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police or fire protection? 
(f)  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the comprehensive plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
(g)  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-29. - Additional procedures and criteria for planned developments (PD). 
    In addition to the requirements for annexation applications specified in this chapter, approval proceedings for annexation with PD zoning/development approval shall comply with the additional procedures and criteria for PD zoning/development as outlined in article XV and article XVI for a zoning change. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-30. - Effective date. 
    The zoning of property hereafter annexed shall become effective on the day the zoning is approved by the governing body, on the date that the annexation becomes effective, or where a county has interposed an objection pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-11, the date provided for in O.C.G.A. § 36-36-11(b)(8), whichever is later. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-31. - Zoning district. 
    If approved, any newly annexed property shall be zoned the most restrictive of the city's zoning code, R-9, unless otherwise specified by the city commission upon annexation. 
    The zoning classification shall become effective on the later of: 
(a)  The date the zoning is approved by the municipality; 
(b)  The date that the annexation becomes effective; 
(c)  Where the county has interposed an objection pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-36-11, 28 calendar days following the completion of the annexation authorized by the governing body. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-32. - Issuance of permits. 
    No application for a land development or building permit shall be filed on newly annexed property until the first of the month following the effective date of the annexation approval. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-33. - Existing nonconforming use. 
    Any use existing at the time of annexation approval on property annexed by the city which does not comply with the use provisions of the city's zoning district assigned to said annexed property shall be considered a nonconforming use which shall be governed by section 23-3-15. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-34. - Conformity with this Code. 
    Lands hereafter annexed into the city limits shall, upon the effective date of such annexation, be subject to all applicable procedural and substantive requirements of this Code as now or hereafter amended. Any new use of an annexed property after zoning approval shall only be permitted if it conforms to all applicable provisions of this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
DIVISION 4. - TRAFFIC IMPACT ANALYSIS 

Sec. 23-26-35. - Purpose and intent. 
    Understanding the demands placed on the community's transportation network by development is an important dimension of assessing the overall impacts of development proposals. All development generates traffic, and it may generate enough traffic to create congestion and thus require the community to invest more capital funds into the transportation network in the form of new roads, traffic signals, and intersection improvements. Traffic congestion results in a number of problems, including economic costs due to delayed travel times, air pollution and accidents. A traffic impact analysis is a mechanism for the city to foresee the demands a development proposal will place on the transportation network. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-36. - Objectives. 
    The city finds that requiring a traffic impact analysis for proposed developments that meet certain thresholds will help to achieve the following objectives: 
(a)  Forecast additional traffic associated with new development, based on accepted practices. 
(b)  Determine the improvements that are necessary to accommodate the new development. 
(c)  Allow the city to assess the impacts that a proposed development may have and assist the city in making decisions regarding development proposals. 
(d)  Help to ensure safe and reasonable traffic conditions on streets after the development is complete. 
(e)  Reduce the negative impacts created by developments by helping to ensure that the transportation network can accommodate the development. 
(f)  Protect the substantial public investment in the street system. 
(g)  Provide information relevant to citywide comprehensive planning, transportation planning, transit planning, and the provision of programs and facilities for traffic safety, road improvements, transportation demand management, pedestrian access, and other transportation system considerations. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-37. - Definitions. 
    City engineer: The City Engineer of the City of Brunswick, or his or her designee. 
    Discretionary development proposal: Any application for a rezoning, preliminary plat, conditional use permit, final design plan approval, or certificate of appropriateness. For purposes of this Code, a determination of applicability shall be made at the first discretionary development proposal encountered. 
    Horizon year: Unless otherwise specified or approved by the city engineer, the horizon year shall be 20 years into the future from the year during which a traffic impact study is being prepared. 
    Internal trips: Trips that are made within a multi-use or mixed-use development, by vehicle or by an alternate mode such as walking. 
    Level of service (LOS): A quantitative and qualitative measure of how well traffic flows on a given street or highway. Level of service relates to such factors as highway width, number of lanes, percentage of trucks, total traffic volume, turning movements, lateral clearances, grades, sight distance, capacity in relation to volume, travel speed, and other factors which affect the quality of flow. Level of service is typically summarized by letter grades described as follows: 
    Level "A" is a condition with low traffic volumes, high speeds, and free-flow conditions. 
    Level "B" is a condition with light traffic volumes, minor speed restrictions, and stable flow. 
Level "C" is a condition with moderate traffic volumes, where speed and maneuvering are restricted to a limited degree by the amount of traffic. 
Level "D" is a condition with heavy traffic operating at tolerable speeds, although temporary slowdowns in flow may occur. 
Level "E" is a condition of very heavy flow and relatively low speeds. Under Level "E" the traffic is unstable and short stoppage may occur. 
Level "F" is a condition of extremely heavy flow, with frequent stoppage and very slow speeds. It is an unstable traffic condition under which traffic often comes to a complete halt. 
    New trips: Total vehicle trips, minus pass-by trips, minus internal trips if applicable. 
    PDC director: The director of planning, development and codes for the City of Brunswick, or his or her designee. 
    Pass-by trips: Vehicle trips which are made by traffic already using the adjacent roadway and entering the site as an intermediate stop on the way to another destination. 
    Peak hour: 7:00 a.m. to 8:00 a.m. and 5:00 p.m. to 6:00 p.m. daily. 
    Peak-hour trip generation study: A study by a qualified professional of one or more actual developments of similar land use and development characteristics which provides empirical data on the actual number of trips entering and exiting said development(s) during the a.m. and p.m. peak hour. A peak-hour trip generation study shall consist of a.m. and p.m. peak hour traffic counts by direction (entering and exiting) on at least three separate weekdays if the study is based on only one similar development, or at least one a.m. and p.m. traffic count for three different actual developments. The results of actual traffic counts from peak-hour trip generation studies may be adjusted to discount pass-by trips as provided in this chapter. 
    Professionally accepted: Published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers; or prepared by a qualified professional under work supervised by the City or Glynn County, or prepared by a qualified professional and accepted by the city engineer. 
    Qualified professional: For purposes of conducting traffic impact analyses as may be required by this chapter, a qualified professional shall mean a registered professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering. For purposes of conducting peak hour trip generation studies, a qualified professional shall mean a registered professional engineer with experience in traffic engineering, or another professional approved by the city engineer based on education and experience to conduct such trip generation studies. 
    Traffic impact analysis: A study, conducted by a qualified professional, which assesses the effects that a discretionary development proposal's traffic will have on the transportation network in a community or portion thereof. Traffic impact studies vary in their range of detail and complexity depending on the type, size, and location of the proposed development. 
    Trip: A single or one-directional travel movement with either the origin or destination of the trip inside the study site. 
    Trip generation: An estimate of the number of vehicle trips that will be generated due to the new development, which is calculated based on the type and amount of land uses in the proposed development and professionally accepted trip generation rates for each such land use. Trip generation may be expressed on an average daily basis or average peak hour (a.m., p.m.), or both. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-38. - Thresholds of applicability. 
    A traffic impact study shall be required for any discretionary development proposal which can be reasonably expected to generate 1,000 vehicle trip ends during a single day and/or more than 100 vehicle trips during the morning or afternoon peak hours, as determined by professionally acceptable information as provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-39. - Exemptions. 
(a)  A traffic impact analysis is not required if a discretionary development proposal is initiated by the governing body or the planning and appeals commission. 
(b)  A discretionary development proposal may be exempted from the traffic impact study requirement by the city engineer if a prior traffic impact study for the subject property has been submitted to the city or is available from Glynn County and the proposed development is substantially similar to that for which the prior traffic impact study was conducted. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-40. - Trip generation data. 
    The source for trip generation rates for the purposes of this Code shall be "Trip Generation" published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), most recent edition, unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. Final determinations of whether this chapter applies shall be made based on application of data from ITE Trip Generation, which may change from time to time, or as otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-41. - Determination of applicability. 
    At the time a discretionary development proposal is filed, or during any pre-application meeting if possible, the PDC Director shall determine whether a traffic impact analysis shall be required according to this chapter. The PDC director shall calculate the expected trip generation of the proposed development using professionally accepted trip generation rates or other data and compare it to the thresholds specified in this chapter to determine whether a traffic impact analysis is required. The city engineer shall assist in this effort by providing the director with any updated information available on trip generation rates. 
    Applicants for discretionary development proposals shall provide sufficient information about the development proposal (e.g., number of dwelling units, square footage of buildings, number of employees, land area of the development, etc.) for the PDC director to apply professionally accepted trip generation rates to the proposed development. The director shall not accept a discretionary development proposal for processing unless it contains the data on the proposed development necessary to apply available trip generation rates. Further, no application for a discretionary development proposal shall be accepted nor advertised for a public hearing until such time as the transportation impact study, if required, has been completed and submitted in accordance with this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-42. - Cases where data are not available. 
    In the event that information submitted by the applicant of the discretionary development proposal is sufficient to calculate the trip generation that would be expected to result from the proposed development, but trip generation rates or other data are not available or in sufficient quantity of studies to make a determination of applicability under the terms of this chapter, this section shall apply. 
(a)  The director shall first consult with the city engineer to determine if: 
(1)  Professionally acceptable trip generation rates applicable to the subject development exist from other reputable sources, such as the Journal of the Institute of Transportation Engineers; 
(2)  Other trip generation studies of similar developments are available; or 
(3)  Professionally acceptable trip generation rates for one or more similar land uses can be used in making the determination of applicability. 
If the city engineer is able to provide such information and determines it is professionally reputable, then the director shall use said data as may be interpreted by the city engineer to make the determination of applicability. The director and city engineer shall have no more than ten working days to comply with the provisions of this section, when it applies. 
(b)  In the event the director is unable to make a determination of applicability after consulting with the city engineer pursuant to this section, the director shall notify the proposed applicant in writing that professionally accepted trip generation rates are not available for purposes of making a determination of applicability. 
(c)  Upon receipt of notice described in this section, the applicant for a discretionary development proposal shall have 30 days to have a qualified professional prepare and submit a peak-hour trip generation study as defined by this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-43. - Specifications for peak-hour trip generation studies. 
(a)  Discounting of pass-by trips. The peak-hour trip generation study may subtract from the empirical data on actual vehicle trips those trips that are reasonably considered to be "pass-by" trips as defined by this chapter, using professionally accepted assumptions about the percent of pass-by trips approved by the city engineer. 
(b)  Reduction for internal trips in multi-use or mixed use developments. In calculating the new trips generated from a proposed development containing multiple uses or mixed uses, a qualified professional with the approval of the city engineer may apply a percentage reduction to the total vehicle trips shown in any peak hour trip generation study to account for internal trips, as defined in this chapter, so as to account for (discount) the number of internal trips reasonably expected to occur in such multi-use or mixed use development. Said reduction shall not exceed 24 percent of total trips generated. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-44. - Scoping meeting. 
    Once it is determined that a traffic impact analysis is required, a scoping meeting may be held with the developer or his or her consultant and the appropriate representatives of the city engineering department and if appropriate, the PDC department. It will be the responsibility of the developer or his or her consultant to initiate this meeting. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the availability of site-specific information concerning the development, available forecasts of traffic volumes, and to ensure the applicant understands the content requirements for traffic impact analyses. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-45. - Required contents of a traffic impact study. 
    A traffic impact analysis must evaluate the adequacy of the existing transportation system to serve the proposed development and determine the expected effects of the proposed development on the transportation system. The traffic impact study must provide adequate information for city staff to evaluate the development proposal and, when appropriate, recommend conditions of approval. 
    The qualified professional preparing the traffic impact study is encouraged to coordinate preparation with city staff and staff from other jurisdictions, as appropriate, to ensure that all necessary components are included in the traffic impact study and to reduce revision and review time. 
    In order to be reviewed, the traffic impact study shall include at least the following minimum components: 
(a)  Title page. A title page listing the name of the proposed development and its location. 
(b)  Table of contents. A table of contents outlining the study shall be provided. 
(c)  Certification. The study shall be signed and stamped by a qualified professional. 
(d)  Executive summary. An executive summary, discussing the development, the major findings of the analysis, and any recommendations made by the qualified professional. 
(e)  Vicinity map. A vicinity map showing the location of the proposed project in relation to the transportation system of the area. 
(f)  Study area map. A map of the traffic impact study area. For purposes of this chapter, the traffic impact analysis area shall be determined according to trip generation rates as follows. In the event there is a difference as a result of applying peak and total trips, the more restrictive requirement (larger study area) shall apply. 
Study Area Size Requirements 
Peak Hour Trips Generated Daily Trips 
Generated Distance from Perimeter of Proposed Development Along Roads 100-150 1,000-1,500 1/2 mile 151-500 1,501-5,000 1 mile 501-1,000 5,001-10,000 2 miles 1,001 or more 10,001 or more 3 miles  
(g)  Inventory of transportation facilities in the study area. A description of transportation facilities in the study area, including roadway names, locations and functional classifications, intersection lane configurations and traffic control (including signal timing), existing rights-of-ways, transit routes and stops (if any), pedestrian and bicycle facilities, and planned transportation system improvements. An existing lane configuration sketch shall be submitted for all roadways and intersections within the study area. 
(h)  Concept plan and development data. A complete description of the proposed development, including a concept plan, with the best available information as to the nature and size of each proposed use, and the proposed location and traffic control of all proposed access points, including the distance from all proposed access points to adjacent accesses and/or streets, including those across a street right-of-way from the subject development. 
(i)  Existing traffic volumes. Peak and total daily traffic volumes on all arterial, collector, and local streets within the study area. Traffic counts should, as a rule, not be more than one year old when the report is prepared. Traffic counts between one and three years old may be used if factored to the current year. Traffic counts older than three years will not be accepted. 
(j)  Facility performance. Existing performance of the transportation system, including levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity ratios (V/C) for all intersections and road segments as appropriate within the study area. 
(k)  Trip generation. Complete trip generation figures for all aspects of the proposed development. The source for trip generation rates shall be "Trip Generation" published by the Institute of Transportation Engineers (ITE), most recent edition. For developments expected to generate more than thirty (30) trucks per day, the trip generation data shall include separate figures for trucks. If phased development is proposed, the study shall include projections for the year that each phase of the development is planned to be complete. The traffic impact analysis shall also include trip generation data for any pending and approved developments that would affect the study area. The city shall facilitate the review of applicable files by a qualified professional to determine the names and development characteristics of pending and approved developments in the study area. 
(l)  Trip distribution and assignment. Trip distribution for the proposed development. For developments expected to generate more than 30 truck trips per day, the study shall include separate trip distribution figures for trucks. 
(m)  Forecast traffic volumes without the development. Forecast traffic volumes without the development, on all arterial, collector, and local roads within the study area, in the year that the proposed development is planned to commence, and in the horizon year. Qualified professionals should consult the city engineer for information to determine the most appropriate sources or methods of determining future traffic volumes. If phased development is proposed, the traffic impact study shall include projections for the year that each phase of the development is planned to be complete. 
(n)  Forecast performance without the development. Forecast performance, including levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity ratios (V/C) of the transportation system without the development in the year that each phase is planned to be complete and in the horizon year. 
(o)  Forecast traffic volumes with the development. Forecast traffic volumes with the development, on all arterial, collector, and local roads within the study area, in the year that the proposed development is planned to commence, and in the horizon year. 
(p)  Forecast performance with the development. Forecast performance, including levels of service (LOS) and volume/capacity ratios (V/C) of the transportation system with the development in the year that each phase is planned to be complete and in the horizon year. 
(q)  Sight distance. A safety analysis of the site accesses, and an assessment whether adequate sight distances are provided at driveways and streets abutting the development. 
(r)  Operational characteristics. Analysis of prevailing operating speeds, if significantly different than speed limits, right and left turn lane warrants, queue lengths, acceleration and deceleration lanes including lengths and tapers, throat lengths, channelization, and other characteristics of the site accesses, which exist and may be needed, as appropriate. The traffic impact analysis shall address whether driveways and intersections are located and spaced safely and designed to accommodate expected traffic volumes and maneuvers. The operational characteristics analysis shall also evaluate the turning and traveling characteristics of the vehicles that will be using the proposed development and the adequacy of the geometrics of the existing and proposed roadway (public and/or private) configurations to accommodate these characteristics. 
(s)  On-site circulation. The traffic impact analysis shall address whether on-site vehicular and pedestrian circulation and parking layouts are safe and efficient. 
(t)  Significant impacts. Analysis as appropriate of any potential adverse or controversial effects of the proposed development on the transportation system in the area. Examples of possible effects include, but are not limited to, infiltration of non-residential traffic into residential neighborhoods, traffic noise, creation of potential for traffic violations, conflicting turning movements with other driveways, any new pedestrian or bicycle transportation needs arising from the development, etc. 
(u)  Mitigation measures. Listing of all intersections and road segments that are forecasted to be level of service "E" and "F" in the horizon year, or if phased, in the years that each phase is planned to be complete, and an identification and description of specific mitigation measures including signal, turn lane, or other warrant analyses as appropriate and necessary to bring these intersections and road segments into compliance with a level of service "D" or other city-adopted level of service for said road segment or intersection. 
(v)  Drawing of improvements. If roadway improvements are needed, the study shall show a drawing at an engineering scale of one inch equals 20 feet for all recommended lane configurations. 
(w)  Signalization. If signalization is warranted by the traffic signal warrants outlined in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), a warrant analysis shall also be conducted as a part of the traffic impact analysis. If a traffic signal is warranted, the warrant package in the study shall show a drawing at an engineering scale of one inch equals 20 feet detailing the signal design and phasing plans. 
(x)  Costs. The estimated costs associated with implementing all such mitigation measures shall be provided in the traffic impact analysis. The traffic impact analysis may take into account any city/county/state approved roadway, traffic signalization, and other improvements in determining mitigation measures and providing recommendations. 
(y)  References. A listing of all technical documents and resources cited or consulted in preparing the traffic impact analysis. 
(z)  Technical appendix. Relevant technical information, including but not limited to: copies of raw traffic count data used in the analysis, calculation sheets and/or computer software output for all LOS and V/C calculations in the analysis, and warrant worksheets for signals, turn lanes, signal phasing, etc. used in the analysis. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-46. - Additional technical specifications. 
    The city engineer is further authorized to promulgate and require the use of additional technical specifications for conducting traffic impact analysis, which shall be consistent with analysis methods included in the most recent Highway Capacity Manual, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, and/or Traffic Access and Impact Studies for Site Development: A Recommended Practice (Washington, DC: Institute of Transportation Engineers, 1991), as may be amended or republished from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-47. - Costs and fees. 
    The city assumes no liability for any costs or time delays (either direct or consequential) associated with the preparation and review of traffic impact analyses. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-48. - Submittal and review of study. 
    The applicant for the proposed development or the qualified professional shall submit one electronic copy of the traffic impact study and technical appendix, six paper copies of the traffic impact analysis, and one paper copy of the technical appendix to the director. The director shall transmit the electronic copy, one paper copy of the traffic impact study and the paper copy of the technical appendix to the city engineer, who may at his or her discretion submit copies of the report to applicable review agencies such as the state department of transportation, the metropolitan planning organization, or an adjacent local jurisdiction. Within ten working days of receipt of a traffic impact analysis, the city engineer shall review all calculations and analyses and determine if they are complete, reasonable, understandable, consistent, and fully explained. The conclusions presented in the traffic impact analysis shall be consistent with and supported by the data, calculations, and analyses in the report. Calculations, graphs, tables, data, and/or analysis results that are contrary to good common sense or not consistent with and supported by the data will not be accepted. In such events, the city engineer shall return the traffic impact analysis to the development applicant for correction. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-49. - Recommendations for mitigation of impacts. 
    Within 30 working days of receipt of a completed traffic impact study, the city engineer shall complete his or her review the study and submit to the director all recommendations for mitigation measures as stated in the traffic impact study and include any interpretations or recommended conditions of approving the discretionary development proposal that will mitigate traffic impacts of the proposed development. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-50. - Conditions of development approval for project improvements. 
    Upon the determination of project improvements needed to mitigate the traffic impacts of the discretionary development proposal as provided in this chapter, the director shall recommend that the project improvements be completed by the developer as conditions of approval of the discretionary development proposal. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-51. - Appeal. 
    An applicant for a discretionary development proposal may appeal a decision of the city engineer or the PDC director in the administration and interpretation of this chapter to the planning and appeals commission as an appeal of an administrative decision as provided in this Code. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
DIVISION 5. - DEVELOPMENT OF REGIONAL IMPACT 

Sec. 23-26-52. - Definitions. 
    Initial DRI information form: A form intended to identify basic information about a proposed development of regional impact on which a local government is being requested to take action, and which provides information to the regional commission (RC). This form notifies the RC of a potential development of regional impact in order for the RC to meet its responsibilities within the DRI review process. 
    DRI review initiation request form: A form intended to provide additional information about the proposed project to the regional commission (RC), the submission of which serves as an official request that the DRI review process be started by the RC. 
    Regional development center: The coastal regional center. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-53. - Applicability. 
    This chapter shall apply when an applicant (industry, business, or developer) requests some type of local government action related to a project, such as, but not limited to, a request for a zoning change or conditional use, zoning variance, permit, hookup to a water or sewer system, master or site plan approval, or entering into a contract, and it appears that the proposed development (or, for multi-phased projects, the complete development) meets the threshold(s) of a development of regional impact, according to "Rules of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, Developments of Regional Impact, Effective July 1, 2001," as may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-54. - Jurisdiction. 
    If a proposed development project is to be located in more than one jurisdiction and, in total, the proposed development meets or exceeds a DRI threshold, the local government in which the largest portion of the project is to be located is responsible for initiating the DRI review process. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-55. - Procedures. 
    The application procedures established in chapter XX-2 and chapter XX-3 will be modified by this chapter in cases where a rezoning or conditional use permit application, or an annexation application respectively, fits the definition of a "development of regional impact." Developments of regional impact will be processed according to procedures of the State Department of Community Affairs as described in "Rules of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, Developments of Regional Impact, effective July 1, 2001," as may be amended from time to time. 
    When an application is received for development that meets or exceeds the thresholds established for that development type and thus constitutes a "development of regional impact" according to the aforementioned rules of the state department of community affairs, the city will follow the procedures identified in said administrative rules which are summarized here. 
    When an application for a development of regional impact is received, the PDC director or city engineer, on behalf of the city, will complete an "initial DRI information" form and a "DRI review initiation request" form. Each of these two forms may be submitted to the regional commission simultaneously, provided the city has all necessary project-related information. 
    The city shall not take any official legislative or administrative action to advance or further a DRI project until the review process identified under the DRI review procedure specified in "Rules of Georgia Department of Community Affairs, Chapter 110-12-3, Developments of Regional Impact, Effective July 1, 2001," as may be amended from time to time, is completed. The city may undertake preliminary staff administrative functions associated with a proposed DRI including, but not limited to, project evaluation/assessment, site visits, and placing consideration of the application on a future agenda for formal action, if required. The city shall not take any official action related to such a project until the DRI review process is completed and the city has had adequate time to consider the DRI review comments. 
    After the DRI review process is completed, the city may proceed with whatever action it deems appropriate regarding the proposed project, although it is encouraged to take the public finding and additional comments into consideration as it makes its decision. 
    If the project receives a negative public finding from the regional commission and the city approves said project or takes action to advance said project, the city shall notify the regional commission and the state department of community affairs of its action and identify all local requirements it has placed on the development that could mitigate any negative findings identified in the DRI review process. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
DIVISION 6. - ZONING VARIANCES 

Sec. 23-26-56. - Generally. 
    Persons may seek relief from compliance with the zoning-related requirements of this Code pursuant to this chapter when the strict application would create a particular and unique hardship, by filing an application for variance with the director for consideration by the planning and appeals commission in accordance with this chapter. Such relief may be granted only to the extent necessary to alleviate such unnecessary hardship and not as a convenience neither to the applicant nor to gain any advantage or interest over similarly zoned properties. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-57. - Initiation. 
    An application for a zoning variance for any property or properties in the city may be initiated by the governing body, planning and appeals commission, owner of the property, or some other person(s) given authorization by property owner to file said application. 
    Any applicant wishing to submit an application for a zoning variance request must schedule an appointment with the PDC department staff in order to review the application for completeness. No such application shall be accepted for processing by the director unless it meets the requirements of this section. Incomplete or improper applications will be returned to the applicant. The director is hereby authorized to establish administrative deadlines for the receipt of applications. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-58. - Waiting period for reapplication. 
    If denied, a variance request affecting the same property shall not be reconsidered for a period of 12 months from the date of denial; provided, however, that the planning and appeals commission may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. A request to reduce the waiting period must be asked for and acted upon by the planning and appeals commission during the public hearing at which the request was first considered. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-59. - Requirements for submittal. 
    Applications for zoning variance shall include the following: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the PDC department on the department's application forms. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. A fee shall not be charged if the governing body or the planning and appeals commission initiate the application. 
(c)  Plat or boundary survey. A plat or boundary survey of the property or properties involved in the application. Provide one scaled and folded copy, and one 8.5"×11" or 11"×17" reproducible size copy. 
(d)  Statement of hardship. Form with various questions to be answered by an applicant in a manner describing how each situation applies to the application. The applicant may complete the questions on the form provided with the application, or the applicant can type the answers on a separate sheet of paper as part of the written narrative, identifying each component as such. 
(e)  Written narrative. A written narrative should indicate at a minimum: the purpose of the request, proposed use, economic and environmental impacts as well as overlay zones or protection areas in which the property is located. 
(f)  Architectural renderings. Architectural renderings for any proposed new construction or exterior alterations of the existing structure(s), including at a minimum: 
(1)  Roof pitch; 
(2)  Materials to be used on exterior; 
(3)  Basic landscaping proposed; and 
(4)  Building elevations. 
If the architectural rendering is in a color format or is larger than an 11"×17" size copy, nine copies of the colored or large-scale rendering must be submitted with the completed application. 
(g)  Concept plan. An application for a zoning variance approval related to a residential subdivision, multi-family, or non-residential use or zoning district shall be accompanied by a concept plan if any new construction is proposed or alteration of the site is required under the site or development design standards of this Code. An as-built survey (rather than a concept plan) indicating the most current development conditions must be submitted with those applications regarding existing developments that are not to be altered. The concept plan must be prepared by a professional engineer, or a registered land surveyor; landscape architect; or architect. The concept plan shall meet the requirements of section 9-22-6-5. The applicant shall submit nine scaled and folded copies, folded to fit into an 8"×10" size envelope, and one 11"×17" reproducible copy. The director may request information in addition to that specified in this section when considered necessary for review of the application. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-60. - Specifications for concept plans. 
    The concept plan shall show the following, as appropriate to the variance requested: 
(a)  Name, address and telephone number of the property owner. 
(b)  Name, address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(c)  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of datum, date of plan drawing, and revision dates, as appropriate. 
(d)  Proposed use of the property. 
(e)  Location (land district and land lot) and size of the property in acres (or in square feet if less than an acre). 
(f)  Location map of the property in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as arterial streets or railroads. Location maps must be drawn at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch equal to 2,000 feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide. 
(g)  Zoning district classification of the subject property and all adjacent properties, and zoning district boundaries as appropriate. 
(h)  Natural features within the property, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas and other significant natural features such as rock outcroppings. On all water courses entering or leaving the property, the direction of flow shall be indicated. The 100-year flood plain, if any, shall be outlined. 
(i)  Man-made features within and adjacent to the property, including existing streets and names, city and county political boundary lines, and other significant information such as location of bridges, utility lines, existing buildings to remain, and other features as appropriate to the nature of the request. 
(j)  The proposed project layout including: 
(1)  For residential development projects, approximate lot lines and street right-of-way lines, along with the building setback lines. 
(2)  For multi-family and non-residential development projects, the approximate outline and location of all buildings, and the location of all minimum building setback lines, outdoor storage areas, buffers, parking areas, and driveways. 
(k)  The proposed phasing of the development if it is proposed to be built in sections. 
(l)  A statement as to the source of domestic water supply. 
(m)  A statement as to the provision for sanitary sewage disposal. 
(n)  The approximate location of proposed stormwater detention facilities. 
(o)  Such additional information as may be useful to permit an understanding of the proposed use and development of the property. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-61. - Notice of public hearing in newspaper. 
    Before the planning and appeals commission may take final action on a proposed variance application, the PAC shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing before the PAC, notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The published notice shall be prepared by the PDC department and shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, the variance requested, and the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the planning and appeals commission. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-62. - Notice of public hearing by sign on property. 
    At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing, the city shall post a sign or signs stating the date, time and place of the public hearing before the planning and appeals commission, the present zoning classification and the proposed variance. One such sign shall be placed in a conspicuous location along each street frontage of the property for which the variance has been requested. If the property has no street frontage, the sign shall be placed on each street from which access will be gained to the property. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-63. - Notice to adjacent property owners. 
    At least ten days prior to the planning and appeals commission public hearing, the applicant shall cause a notice to be mailed to all persons owning property located abutting or across any street from the property that is the subject matter of the variance application. The written notice shall be mailed to the property owners as such names and addresses appear on the county's ad valorem tax records. The notice shall state the date, time, place and purpose of the hearing by the PAC. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-64. - Investigations and staff recommendation. 
    Within a reasonable period of time after acceptance of a complete application, the PDC director may but shall not be required to send the application or notice thereof out for review by internal municipal departments and external agencies, such as the development review team (DRT) as may be appropriate. Any written comments received in a timely manner as a result of such review shall be submitted for consideration to the planning and appeals commission and governing body, or summarized in a memorandum. Any such comments shall become public records. 
    The director may but shall not be required to investigate and make a recommendation regarding the variance application. Any such investigation and recommendation if in writing shall be made available to the applicant and planning and appeals commission prior to its public hearing and shall become public records. Copies of the director's findings and recommendations, if provided, shall be available no later than the time of the planning and appeals commission's public hearing on the matter. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-65. - Planning and appeals commission hearing and action. 
    The planning and appeals commission shall convene a public hearing on the variance application as provided in the public notice. The public hearing shall follow policies and procedures which govern calling and conducting public hearings established in section 23-27.4. The planning and appeals commission shall have 65 calendar days from the date of its public hearing within which to take final action on the variance application. 
    In rendering a decision on a variance application, the planning and appeals commission shall consider all information supplied by the applicant, the director, and any information presented at the public hearing of the PAC. After conducting a public hearing, in taking action on an application, the PAC may: 
(a)  Approve the application as submitted. 
(b)  Approve the application with conditions. 
(c)  Deny the proposal. 
(d)  Table the proposal for consideration at its next scheduled meeting, provided that it acts within its allotted 65-day review period. 
    The action of the planning and appeals commission on the variance application shall be final; provided, however, that any person adversely affected by any determination made by the PAC relative to the approval or denial of a variance application may appeal such determination to a court of competent jurisdiction in the manner provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-66. - Criteria to consider for variance applications. 
    The planning and appeals commission shall consider the following standards in considering any variance application, giving due weight or priority to those factors that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(a)  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape, or topography; 
(b)  The application of this Code to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; and 
(c)  There are conditions that are peculiar to the property which adversely affect its reasonable use or usability as currently zoned. 
(d)  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this Code. 
(e)  There must be a proved hardship by showing beyond a doubt the inability to make a reasonable use of the land if the zoning ordinance were applied literally. 
(f)  The hardship cannot be self-created; e.g., as in a case where the lot was purchased with the knowledge of an existing restriction. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-67. - Withdrawal of application. 
    A variance application may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or entity initiating such a request upon notice to the director, up until the public hearing by the planning and appeals commission is closed. 
    If the applicant withdraws the application prior to the publication of notice for public hearing before the planning commission, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the director without restriction on the refiling of a proposed variance on the property in the future. 
    If the applicant withdraws the application after notice has been published or is irretrievably set for publication but the application has not been heard by the planning and appeals commission, the application shall be withdrawn administratively by the director and an application for variance on the property may not be resubmitted for six months from the date of withdrawal. 
    If the request for withdrawal is made at the planning and appeals commission public hearing on the case, the request may be approved by a majority vote of the PAC, but an application for a variance on the property may not be resubmitted for 12 months from the date of withdrawal. However, the planning and appeals commission may reduce the waiting period under extenuating circumstances or on its own motion. A request to reduce the waiting period must be asked for and acted upon by the PAC during the public hearing at which the request was first considered. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-68. - Provisions that cannot be varied. 
    In no case shall a variance be granted for any of the following: 
(a)  A condition created by the applicant, including the result of an unwise investment decision or real estate transaction. 
(b)  A change in the conditions of approval imposed through a rezoning application approved by the governing body. 
(c)  Reduction of a minimum lot size required by a zoning district. 
(d)  Use of land or buildings or structures that is not permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
(e)  Any increase in the number of dwelling units or nonresidential building floor area otherwise permitted by the zoning district that is applicable to the property. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-69. - Duration of validity. 
    Approval of a zoning variance on a property located within the city shall be in full force and effect upon its approval by the planning commission and shall be effective for a period of 12 months. If no action is taken by the applicant to implement the purpose of the application within 12 months from the date of approval, said approval shall become null and void. A zoning variance shall be specific to the request made by the current applicant and shall not stay with the property, as is the case for a zoning change. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
DIVISION 7. - TEXT AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 23-26-70. - Applicability. 
    This Code may be amended from time to time in whole or in part by the governing body under the provisions of this section. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-71. - Initiation. 
    A text amendment may be initiated by the governing body or planning and appeals commission by a majority vote of those voting, or by the PDC director or other city departmental director. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-72. - Application requirements. 
    A pre-application meeting with the director is required prior to filing a text amendment. Applications for text amendments shall require submittal of the following: 
(a)  Application form. A completed application. All applications shall be submitted to the PDC department on the department's application forms, including signed and notarized signature of property owner. 
(b)  Fee. All applications shall be accompanied by a non-refundable fee as fixed from time to time by the governing body. A fee shall not be charged if the governing body or the planning commission initiate the application. 
(c)  Letter of intent. A written narrative describing the purpose of the request and addressing how the proposed application meets the criteria to consider for text amendments as specified in section XX-2-5. 
(d)  Disclosure. A statement of disclosure complying with O.C.G.A. 36-67-1, "Conflict of Interest in Zoning Actions," if not incorporated into the required application form. 
    In cases where an applicant is proposing a text amendment to modify an existing zoning district or create a new zoning district, and where the applicant also desires to rezone property to the modified or new zoning district, the two applications shall not be considered concurrently. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-73. - Notice of public hearings. 
    Before the governing body may take final action on a proposed text amendment, the planning and appeals commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposal. At least 15 days but not more than 45 days prior to the public hearing before the PAC notice shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation within the city. The published notice shall be prepared by the PDC department and shall include the nature of the proposed text amendment, and the date, time and place of the public hearing before the PAC. Notice of the date, time, and place of the public hearing before the governing body shall also be included in the notice. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-74. - Criteria to consider for text amendments. 
    The governing body, planning and appeals commission shall consider the following standards for text amendments, giving due weight or priority to those standards that are appropriate to the circumstances of each proposal: 
(a)  The extent to which the proposed text amendment is consistent with the purpose and intent of this Code. 
(b)  The extent to which the proposed text amendment is compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan. 
(c)  Whether the proposed text amendment adequately addresses new or changing conditions in the city. 
(d)  Whether the proposed text amendment is needed to properly implement the comprehensive plan. 
(e)  The extent to which the proposed text amendment promotes the public health, safety, morality or general welfare of the city. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-75. - Appointed hearing and recommendation. 
    The planning and appeals commission shall convene a public hearing on the text amendment as provided in the public notice. The public hearing shall follow policies and procedures which govern calling and conducting public hearings established in section 23-27-4. The PAC shall have 65 calendar days from the date of its public hearing within which to submit its recommendation on the text amendment. The PAC may submit any additional report it deems appropriate. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-76. - Action by governing body. 
    The governing body shall hold a public hearing on the text amendment. In rendering a decision on any such text amendment, the governing body shall consider all information supplied by the applicant, director, and the planning and appeals commission any information presented at the public hearing of the PAC, and information gained at its own public hearing. The governing body shall either approve or disapprove of the application, or it may modify the text amendment language as proposed or recommended and approve the text amendment as modified. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-77. - Withdrawal of application. 
    Any application for a text amendment may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or entity initiating such a request upon notice to the director, up until the public hearing by the planning and appeals commission is closed. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-78. - Effect. 
    Approval of a text amendment shall be in full force and effect upon its approval or upon the stated effective date thereof, and shall thereupon apply to every property for which a use has not been established or for which a building permit or development permit may subsequently be requested. 
    For a property on which a use, building, structure or other improvements existed in conformity with this Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment affecting the property, any such use, building, structure or other improvements no longer in conformance shall be governed under the provisions for nonconformities in section 23-3-15. Construction of any use, building, structure, or other improvements for which a building permit has been issued in conformity with this Code prior to the effective date of a text amendment may continue to completion as though no change had occurred and, upon completion, shall be governed under the provisions for nonconformities in section 23-3-15, as applicable. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-79. - Waiting period for reapplication. 
    There shall be no waiting period for reapplication of text amendments. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
DIVISION 8. - PROCEDURES FOR CALLING AND CONDUCTING PUBLIC HEARINGS 

Sec. 23-26-80. - Applicability. 
    Any public hearing required by this article shall be called and convened at the scheduled time and place, and it shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures of this chapter. For purposes of this chapter, the term "hearing body" shall refer to the governing body, and the planning and appeals commission. Nothing contained in this chapter shall be construed as prohibiting a presiding official or hearing body from conducting a public hearing in a fair, orderly, and decorous manner. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-81. - Presiding official. 
    The presiding officer shall preside over the public hearing as follows: 
(a)  Governing body. In the case of a governing body, the mayor shall have authority to preside but may delegate the presiding official's duties to the city attorney. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tempore shall have authority to preside but may delegate the presiding official's duties to the city attorney. In the absence of both the mayor and mayor pro tempore, another member of the governing body shall have authority to preside but may delegate the presiding official's duties to the city attorney. 
(b)  Planning and appeals commission. In the case of the planning and appeals commission, the chairperson of said commission shall preside, or in the absence of the chairperson, the vice chairperson if designated, or if neither is present to preside, another member of the commission shall be designated to preside. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-82. - Opening of public hearing. 
    The presiding official shall indicate that a public hearing has been called on one or more applications made pursuant to this article, shall summarize the processes required by this chapter, and shall open the public hearing. Thereupon, the presiding official shall call the first case and the hearing body shall consider each application on an individual basis in succession as printed on the published agenda or as otherwise approved by the hearing body; provided, however, that the presiding officer may at his or her discretion call and consider more than one application simultaneously when more than one application involves the same piece of property, and when proceedings would be efficiently completed by combining separately required public hearings and discussing more than one scheduled matter as a single group of applications. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-83. - Report of PDC director. 
    Upon opening the public hearing, the presiding official shall, unless he or she elects to summarize and present information about the application personally, recognize the PDC director or designee, who shall provide a summary of the application and present any recommendations or results of investigations. In the case of public hearings before a governing body, unless a member of the planning and appeals commission is present and is authorized and willing to speak for the board on the subject application, the director shall also summarize the recommendations made by the planning and appeals commission. Any member of the hearing body upon recognition by the presiding official may ask questions of the director or designee or other city official or planning and appeals commission representative providing the report or recommendations. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-84. - Applicant. 
    When an individual application comes up for hearing, the presiding official may ask for a show of hands of those persons who wish to appear in support of the application. If it appears that the number of persons wishing to appear in support of the application is in excess of that which may reasonably be heard, the presiding official may request that a spokesperson for the group be chosen to make presentations. Following the report of the director or designee, the presiding official shall recognize the applicant or his or her agent, spokesperson, or each of them, who shall present and explain the application. 
    There shall be a minimum time period of ten minutes per application at the public hearing for the proponents to present data, evidence, and opinions; the hearing body shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minute period to the proponents if they elect not to use that much time. Any member of the hearing body upon recognition by the presiding official may ask questions of the applicant or agent of the applicant, or both. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-85. - Public. 
    At the conclusion of the applicant's presentation, the presiding official shall initiate the public comment portion of the public hearing. When an individual application comes up for review, the presiding official may ask for a show of hands of those persons who wish to ask questions, make comments, and/or appear in opposition to the application. If it appears that the number of persons wishing to ask questions, make comments, or appear in opposition to the application is in excess of that which may reasonably be heard, the presiding official may request that a spokesperson for the group be chosen to make presentations and ask questions, or appear in opposition. There shall be a minimum time period of ten minutes per application at the public hearing for the opponents to present data, evidence, and opinions and ask questions; the hearing body shall not be obligated to provide the full ten-minutes per application to the opponents if they elect not to use that much time. 
    Prior to speaking, each speaker will identify him or herself and state his or her current address. Each speaker shall speak only to the merits of the proposed application under consideration and shall address his or her remarks only to the hearing body. Each speaker shall refrain from personal attacks on any other speaker or the discussion of facts or opinions irrelevant to the proposed application under consideration. The presiding official may limit or refuse a speaker the right to continue, if the speaker, after first being cautioned, continues to violate this procedure. 
    The hearing body will consider the questions raised during the public portion of the hearing and may elect to answer questions following the speakers, or it may defer questions to the applicant to be answered during rebuttal. Any member of the hearing body upon recognition by the presiding official may ask questions of a member of the public giving testimony. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-86. - Applicant's rebuttal. 
    At the conclusion of public testimony, or upon the expiration of time allotted for public testimony, the applicant or his or her agent, or both, shall be allowed a short opportunity for answer questions, rebut the testimony of the public, and provide final comments and remarks. The time devoted to any such rebuttal shall be counted toward the total ten minutes allotted to the applicant if a time limit is set by the presiding official. 
    Any member of the hearing body upon recognition by the presiding official may ask questions of the applicant, his or her agent, or both. Time devoted to questions and answers will not be counted against any time limitations that have been imposed on presentations. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-87. - Close of hearing. 
    After the foregoing procedures have been completed, the presiding official will indicate that the public hearing is closed. Upon the closing of the public hearing, the applicant or his agent and any member of the public shall no longer address the hearing body in any way, including hand waving or motions for attention; provided, however, that at any time considered appropriate the presiding official may reopen the public hearing for a limited time and purpose. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-88. - Decision. 
    After the public hearing is closed, the hearing body may either vote upon the application or may delay its vote to a subsequent meeting, subject to the limitations of this article, provided that notice of the time, date and location when such application will be further considered shall be announced at the meeting during which the public hearing is held. 
    After hearing evidence, in making a decision, the hearing body shall apply the evidence to the criteria specified in this article, as appropriate given the type of application. It will not be required that the hearing body consider every criterion given the type of application. It shall be the duty of the applicant to carry the burden of proof that approval of the proposed application will promote the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. 
    If the hearing body determines from the evidence presented by the applicant has shown that the proposed application promotes the health, safety, morals, and general welfare under applicable criteria, then the application shall be granted, subject to those reasonable conditions as may be imposed by the hearing body on its own initiative or as may be recommended by the Planning Commission or the director. Otherwise, such application shall be denied. In cases where one or more companion applications are submitted and the governing body attaches conditions to the application, such conditions shall unless otherwise specifically stated otherwise become conditions of approval for each companion application. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
Sec. 23-26-89. - Planning and appeals commission special provisions. 
    In the case of the planning and appeals commission, the following provisions shall apply to its decision making: 
(a)  A total of three PAC members present shall constitute a quorum. A majority vote of the quorum shall be necessary to approve any decision or recommendation. 
(b)  If a motion to recommend approval of an application fails, the application is automatically recommended for denial. If a motion to recommend denial of an application fails, another motion would be in order. 
(c)  A tie vote on a motion to recommend approval of an application shall be deemed a recommendation for denial of the application. A tie vote on any other motion shall be deemed to be no action, and another motion would be in order. 
(d)  If no action is taken on an application, it will go forward to the governing body with no recommendation. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 3(Exh. A), 3-21-2018) 
ARTICLE XXVII. - AMENDMENTS 

Sec. 23-27-1. - Initiation of amendments. 
(a)  A general amendment of this chapter may be initiated only by the city commission. However, the commission shall give reasonable consideration to requests for the initiation of an amendment when such requests are made by a property owner or owners, members of the general public or other public bodies or officials. 
(b)  A proposed amendment to the official zoning map affecting specific property or properties may be initiated by the city commission or by application filed with the city department of community development on behalf of the owner or owners of the property proposed to be changed, provided however, that action shall not be initiated for an amendment affecting the same parcel or parcels of property, or any part thereof, on behalf of the owner or owners more often than once every six months. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008; Ord. No. 1017, § 1, 7-7-2010) 
Sec. 23-27-2. - Application procedure. 
    Application filed by property owners pursuant to subsection 23-25-1(b) shall be made on forms which shall be obtained from the City of Brunswick Department of Community Development. Completed forms, together with the appropriate application fee to cover administrative costs and advertising, plus any additional information which the applicant deems to be relevant, shall be filed with the City of Brunswick Department of Community Development. The applicant shall pay as a fee for the processing of the application, such amount as may be established in writing by the city manager. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-27-3. - Processing application. 
    The planning staff of the City of Brunswick Department of Community Development shall review the application, shall determine an appropriate time for a public hearing before the city commission, shall publish notice of the public hearing as required by Official Code of Georgia Annotated section 36-66-4 [O.C.G.A. § 36-66-4], and shall prepare a recommendation to the city commission to assist in the zoning decision to be made. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-27-4. - Policies, procedures and standards. 
    Public hearings shall be called and conducted before the city commission in accordance with the policies and procedures, and zoning decisions will be made by the commission in accordance with the zoning standards, heretofore approved by the commission, which are set forth in the addendum to this chapter and incorporated herein by reference. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-27-5. - Limited rezoning. 
    In granting any rezoning application, the city commission shall be authorized expressly to limit the permitted and conditional uses which shall be allowed within the new zoning classification, so as to prohibit certain uses which otherwise would be allowed pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-27-6. - Spot zoning prohibited. 
(a)  "Spot zoning" is defined as rezoning of a specific parcel of property which creates an isolated district unrelated to adjacent districts and which is not a logical extension of a zoning boundary which would improve the pattern of uses in the general area. 
(b)  Spot zoning is hereby prohibited. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-27-7. - Changes in the zoning map. 
    Following final action by the city commission after public hearing, any necessary changes shall be made on the zoning map. Such final action may be taken by the adoption of a motion without the necessity of placing the change in the form of an ordinance. When a limited rezoning is granted as contemplated in section 23-27-5, an appropriate reference shall be indicated on the zoning map. A written record of the type and date of all such changes shall be maintained by the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ARTICLE XXVIII. - SEVERABILITY, REPEALER, EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 23-28-1. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this chapter is held invalid or unconstitutional for any reason by any court of competent jurisdiction, such provision shall be deemed a separate, distinct and independent provision and such holding shall not affect the validity of the remaining provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-28-2. - Repeal of conflicting ordinances. 
    Any and all other ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict with this chapter, specifically Ordinance No. 492, adopted February 3, 1965, as amended, shall be and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Sec. 23-28-3. - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be in force and effect from and after the date of its adoption. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
ADDENDUM 
ZONING STANDARDS AND 
POLICIES AND PROCEDURES 
FOR ZONING HEARINGS 
Approved by the Commission 
City of Brunswick, Georgia 
April 5, 1989 
Part I. Standards 
In a landmark zoning decision, the Supreme Court of Georgia wrote: 
As the individual's right to the unfettered use of his property confronts the police power under which zoning is done, the balance the law strikes is that a zoning classification may only be justified if it bears a substantial relation to the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. Lacking such justification, the zoning may be set aside as arbitrary or unreasonable. . . As these critical interests are balanced, if the zoning regulation results in relatively little gain or benefit to the public while inflicting serious injury or loss on the owner, such regulation is confiscatory and void. . . Moreover, we specifically rule that for such unlawful confiscation to occur requiring that the zoning be voided, it is not necessary that the property be totally useless for the purposes classified. . . It suffices to void it that the damage to the owner is significant and is not justified by the benefit to the public. Barrett v. Hamby, 235 Ga. 262, 265; 219 S.E.2d 399 (1975) 
    The foregoing means that a zoning classification, to be valid, must be supported by reasons related to the public health, safety, morality or general welfare. Specific criteria for zoning decisions do not exist, but the reasons upon which such decisions are based must be identifiable and articulable, in order to avoid the fatal defect of arbitrariness. 
    In a later decision the Court suggested a number of factors which should be considered in determining the validity of a zoning classification: 
The validity of each zoning ordinance must be determined on the facts applicable to the particular case, but certain general lines of inquiry have been regarded as relevant, to wit: (1) existing uses and zoning of nearby property; (2) the extent to which property values are diminished by the particular zoning restrictions; (3) the extent to which the destruction of property values of the plaintiffs promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; (4) the relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; (5) the suitability of the subject property for the zoned purposes; and (6) the length of time the property has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property. Guhl v. Holcomb Bridge Road Corp., 238 Ga. 322, 323; 232 S.E.2d 830 (1977) 
    The current Georgia statutory law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5(b) expressly mandates that each local government exercising zoning power establish and consider such factors in the form of substantive standards for zoning decisions. That subsection provides: 
[E]ach local government shall adopt standards governing the exercise of the zoning power, and such standards may include any factors which the local government finds relevant in balancing the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property. Such standards shall be printed and copies thereof shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
    In keeping with the foregoing statutory requirement, the City of Brunswick has adopted the following substantive standards to govern its zoning decisions: 
A. A PROPOSED ZONING CLASSIFICATION OR CONDITIONAL USE REQUEST SHOULD BE COMPATIBLE WITH EXISTING USES AND ZONING OF ADJACENT AND NEARBY PROPERTY, AND ``SPOT ZONING'' SHOULD ALMOST ALWAYS BE REJECTED. 
Relevant Questions 
(1)  Would the proposed rezoning create an isolated district unrelated to adjacent and nearby districts? 
(2)  Is the proposed rezoning a logical extension of a zoning boundary which would improve the pattern of uses in the general area? 
B. A PROPOSED ZONING CLASSIFICATION SHOULD NOT DESTABILIZE THE SURROUNDING NEIGHBORHOOD. 
Relevant Questions 
(1)  Is the proposed zoning classification one which would promote integrity of the neighborhood and preserve its general character? 
(2)  Would the proposed rezoning precipitate similar rezoning requests which would generate or accelerate adverse land use changes in the neighborhood? 
C. A PROPOSED ZONING CLASSIFICATION SHOULD MAXIMIZE THE ECONOMIC VALUE OF THE SUBJECT PROPERTY WITHOUT DEPRECIATING THE VALUE OF ADJACENT AND NEARBY PROPERTY. 
Relevant Questions 
(1)  To what extent does the existing zoning classification depress the value of the subject property? 
(2)  To what extent would the proposed zoning classification result in appreciation of the value of the property? 
(3)  What effect does the existing zoning classification have on the values of adjacent and nearby property? 
(4)  What effect would the proposed zoning classification have on the values of adjacent and nearby property? 
D. A PROPOSED ZONING CLASSIFICATION SHOULD NOT HAVE AN ADVERSE EFFECT ON TRAFFIC FLOW, TRAFFIC SAFETY OR POPULATION DENSITY. 
Relevant Questions 
(1)  Is there adequate public or private parking for the proposed use and other uses permitted within the classification? 
(2)  Would such uses create any problem of traffic congestion in the area? 
(3)  Would such uses create any traffic safety problem with regard to ingress and egress, visibility or otherwise? 
(4)  Would such uses necessitate changes in streets or sidewalks or traffic signage or signalization? 
(5)  Would such uses contribute to an undesirable level of population density? 
(6)  Would such uses substantially conflict with existing density patterns in the neighborhood? 
E. A PROPOSED ZONING CLASSIFICATION SHOULD NOT HAVE ADVERSE ENVIRONMENTAL IMPACT. 
Relevant Questions 
(1)  Would the proposed use or other uses permitted within the classification create noise, dust, smoke or odors? 
(2)  Would such uses affect air quality or water quality and quantity? 
(3)  Would such uses create problems with drainage or soil erosion and sedimentation? 
(4)  Would such uses aggravate problems with flood damage control? 
(5)  Would such uses aggravate waste disposal problems? 
F. A PROPOSED ZONING CLASSIFICATION SHOULD NOT HAVE ADVERSE AESTHETIC EFFECTS. 
Relevant Questions 
(1)  Would the proposed rezoning lead to removal of existing vegetation? 
(2)  Would the proposed use incorporate new planting? 
(3)  Would the proposed use necessitate unattractive structures or result in removal or alteration of historic structures? 
(4)  Would the proposed use be visually compatible with the surrounding neighborhood? 
(5)  Would the proposed use include machinery or work visible from the street or neighboring property? 
(6)  Would the proposed use be adequately separated from conflicting uses by an appropriate buffer? 
G. A REZONING SHOULD NOT RESULT IN COSTS TO THE PUBLIC DISPROPORTIONATE TO TAX REVENUES GENERATED BY THE PROPOSED USE. 
Relevant Questions 
(1)  Would the rezoning increase the cost of government in providing public utilities, schools, streets, police and fire protection, etc.? 
(2)  What additional public facilities would be required? 
(3)  To what extent would such increased costs be offset by increased tax revenues? 
H. THE SUBJECT PROPERTY SHOULD BE SUITABLE FOR THE ZONED PURPOSES. 
Relevant Questions 
(1)  Is the property suitable for uses within the existing zoning classification? 
(2)  Has the property been vacant as zoned, and if so, for what period or periods of time? 
(3)  Are there substantial reasons why the property cannot be economically used in accordance with existing zoning? 
(4)  Would the proposed rezoning benefit the general public in any way? 
(5)  Would the proposed rezoning conform to or diverge from the comprehensive land use plan? 
* * * 
    It is obvious that the foregoing standards are very general, not at all specific, and that the public and private interests cannot be balanced with mathematical certainty in a zoning decision. Moreover, particular zoning issues which may arise, considered in context, may suggest concerns in addition to the foregoing standards and further questions which will need to be addressed by the Commission. It can only be said that any zoning decision, to be lawful, must be based on a relative gain to the public, as compared to the hardship imposed upon private parties. Such decisions must never be based simply upon the numbers of supporters or opponents or other political factors without consideration of the standards. 
Part II. Hearing Policies 
The Georgia statutory law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-5(a) provides: 
Local governments shall adopt policies and procedures which govern calling and conducting hearings [on proposed zoning decisions]. . . and printed copies of such policies and procedures shall be available for distribution to the public. 
    In keeping with the foregoing statutory requirement, the City of Brunswick has adopted the following policies and procedures to govern calling and conducting hearings on proposed zoning decisions: 
1.  All public hearings on proposed zoning decisions shall be held in the Council Room in Brunswick City Hall. 
2.  Hearings may be held at either the regular morning meetings of the City Commission-that is, on the first Wednesday of each month at 8:30 A.M.-or at the regular evening meetings of the Commission-that is, on the third Wednesday of each month at 6:30 P.M. It is generally preferred that public hearings be held at the evening meetings in order to afford more convenient public participation. 
3.  Where the hearing is related to a proposed amendment initiated by the Commission, the Commission shall determine the time for the hearing and shall cause publication of the notice required by law. 
4.  Where the hearing is related to an application for rezoning initiated by a property owner or property owners, the Planning Staff of the City of Brunswick Department of Community Development shall establish an appropriate time for the hearing and shall be responsible for giving the notice required by law. 
5.  Such hearings shall be chaired by the Mayor, or in his absence, by the Mayor Pro Tem. 
6.  Upon opening the hearing, the presiding officer shall determine the number and identity of attendees who wish to speak in support of or opposition to the proposed zoning decision. 
7.  The presiding officer may then impose a reasonable time limit upon the individual speakers in attendance, which shall apply equally to all; provided, however, that an applicant for rezoning shall be given adequate time to present his argument. 
8.  Next in order, the presiding officer shall call for the recommendation of the Planning Staff and the reasons upon which the recommendation is based. 
9.  Following the presentation of the staff recommendation, the presiding officer shall call upon an applicant for rezoning, if any, or his representative to present his case. 
10.  The presiding officer shall then allow other citizens present to speak in support of the proposed zoning decision. 
11.  The presiding officer shall then allow other citizens present to speak in opposition to the proposed zoning decision. 
12.  The presiding officer shall then allow an applicant or his representative a brief opportunity for rebuttal, following which there shall be no further comment on the application from the audience. 
13.  The presiding officer shall then open the floor for discussion of the issues among the members of the City Commission and shall direct the discussion to a consideration of the standards set forth in Part I hereinabove. 
14.  As part of its decision the Commission shall show that the decision is not based on the numbers of supporters or opponents or other personal or political considerations. 
15.  The minutes of the hearing shall reflect the specific reasons for the decision of the City Commission. 
(Ord. No. 1006, § 1, 11-19-2008) 
Chapter 24 - CODE OF ETHICS 

Sec. 24-1. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this code of ethics is to: 
(a)  Encourage high ethical standards in official conduct by city officials; 
(b)  Establish guidelines for ethical standards of conduct for all such officials by setting forth those acts or actions that are incompatible with the interest of the city; 
(c)  Require disclosure by such officials of private financial or other interest in matters affecting the city; and 
(d)  Serve as a basis for disciplining those who refuse to abide by its terms. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-2. - Scope. 
    The provisions of this code of ethics shall be applicable to all elected or appointed city officials. 
    Notwithstanding anything herein to the contrary, state law and the charter of the city shall be controlling in the event of an actual conflict with the provisions of this code of ethics. This chapter shall be interpreted to supplement, and not replace, said provisions of state law and the charter. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-3. - Definitions. 
    Solely for the purpose of this code of ethics: 
(a)  City official or official , unless otherwise expressly defined does not include city employees but does mean the mayor, members of the city commission, municipal court judges (including substitute judges), city manager, city clerk, city attorney, and all other persons holding positions designated by the City Charter, as amended. The term "city official" also includes all individuals, including city employees, appointed by the mayor and/or city commission as appropriate to city authorities, commissions, committees, boards, task forces, or other bodies which can or may vote or take formal action or make official recommendations to the mayor and/or city commission. 
(b)  Decision means any ordinance, resolution, contract, franchise, formal action or other matter voted on by the city commission or other city board or commission, as well as the discussions or deliberations of the city commission, board, or commission which can or may lead to a vote or formal action by that body. 
(c)  Employee means any person who is a full-time or part-time employee of the city. 
(d)  Immediate family means the spouse, mother, father, grandparent, brother, sister, son or daughter of any city official related by blood, adoption or marriage. The relationship by marriage shall include in-laws. 
(e)  Incidental interest means an interest in a person, entity or property which is not a substantial interest as defined herein and which has insignificant value. 
(f)  Remote interest means an interest of a person or entity, including a city official, which would be affected in the same way as the general public. For example, the interest of an official in the property tax rate, general city fees, city utility charges or a comprehensive zoning ordinance or similar matters is deemed remote to the extent that the official would be affected in common with the general public. 
(g)  Substantial interest means an interest, either directly or through a member of the immediate family, in another person or entity, where: 
(1)  The interest is ownership of five percent or more of the voting stock, shares or equity of the entity or ownership of $5,000.00 or more of the equity or market value of the entity; or 
(2)  The funds received by the person from the other person or entity during the previous 12 months either equal or exceed (a) $5,000.00 in salary, bonuses, commissions or professional fees, or $5,000.00 in payment for goods, products or services, or (b) ten percent of the recipient's gross income during that period, whichever is less; or 
(3)  The person serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors or other governing board of a for-profit entity other than a corporate entity owned or created by the city commission; or 
(4)  The person is a creditor, debtor, or guarantor of the other person or entity in an amount of $5,000.00 or more. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-4. - Prohibitions. 
(a)  No city official shall use such position to secure special privileges or exemptions for himself or herself or others, or to secure confidential information for any purpose other than official duties on behalf of the city. 
(b)  No city official, in any matter before the city commission or other city body, relating to a person or entity in which the official has a substantial interest, shall fail to disclose for the record such interest prior to any discussion or vote or fail to recuse himself or herself from such discussion or vote as applicable. 
(c)  No city official shall act as an agent or attorney for another in any matter before the city commission or other city body. 
(d)  No city official shall directly or indirectly receive, or agree to receive, any compensation, gift, reward, or gratuity in any matter or proceeding connected with, or related to, the duties of his office except as may be provided by law. 
(e)  No city official shall enter into any contract with, or have any interest in, either directly or indirectly, the city except as authorized by state law. 
(1)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to the professional activities of the city attorney in his or her work as an independent contractor and legal advisor on behalf of the city. 
(2)  This prohibition shall not be applicable to an otherwise valid employment contract between the city and a city official who is not elected (such as, by way of example, a city manager, city administrator or chief of police). 
(3)  Any official who has a proprietary interest in an agency doing business with the city shall make that interest known in writing to the city commission and the city clerk. 
(f)  All public funds shall be used for the general welfare of the people and not for personal economic gain. 
(g)  Public property shall be disposed of in accordance with state law. 
(h)  No city official shall solicit or accept other employment to be performed, or compensation to be received, while still a city official if the employment or compensation could reasonably be expected to impair such official's judgment or performance of city duties. 
(i)  If a city official accepts or is soliciting a promise of future employment from any person or entity who has a substantial interest in a person, entity or property which would be affected by any decision upon which the official might reasonably be expected to act, investigate, advise, or make a recommendation, the official shall disclose the fact to the city commission and shall recuse himself or herself and take no further action on matters regarding the potential future employer. 
(j)  No city official shall use city facilities, personnel, equipment or supplies for private purposes, except to the extent such are lawfully available to the public. 
(k)  No city official shall grant or make available to any person any consideration, treatment, advantage or favor beyond that which it is the general practice to grant or make available to the public at large. 
(l)  A city official shall not directly or indirectly make use of, or permit others to make use of, official information not made available to the general public for the purpose of furthering a private interest. 
(m)  A city official shall not use his or her position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to such official or persons within the official's immediate family, or those with whom the official has business or financial ties amounting to a substantial interest. 
(n)  A city official shall not order any goods and services for the city without prior official authorization for such an expenditure. No city official shall attempt to obligate the city nor give the impression of obligating the city without proper prior authorization. 
(o)  No city official shall draw travel funds or per diem from the city for attendance at meetings, seminars, training or other educational events and fail to attend such events without promptly reimbursing the city therefore. 
(p)  No city official shall attempt to unduly influence the outcome of a case before the Municipal Court of the City of Brunswick nor shall any city official engage in ex parte communication with a Municipal Court Judge of the City of Brunswick on any matter pending before the Municipal Court of the City of Brunswick. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-5. - Conflict of interest. 
(a)  A city official may not participate in a vote or decision on a matter affecting an immediate family member or any person, entity, or property in which the official has a substantial interest. 
(b)  A city official who serves as a corporate officer or member of the board of directors of a nonprofit entity must disclose their interest in said entity to the mayor and city commission prior to participating in a vote or decision regarding funding of the entity by or through the city. 
(c)  Where the interest of a city official in the subject matter of a vote or decision is remote or incidental, the city official may participate in the vote or decision and need not disclose the interest. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-6. - Board of ethics. 
(a)  The board of ethics of the city shall consist of three residents of the city, one appointed by the mayor, one appointed by the city commission, and the third appointed by the mayor and approved by a majority of the city commission. 
(b)  All members of the board of ethics shall be residents of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident while serving on the board. 
(c)  All members of the board of ethics shall serve a three-year term. 
(d)  No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if the person has, or has had within the preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract or contracting opportunity with the city or has been employed by the city. 
(e)  Members of the board of ethics with any permit or rezoning application pending before the city, or any pending or potential litigation against the city or any city official charged in the complaint shall be disqualified from serving on the board of ethics for that complaint. An alternate member of the board of ethics shall be selected in the same manner as the disqualified individual. 
(f)  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The city commission shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics and, subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary for the board to perform its duties and responsibilities. 
(g)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who has been convicted of a felony involving moral turpitude in this state or any other state, unless such person's civil rights have been restored and at least ten years have elapsed from the date of the completion of the sentence without a subsequent conviction of another felony involving moral turpitude. 
(h)  No person shall serve on the board of ethics who is less than 21 years of age, who holds a public elective office, who is physically or mentally unable to discharge the duties of a member of the board of ethics, or who is not qualified to be a registered voter in the City of Brunswick. 
(i)  Upon appointment, members of the board of ethics shall sign an affidavit attesting to their qualification to serve as a member of the board of ethics. 
(j)  Members of the board of ethics may be removed by majority vote of the city governing authority. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-7. - Receipt of complaints. 
(a)  All complaints against city officials shall be filed with the board of ethics, who may require that oral complaints, and complaints illegibly or informally drawn, be reduced to a memorandum of complaint in such form as may be prescribed by the city commission or the board of ethics. Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the chair of the board of ethics shall forward a copy of the complaint to the city official or officials charged in the complaint within no more than seven calendar days. 
(b)  All complaints shall be submitted and signed under oath, shall be legibly drawn and shall clearly address matters within the scope of this chapter. 
(c)  Upon receipt of a complaint in proper form, the board shall review it to determine whether the complaint is unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fails to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city commission. The board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing complaints that it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city commission; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. For complaints that are not dismissed, the board of ethics is empowered to collect evidence and information concerning any complaint and add the findings and results of its investigations to the file containing such complaint. 
(d)  Upon completion of its investigation of a complaint, the board of ethics is empowered to dismiss in writing those complaints which it determines are unjustified, frivolous, patently unfounded or which fail to state facts sufficient to invoke the disciplinary jurisdiction of the city commission; provided, however, that a rejection of such complaint by the board of ethics shall not deprive the complaining party of any action such party might otherwise have at law or in equity against the city official. 
(e)  The board of ethics is empowered to conduct investigations, to take evidence, and to hold hearings to address the subject matter of a complaint. 
(f)  The board of ethics is empowered to adopt forms for formal complaints, notices, and any other necessary or desirable documents within its jurisdiction where the city commission has not prescribed such forms. 
(g)  Findings of the board of ethics shall be submitted to the city commission for action. 
(h)  To discourage the filing of ethics complaints solely for political purposes, complaints will not be accepted against a person seeking election as a city official, whether currently serving as a city official or not, from the date qualifying opens for the elected office at issue through the date the election results for that office are certified. The time for filing complaints will not run during this period. Properly filed complaints will be accepted and processed after the election results have been certified. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-8. - Service of complaint. 
    The city clerk or board of ethics as appointed herein set forth shall cause the complaint to be served on the city official charged as soon as practicable but in no event later than seven calendar days after receipt of a proper, verified complaint. Service may be by personal service, by certified mail, return receipt requested or by statutory overnight delivery. A hearing shall be held within 60 calendar days after filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct hearings in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, at least one hearing shall include the taking of testimony and the cross-examination of available witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to mayor and city commission within seven calendar days after completion of the final hearing. At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the city official who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the hearing and the allegations at least seven calendar days before the first hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence and witnesses and, to oppose or try to mitigate the allegations. The city official subject to the inquiry shall have also have the right but not the obligation of submitting evidence and calling witnesses. Failure to comply with any of time deadlines in this section of the ordinance shall not invalidate any otherwise valid complaint or in any way affect the power or jurisdiction of the board of ethics or the city commission to act upon any complaint. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-9. - Right to appeal. 
(a)  Any city official or complainant adversely affected by the findings or recommendations of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision as provided in this section. 
(b)  An action for judicial review may be commenced by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the Superior Court of Glynn County within 30 days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing of such application shall act as supersedeas. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Sec. 24-10. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article is subject to: 
(a)  Public reprimand or censure by the city commission; or 
(b)  Request for resignation by the city commission. 
(Ord. No. 1041, § 1, 5-6-2015) 
Chapter 25 - CLEAN COMMUNITY ORDINANCE[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 1047, § 1, adopted April 5, 2017, set out provisions intended for use as Ch. 24. For purposes of clarity, and at the editor's discretion, these provisions have been included as Ch. 25. 

Sec. 25-1. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known and may be cited as the "The City of Brunswick's Clean Community Ordinance." 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-1.1. - Preamble. 
    The City of Brunswick, Georgia possesses unique natural assets and amenities which enhance the value and enjoyment of the community by residents, businesses and visitors. These assets are irreplaceable and must be preserved and protected in order to: Allow the public's continued enjoyment of these natural resources, enhance property values, prevent nuisances, protect public health and safety, and protect the safety of wildlife. Thus, this chapter is intended to provide for the uniform prohibition throughout the city limits of the City of Brunswick of any and all littering on public or private property. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-1.2. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words and their derivations shall have the meaning given herein: 
    Aircraft: Any contrivance now known but is not limited to or hereafter invented, used or designated for navigation or for flight in the air. The term "aircraft" includes helicopters and lighter-than-air dirigibles and balloons. 
    Authorized receptacle: A container, not to exceed 95 gallons, of substantial construction, with tight-fitting lid and equipped with handles sufficient for safe and convenient handling. Such receptacles shall be maintained in a serviceable condition at all times. 
    The City of Brunswick or the city: The City of Brunswick, Georgia a municipal corporation of the State of Georgia. 
    Commercial handbill: Any printed or written matter, any sample or device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature: 
(1)  Which advertises for sale any merchandise, product, event, commodity or thing; 
(2)  Which directs attention to any business or mercantile or commercial establishment or other activity, for the purpose of either directly or indirectly promoting the interest thereof; 
(3)  Which directs attention to or advertises any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or any event of any kind for which an admission fee is charged for the purpose of private gain or profit; but the terms of this section shall not apply where an admission fee is charged or a collection is taken up for the purpose of defraying the expenses incident to such meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition, or event of any kind, when it is held or given or takes place in connection with the dissemination of information. Provided, however, that nothing contained in this section shall be deemed to authorize the holding, giving or taking place of any meeting, theatrical performance, exhibition or event of any kind without a license, where such license is or may be required by law of this state or under any ordinance of the city; or 
(4)  Which, while containing reading matter other than advertising matter, is predominantly and essentially an advertisement and is distributed or circulated for advertising purposes for the private benefit and gain of any person so engaged as an advertiser or distributor. 
    Discard: To get rid of as unwanted any physical material, substance or thing which has been left, dropped, placed, thrown, dumped or otherwise disposed of in a manner or place that does not reasonably suggest an intent to preserve, protect or retain the use or possession of that which is left. 
    Disposal site: A location for the final disposal of solid waste, putrescible waste, hazardous waste or other waste, except this term shall not be deemed to include land or a facility used for the disposal of solid waste or other waste from a single-family dwelling by the owner, occupant or lessee thereof. 
    Garbage: The by-product of animal or vegetable food resulting from the handling, preparation, cooking and consumption of food, or other matter which is subject to decomposition, decay, putrefaction or the generation of noxious or offensive gases or odor, or which during or after decay may serve as breeding areas or feeding material for flies, insects or animals. 
    Hazardous refuse: Materials that are harmful to humans, animals, or environmental health, such as poisons, acids, caustics matter or solutions, chemicals, infected materials, offal, fecal matter, explosives, sewage sludge, radioactive materials and highly flammable substances. 
    Industrial waste: All waste, including solids, semisolids, sludge and liquids, created by factories, processing plants or other manufacturing concerns. 
    Litter: "Litter" means all forms of discarded materials including but not limited to sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, animal waste, bottles, glass, cans, boxes, containers, unclaimed papers or paper products, all tobacco products, tires, appliances, furniture, tree and landscape materials, grass trimmings, leaves, mechanical equipment or parts, building or construction materials, tools, machinery, wood, motor vehicles and motor vehicle parts, vessels, aircraft equipment, waste oil, batteries, antifreeze, sludge, or any other discarded material or substance of every kind and description. 
    Newspaper: Any newspaper of general circulation as defined by general law, any newspaper duly entered with the United States Postal Service in accordance with federal statute or regulation, and any newspaper filed and recorded with any recording officer as provided by general law; and, in addition thereto, includes any periodical or current magazine, regularly published with not less than four issues per year and sold to the public. 
    Noncommercial handbill: Any printed or written matter, any sample, device, dodger, circular, leaflet, pamphlet, newspaper, magazine, paper, booklet, or any other printed or otherwise reproduced original or copies of any matter of literature not included in the aforesaid definitions of a commercial handbill or newspaper. 
    Park: A park, reservation, playground, beach, recreation center or any other public area in the city, owned or used by the city and devoted to active or passive recreation. 
    Person: An individual, firm, company, partnership, corporation, association, institution, or other legal entity. 
    Public or private property: Means the right-of-way of any road, street, highway, alley, or thoroughfare; any body of water or watercourse, including any river, channel, ditch, canal, stream, and marshland; any tidal or coastal water or the shores or beaches thereof; any park, playground, sidewalk, or public building and the grounds thereof; any refuge, conservation, or recreation area; any residential, private, or farm properties; any timberlands or forests; any dumpsters or litter receptacles; and any other site, place, or location of every kind and description. 
    Vehicle: Every device in, upon or by which any person or property is or may be transported or drawn upon a highway, including devices used exclusively upon stationary rails or tracks. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-2. - Littering. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw, leave, discard, place, discharge, dispose, drop or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, leaving, discarding, placing, discharging, disposing, or dropping of litter on any public or private property in the city limits of the city or any waters located within the city limits of the city, unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the city or an agency of the State of Georgia for the disposal of litter and the person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on the property and the person is authorized or permitted to place litter in such litter receptacle or container; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-3. - Placement of litter in receptacles so as to prevent scattering. 
    Persons placing litter in public receptacles or in authorized receptacles shall do so in such a manner as to prevent it from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public or private property. If a public trash or recycling receptacle is full, persons are responsible for finding another lawful place to dispose of litter properly. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-3.1. - Sweeping litter into gutter prohibited; keeping sidewalk clean-Generally. 
    No person shall sweep or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. No persons shall sweep, blow or dump litter, leaves or other yard waste unto streets, sidewalks, roadsides, parks, or unto others private property. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-3.2. - Same-Merchant's duty. 
    No person owning or occupying a place of business shall sweep into or deposit in any gutter, street or other public place within the city the accumulation of litter from any building or lot or from any public or private sidewalk or driveway. Persons owning or occupying places of business within the city shall keep their business premises free of litter. Merchants are required to use their own trash receptacles and not place business waste in the public trash receptacles. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-4. - Maintenance of general property. 
    All owners or occupants of property shall maintain their property in a litter-free condition. No sweeping into sidewalks, streets, gutters or drains. No person shall sweep into or deposit on any street, sidewalk or gutter or into or adjacent to any drainage structure the accumulation of litter from any building or property. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-5. - Special refuse disposal. 
    Contagious disease refuse. The removal of clothing, bedding or other refuse from places where highly infectious diseases have prevailed shall not be placed in receptacles or bulk containers for regular collection. The producers of pathological wastes, or the owners of premises upon which pathological waste is produced shall arrange for disposal of such waste adhering to all federal, state and local laws. 
    Disposal of needles or hypodermic instruments. Any person who uses, disposes of, or discards any hypodermic syringes, hypodermic needles, or devices for making hypodermic injections shall be required to dispose of these instruments into containers that are puncture resistant, leak proof on the bottom and sides, sealable, labeled and color coded as biohazardous materials. Any person who uses disposable needles shall be required to dispose of these in containers that are rigid, puncture resistant and leak proof, and which are taped closed or tightly lidded to completely contain the contents therein and prevent any spillage. Said containers shall be disposed of in a manner that adheres to all federal, state and local laws. 
    Cardboard boxes and cartons. Prior to depositing refuse for collection in authorized containers or receptacles or in commercial containers, the person disposing of any such boxes or cartons or the person in charge of the premises shall collapse all cardboard boxes and cartons. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Secs. 25-6-25-8. - Reserved. 
Sec. 25-9. - Litter thrown by persons in vehicles. 
    No person, while a driver or passenger in a vehicle, shall throw or deposit litter upon any street or other public place within the city or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-9.1. - Truck loads and vehicles causing litter. 
(a)  No person shall drive or move any truck or other vehicle within the city unless such vehicle is so constructed or loaded as to prevent any loads, contents or litter from being blown or deposited upon any street, alley or other public place. Nor shall any person drive or move any vehicle or truck within the city the wheels or tires of which carry onto or deposit in any street, alley or other public place mud, concrete, liquid wastes, paints, or hazardous substances, litter or foreign matter of any kind. 
(b)  No person shall drive or move any loaded truck or other vehicle within or upon the city road or any other public road within the city unless such vehicle and the load therein are covered by canvas or other protective material providing complete coverage, properly secured, so as to prevent any load, contents or litter from becoming loose, detached or blown from the vehicle or from dropping or escaping from the vehicle during movement of the vehicle. No person shall drive or move a motor vehicle that is open to air such as truck beds, jeeps, and convertibles with unsecured trash or litter being open to air. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-10. - Litter in parks. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter in any park within the city except in public receptacles. Litter shall be deposited in such receptacle to prevent the litter from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any part of the park or upon any street or other public place. Where public receptacles are not provided or are filled to capacity, all such litter shall be carried away from the park by the person responsible for its presence and properly disposed of elsewhere as provided herein. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-11. - Litter in oceans, streams and rivers, etc. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any litter in any ocean, pond, lake, river or stream, bay, marsh, fountain, or other body of water in a park or elsewhere within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-12. - Throwing or distributing commercial handbills in public places. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city. Nor shall any such person hand out or distribute or sell any commercial handbill in any public place; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful on any sidewalk, street or other public place within the city for any person to hand out or distribute, without charge to the receiver thereof, any noncommercial handbill to any person willing to accept it. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-12.1. - Placing commercial and noncommercial handbills on vehicles. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial nor noncommercial handbill in or upon any vehicle; provided, however, it shall not be unlawful in any public place for a person to hand out or distribute without charge to the receiver thereof a noncommercial handbill to any occupant of a vehicle who is willing to accept it in person. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-12.2. - Evidence of violating sections. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to direct, order or instigate the placing of commercial or noncommercial handbills in violation of sections 3-12-15, 3-12-16, and 3-12-17. Furthermore, in the prosecution for the violation of these sections, the fact that a person, a product or a place of business is advertised on a commercial or noncommercial handbill shall be prima facie evidence that the person advertised, or the proprietor of the product advertised, or the proprietor of the place of business advertised, as the case may be, was the person directing the placing, distributing or throwing away the advertising matter in question. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-12.3. - Depositing commercial and noncommercial handbills on uninhabited or vacant premises. 
    No person shall throw or deposit any commercial or noncommercial handbill or any newspaper in or upon any private premises which are temporarily or continuously vacant. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-12.4. - Distribution of handbills where properly posted. 
    No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill or any newspaper upon any private premises if requested by any person thereon not to do so, or if there is placed on such premises in a conspicuous position near the entrance thereof a sign bearing the words: "No Trespassing," "No Vendors," "No advertisement," or any similar notice indicating in any manner that the occupants of such premises do not desire to have their right of privacy disturbed or to have any such handbills left upon such premises. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-12.5. - Distributing commercial and noncommercial handbills at inhabited private premises. 
(a)  No person shall throw, deposit or distribute any commercial or noncommercial handbill in or upon private premises which are inhabited, except by handing or transmitting any such handbill directly to the owner, occupant or other person then present in or upon such private premises; provided, however, in case of inhabited private premises which are not posted, as provided in this chapter, such person, unless requested by any person upon such premises not to do so, may place or deposit any such handbill in or upon such inhabited private premises if such handbill is so placed or deposited as to secure or prevent such handbill from being blown or drifted about such premises or sidewalks, streets or other public places and except that mail boxes may not be so used when so prohibited by federal postal law or regulations. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the distribution of mail by the United States nor to newspapers (as defined herein), except that newspapers shall be placed on private property in such a manner as to prevent their being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon private property. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-12.6. - Posting notices prohibited. 
    No person shall post or affix any notice, poster, handbills or other paper or device, calculated to attract the attention of the public, to any lamppost, public utility pole or tree, sign or upon any public structure or building, except as may be authorized or required by law. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-13. - Litter on occupied private property. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any occupied property within the city, whether owned by such person or not, except that the owner or person in control of private property may maintain authorized receptacles for collection in such a manner that litter will be prevented from being carried or deposited by the elements upon any street, sidewalk or other public place or upon any private property. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-13.1. - Dropping litter from watercraft, aircraft. 
    No person in a watercraft or aircraft shall throw out, drop or deposit any litter within the city. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-13.2. - Private property to be maintained free of litter. 
    The owner, occupant, or person in control of any private property shall at all times maintain the premises free of litter; provided, however, this section shall not prohibit the storage of litter in authorized receptacles for collection. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-13.3. - Litter on vacant lots. 
    No person shall throw or deposit litter on any open or vacant private property within the city, whether owned by such person or not. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-14. - Anti-graffiti ordinance. 
(a)  Graffiti is a public nuisance and destructive of the rights and values of property owners as well as the entire community. This chapter is not intended to conflict with any existing anti-graffiti state laws. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the following words shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  Aerosol paint container means any aerosol container that is adapted or made for the purpose of applying spray paint or other substances capable of defacing property. 
(2)  Broad-tipped marker means any felt tip indelible marker or similar implement with a flat or angled writing surface that, at its broadest width, is greater than one-fourth of an inch, containing ink or other pigmented liquid that is not water soluble. 
(3)  Etching equipment means any tool, device, or substance that can be used to make permanent marks on any natural or man-made surface. 
(4)  Graffiti means any unauthorized inscription, word, figure, painting or other defacement that is written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by any graffiti implement, to the extent that the graffiti was not authorized in advance by the owner or occupant of the property, or, despite advance authorization, is otherwise deemed a public nuisance by the city commission. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to apply graffiti to any natural or man-made surface on any city-owned property or, without the permission of the owner or occupant, on any non-city-owned property. 
(d)  Any person applying graffiti on public or private property shall have the duty to remove the graffiti within 24 hours after notice by the city or private owner of the property involved. Such removal shall be done in a manner prescribed by the chief of police, the director of the department of public works, or any additional city department head, as authorized by the city commission. Any person applying graffiti shall be responsible for the removal or for the payment of the removal. Failure of any person to remove graffiti or pay for the removal shall constitute an additional violation of this chapter. Where graffiti is applied by an unemancipated minor, the parents or legal guardian shall also be responsible for such removal or for the payment for the removal. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Sec. 25-15. - Penalties. 
(a)  Any person who violates the City of Brunswick Litter Ordinance shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows; 
(b)  The punishment imposed for any violation of this chapter shall not exceed a fine of $1,000.00 or 60 days imprisonment or both; however, the minimum fine which will be imposed shall be not less than $500.00 for a first offense, $750.00 for a second offense, and $1,000.00 for a third or subsequent offense. Each occurrence such violation is committed or permitted to continue shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as such hereunder; 
(c)  The person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public property or private right-of-way, for a distance not to exceed two miles, any litter the person has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence; 
(d)  The person may be directed to pick up and remove from any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that the person has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon prior to the date of execution of sentence so long as the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such private property has given prior permission; or 
(e)  If in the sound discretion of the judge of the municipal court, removal of the litter by the person would be unsafe, impractical, not feasible, or impossible, the person may be directed to reimburse the city for the cost of removal and/or cleanup of the litter that the person deposited on public property. 
(f)  The judge of the municipal court may publish the names of persons convicted of violating this chapter. 
(Ord. No. 1047, § 1, 4-5-2017) 
Chapter 26 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORDINANCE 

Sec. 26-1. - Regulations continued in effect. 
    All ordinances, resolutions, motions and orders pertaining to civil defense, emergency management and disaster relief, which are not in conflict with this chapter, are continued in full force and effect. Such ordinances, etc., are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 10-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-2. - Emergency management and response powers. 
    Declaration of local emergency: 
(a)  Grant of authority. In the event of an actual or threatened occurrence of a disaster or emergency, which may result in the large-scale loss of life, injury, property damage or destruction or in the major disruption of routine community affairs, business or governmental operations in the city and which is of sufficient severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary assistance by federal, state and local departments and agencies to supplement the efforts of available public and private resources, the mayor may declare a local emergency for the City of Brunswick. The form of the declaration shall be similar to that provided in subsection (b) of this Code section. 
(b)  Request for state assistance. Consistent with a declaration of local emergency, the mayor may request the governor to provide assistance, provided that the disaster or emergency is beyond the capacity of the city to meet adequately and state assistance is necessary to supplement local efforts to save lives and protect property, public health and safety, or to avert or lessen the threat of a disaster. 
(c)  Continuance. The declaration of local emergency shall continue until the mayor finds that emergency conditions no longer exist, at which time, the mayor shall execute and file with the city clerk a document marking the end of the state of emergency. No state of local emergency shall continue for longer than 30 days, unless renewed by the mayor. The city board of commissioners may, by resolution end a state of local emergency at any time. 
(d)  Effect of declaration of local emergency. 
(1)  Activation of emergency operations plan. A declaration of emergency by the governor or a declaration of local emergency by the mayor shall automatically activate the local emergency operations plan and shall be authority for the deployment of personnel and use of any forces to which the plan applies and for use or distribution of any supplies, equipment, materials, and facilities assembled, stockpiled or arranged to be made available pursuant to the Georgia Emergency Management Act or any other laws applicable to emergencies or disasters. 
a.  The city manager and/or his/her designees shall have the legal authority to exercise the powers and discharge the duties conferred by law, including the implementation of the applicable local emergency operations plan, coordination of the emergency responses of public and private agencies and organizations, coordination of recovery efforts with county, state and federal officials, and inspection of emergency or disaster sites. 
b.  In responding to the emergency and conducting necessary and appropriate survey of the damages caused by the emergency, the city manager or his/her designee is authorized to enter at a reasonable time upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety, and welfare of the public. 
c.  The city manager is authorized to execute a right of entry and/or agreement to use property for these purposes on behalf of the city; however, any such document shall be later presented for ratification by the city board of commissioners. 
d.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the city who requests entry for purposes of evaluating sites involved with emergency management functions to protect the health, safety, or welfare of the public, and who presents appropriate credentials. Nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while that individual is in the process of carrying out his or her official duties. 
(2)  Emergency powers. Following a declaration of emergency and during the continuance of such state of emergency, the mayor is authorized to implement local emergency measures to protect life and property or to bring the emergency situation under control. In exercising this authority, the mayor may cause to become effective any of the sections of this chapter as appropriate. If any of these sections is included in a declaration of local emergency, the same shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be in effect until the declaration of local emergency has terminated. 
(3)  Authority to waive procedures and fees. Pursuant to a declaration of emergency, the city governing authority is authorized to cause to be effective any of the subsections of section 25-4 of this chapter as appropriate. The implementation of such subsections shall be filed in the office of the city clerk. 
(4)  Additional emergency powers. The city manager shall have and may exercise for such period as the declared emergency exists or continues, the following additional emergency powers: 
a.  To direct and compel the evacuation of all or part of the population from any stricken or threatened area, for the preservation of life or other disaster mitigation, response or recovery; 
b.  To prescribe routes, modes of transportation and destinations in connection with evacuation; 
c.  To make provision for the availability and use of temporary emergency housing, emergency shelters and/or emergency medical shelters; 
d.  To transfer the direction, personnel or functions of any city departments and agencies or units thereof for the purpose of performing or facilitating emergency services; 
e.  To utilize all available resources of the city and subordinate agencies over which the city has budgetary control as reasonably necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster; 
f.  To utilize public property when necessary to cope with the emergency or disaster or when there is compelling necessity for the protection of lives, health and welfare; and/or the property of citizens; 
g.  To suspend any law, code provision or regulation prescribing the procedures for conduct of city business, or the orders, rules or regulations of any city agency, if strict compliance with any ordinance, resolution, order, rule or regulation would in any way prevent, hinder or delay necessary action in coping with the emergency or disaster, provided that such suspension shall provide for the minimum deviation from the requirements under the circumstances and further provided that, when practicable, specialists shall be assigned to avoid adverse effects resulting from such suspension; 
h.  To provide benefits to citizens upon execution of an intergovernmental agreement for grants to meet disaster-related necessary expenses or serious needs of individuals or families adversely affected by an emergency or disaster in cases where the individuals or families are unable to meet the expenses or needs from other means, provided that such grants are authorized only when matching state or federal funds are available for such purposes; 
i.  To perform and exercise such other functions, powers and duties as may be deemed necessary to promote and secure the safety and protection of the civilian population, including individuals with household pets and service animals prior to, during, and following a major disaster or emergency. 
(e)  Form of declaration. Upon the declaration of local emergency, an official "Declaration of Local Emergency," in substantially the same form set forth below, shall be signed and filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be communicated to the citizens of the affected area using the most effective and efficient means available. The declaration shall state the nature of the emergency or disaster, the conditions that require the declaration and any sections of this chapter which shall be in effect. 
"DECLARATION OF LOCAL EMERGENCY 
    WHEREAS, the City of Brunswick, Georgia has experienced an event of critical significance as a result of [DESCRIPTION OF EVENT] on [DATE]; and 
    WHEREAS, in the judgment of the Mayor of the City of Brunswick, there exist emergency circumstances located in [DESCRIBE GEOGRAPHIC LOCATION] requiring extraordinary and immediate corrective actions for the protection of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the City of Brunswick, including individuals with household pets and service animals; and 
    WHEREAS, to prevent or minimize injury to people and damage to property resulting from this event; 
    NOW, THEREFORE, pursuant to the authority vested in me by local and state law; 
    IT IS HEREBY DECLARED that a local state of emergency exists and shall continue until the conditions requiring this declaration are abated. 
WHEREFORE, IT IS ORDERED: 
(1)  That the applicable local emergency operations plan is hereby activated; 
(2)  That the following sections of the City of Brunswick Code be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, choose from the following: Section ____-5, Overcharging; Section ____-6, Registration of Building and Repair Services; Section ____-7, Closed or Restricted Areas and Curfews]; and 
(3)  That the following measures also be implemented: [If deemed appropriate, select items from Section ____-2(a)(4)c, d or such other measures as appropriate.] 
ENTERED at [TIME] on [DATE]. 
[Signed] 
Mayor, City of Brunswick." 
(f)  Contracts with local governments. In addition to the normal agreements embodied in the applicable local emergency operations plan for mutual emergency assistance, the city may contract with any municipality or county for the administration of a local emergency response program. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 10-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-3. - Enforcement and remedies. 
(a)  Law enforcement. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-4, city police department shall be authorized to enforce the orders, rules and regulations contained in this chapter and/or implemented by the city manager or local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(b)  Penalties. Failure to comply with any of the requirements or provisions of the regulations contained in this chapter, or with any code section, order, rule or regulation made effective by the city manager or local governing authority upon or after the declaration of an emergency shall constitute a violation of the provisions of this chapter. Any person who violates any provision in this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable by a fine not exceeding $1,000.00, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 180 days, or both such fine and imprisonment, for each violation. Each person assisting in the commission of a violation, shall be guilty of separate offenses. Each day during which a violation or failure to comply continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
(c)  Injunctive relief. In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-5, in addition to the remedies prescribed in this section, the city manager is authorized to obtain an injunction to restrain violation of laws, code sections, orders, rules and regulations which are contained in the Georgia Emergency Management Act and/or this Code, and/or which are implemented by the local governing authority during a declared emergency. 
(d)  Enforcement. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, this chapter may be enforced by the city police department. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 10-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-4. - Authority to waive procedures and fee structures. 
(a)  City business. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the affairs and business of the city may be conducted at places other than the regular or usual location, within or outside of the city, when it is not prudent, expedient or possible to conduct business at the regular location. When such meetings occur outside of the city, all actions taken by the city governing authority shall be as valid and binding as if performed within the city. Such meetings may be called by the presiding officer or any two members of the governing body without regard to or compliance with time-consuming procedures and formalities otherwise required by law. 
(b)  Public works contracts. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city may contract for public works without letting such contract out to the lowest, responsible bidder and without advertising and posting notification of such contract for four weeks; provided, however, that the emergency must be of such nature that immediate action is required and that the action is necessary for the protection of the public health, safety and welfare. Any public works contract entered into pursuant to this subsection shall be entered on the minutes of the city as soon as practical and the nature of the emergency described therein in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 36-91-22(e). Any E-Verify affidavit or other state required affidavit shall be obtained from any contractor if otherwise required by law. 
(c)  Purchasing. Upon declaration of an emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the purchasing ordinances, regulations or policies may be suspended. City officials shall continue to seek to obtain the best prices during the state of local emergency. 
(d)  Code enforcement. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city governing authority may temporarily suspend the enforcement of the ordinances of the city, or any portion thereof, where the emergency is of such nature that immediate action outside the code is required, such suspension is consistent with the protection of the public health, safety and welfare, and such suspension is not inconsistent with any federal or state statutes or regulations. 
(e)  Fees. Upon declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or the mayor, the city may temporarily reduce or suspend any permit fees, application fees or other rate structures as necessary to encourage the rebuilding of the areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" include fees or rates charged by the city for building permits, land disturbance permits, zoning applications, special land use permits, temporary land use permits and other fees relating to the reconstruction, repair and cleanup of areas impacted by the disaster or emergency. The term "fees" does not include fees collected by the city on behalf of the state or federal government or fees charged by the city pursuant to a state or federal statute or regulation. 
(f)  Temporary dwellings. Upon the declaration of a state of emergency or disaster by the governor or mayor, the city or its designees may issue temporary mobile home, trailer, recreational vehicle or other temporary dwelling structures or parks in any zoning district, even though not otherwise permitted by development code, while the primary dwelling is being repaired. The temporary permit shall not exceed six months in duration. Upon expiration of the temporary permit and/or extension, the temporary dwelling must be removed. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 10-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-5. - Registration of building and repair services. 
(a)  In accordance with O.C.G.A. § 38-3-56, before building, constructing, repairing, renovating or making improvements to any real property, including dwellings, homes, buildings, structures or fixtures within an area in the city designated in a declared emergency or disaster, any person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity must register with the city clerk and secure a building permit that is posted at the work site. Each day any such entity does business in the city without complying with this ordinance constitutes a separate offense. 
(b)  The cost of registration fees in a declared emergency or disaster is fixed at $50.00 per annum. Registration is nontransferable. The cost of the emergency building permit shall be equal to the cost for a building permit under existing regulations. The permit shall only be authorized for repairs. 
(c)  When registering, any person, partnership, corporation or other entity making application must, under oath, complete an application, providing the following information: 
(1)  Name of applicant; 
(2)  Permanent address and phone number of applicant; 
(3)  Applicant's Social Security number or federal Employer Identification number; 
(4)  If applicant is a corporation, the state and date of incorporation; 
(5)  Tag registration information for each vehicle to be used in the business; 
(6)  List of cities and/or counties where the applicant has conducted business within the past 12 months; 
(7)  Georgia sales tax number or authorization; 
(8)  Georgia business license number, if required; 
(9)  Copy of license from Secretary of State, if required; 
(10)  Signed and sworn affidavit verifying the applicant's legal presence in the United States as required by O.C.G.A. § 50-36-1. 
(11)  At least one secure and verifiable document as defined in O.C.G.A. § 50-36-2. 
(d)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. Unless otherwise specified in the declaration of emergency or otherwise extended by the city governing authority, the provisions of this Code section shall remain in effect during the state of emergency and for a subsequent recover period of three months. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 10-18-2017) 
Sec. 26-6. - Closed or restricted areas and curfews during emergency. 
(a)  To preserve, protect or sustain the life, health, welfare or safety of persons, or their property, within a designated area under a declaration of emergency, it shall be unlawful for any person to travel, loiter, wander or stroll in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, lanes, parks or other public grounds, public places, public buildings, places of amusement, eating places, vacant lots or any other place during a declared emergency between hours specified by the mayor until the curfew is lifted. 
(b)  To promote order, protect lives, minimize the potential for looting and other crimes, and facilitate recovery operations during an emergency, the mayor shall have discretion to impose reentry restrictions on certain areas. The mayor shall exercise such discretion in accordance with the applicable local emergency operations plan, which shall be followed during emergencies. 
(c)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to persons acting in the following capacities: 
(1)  Authorized and essential law enforcement personnel; 
(2)  Authorized and essential health care providers; 
(3)  Authorized and essential personnel of the city; 
(4)  Authorized National Guard or federal military personnel; 
(5)  Authorized and essential firefighters; 
(6)  Authorized and essential emergency response personnel; 
(7)  Authorized and essential personnel or volunteers working with or through an emergency management agency (EMA); 
(8)  Authorized and essential utility repair crews; 
(9)  Citizens seeking to restore order to their homes or businesses while on their own property or place of business; 
(10)  Other authorized and essential persons as designated on a list compiled by the city manager. 
(d)  Enforceability. This section shall be enforced by officers of the law enforcement personnel approved to provide aid and assistance during the emergency. Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit a law enforcement officer from bringing other charges under state law. 
(e)  Effective date. This section shall become effective only upon the signing of a declaration of emergency, stating this section is in effect. 
(Ord. No. 1051, § 1, 10-18-2017) 
APPENDIX B - SUBDIVISION REGULATIONS[1] 
ORDINANCE NO. 568 
AN ORDINANCE REGULATING THE SUBDIVISION OF LAND WITHIN THE CORPORATE LIMITS OF THE CITY OF BRUNSWICK, GLYNN COUNTY, GEORGIA; REQUIRING AND REGULATING THE PREPARATION AND PRESENTATION OF PRELIMINARY AND FINAL PLATS FOR SUCH PURPOSES; ESTABLISHING MINIMUM SUBDIVISION DESIGN STANDARDS; REQUIRING MINIMUM IMPROVEMENTS TO BE MADE OR GUARANTEED TO BE MADE BY THE SUBDIVIDER; SETTING FORTH THE PROCEDURE TO BE FOLLOWED BY THE PLANNING COMMISSION IN APPLYING THESE RULES, REGULATIONS AND STANDARDS; TO PROVIDE FOR AMENDMENT AND APPEAL PRESCRIBING PENALTIES FOR THE VIOLATION OF ITS PROVISIONS; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES. 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein are the subdivision regulations for the City of Brunswick being Ordinance No. 568 adopted on September 18, 1968 by the city commission. Amendments to the original regulations are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended sections. A uniform system of punctuation and capitalization has been used and words added for clarity have been enclosed in brackets [ ]. 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 5; flood damage prevention, ch. 11; floodproof standards for subdivisions, § 11-73; housing, ch. 12; soil erosion and sedimentation control, ch. 17; streets and sidewalks, ch. 19; utilities, ch. 22; zoning, app. A. 
State Law reference- Sales of subdivided lands, O.C.G.A. § 44-3-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - PREAMBLE AND ENACTMENT CLAUSE 
    In accordance with a comprehensive plan for the development of Brunswick and Glynn County, Georgia, and pursuant to the authority granted by the State of Georgia in the General Planning and Zoning Enabling Act of 1957, No. 358, as Amended (1957 Georgia Laws, p. 420), the Commissioners of the City of Brunswick, Georgia, do ordain and enact into law this subdivision ordinance for application to the area within the Corporate Limits of the City of Brunswick for the following purposes, among others: 
(A)  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
(B)  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments; 
(C)  To assure the adequate provision of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
(D)  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, educational and other public purposes; and 
(E)  To assure that land is developed in conformity with the Comprehensive Plan for Brunswick and Glynn County, Georgia, as amended from time to time. 
ARTICLE II. - SHORT TITLE 
    This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Subdivision Regulations of the City of Brunswick, Georgia." 
ARTICLE III. - INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

Section 300. - Interpretations. 
    For the purposes of this Ordinance, all words used in the present tense include the future tense. All words in the plural number include the singular number, and all words in the singular number include the plural number. 
    The words "shall" and "must" are mandatory, while the words "should" and "may" are permissive. 
    The terms "Brunswick" or "City" refer only to the land within the Corporate Limits of the City of Brunswick, Georgia. 
    The term "Planning Commission" refers to the Brunswick Planning and Appeals Commission. 
    The term "City Commission" refers to the Commissioners of the City of Brunswick, Georgia. 
    The term "County Health Officials" refers to the official representatives of the Glynn County Health Department charged with the responsibility of inspecting and reviewing existing and proposed sewer and water facilities. The term "State Health Officials" refers to those official representatives of the State of Georgia Health Department charged with the responsibility of inspecting and reviewing existing and proposed sewer and water facilities. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 4, 3-21-2018) 
Section 301. - Definitions. 
    For the purposes of this Ordinance, the following definitions are included here because they are deemed essential to avoid misunderstanding the intent of the provisions. Terms not specifically defined herein shall have their customary dictionary definitions when not inconsistent with the context. 
301.1 Lot. A lot is a portion or parcel of land separated from other portions or parcels by description as on a subdivision plat, or on a survey map, or as described by metes and bounds, and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. For the purposes of this Ordinance the term "lot" does not include any portion of a dedicated right-of-way. 
301.2 Plan, Comprehensive. This term refers to the Comprehensive Development Plan for the City of Brunswick, Georgia as amended. The Comprehensive Plan was originally adopted by the Planning Commission on May 15th, 1962, and by the City Commission on August 1st, 1962. 
301.3 Plan, Major Thoroughfare. This term refers to the portion of the Comprehensive Plan dealing with the long-range development of the major roads in Brunswick as a part of a total, planned transportation system. 
301.4 Plan, Sketch. A sketch plan is an informal plan, not necessarily to exact scale, indicating the existing features of a tract proposed for subdivision, as well as its surroundings, and including a general layout of the proposed subdivision. 
301.5 Plat. A plat is a diagrammatic plan or map showing the boundaries which result from the division of any tract of land into two (2) or more parcels. 
301.6 Plat, Final. A final plat is a complete and exact plan of a subdivision prepared for official recording as required by law. 
301.7 Plat, Preliminary. A preliminary plat is a tentative subdivision plan, in lesser detail than a final plat, indicating the approximate proposed layout of a subdivision as a basis for consideration prior to preparation of a final plat. 
301.8 Road. A road is a pathway for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, avenue, boulevard, thoroughfare, highway, expressway, lane, alley, circle, cul-de-sac, or other such classification. For the purposes of this Ordinance "Roads" are divided into the following categories: 
A)  Major Arterial -to provide for the continuous movement of traffic at moderately high speed from one area of the community to another, as shown on the Major Thoroughfare Plan; 
B)  Major Collector -to carry traffic between minor local roads and major arterials; 
C)  Minor Local Road -to provide access to abutting properties, but not intended to serve through traffic or intersect with arterials; 
D)  Alley or Service Drive -a minor way used for service access to the rear or side of properties otherwise abutting on a road; 
E)  Cul-de-Sac -a minor way with only one outlet and terminating at the other end in a vehicular turn-around; and 
F)  Marginal Access Road -a minor road generally parallel and adjacent to a major road providing access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
301.9 Subdivider. A subdivider is a person, firm, or corporation having such a proprietary interest in the land to be subdivided as will authorize the maintenance of proceedings to subdivide such land under this Ordinance, or the authorized agent of such person, firm or corporation for the purpose of proceeding under this Ordinance. 
301.10 Subdivision. A subdivision means all divisions of a tract of land into two (2) or more lots, building sites, or other divisions for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, legacy, or building development, and includes all division of land involving a new road or a change in existing roads, and includes resubdivision and, where appropriate to the context, relates to the process of subdividing or to the land or area subdivided; provided, however, that the following are not included within this definition: 
A)  The combination or recombination of portions of previously platted lots where the total number of lots is not increased and the resultant lots are equal to the standards of the County; and 
B)  The division of land into parcels of five (5) acres or more where no new road is involved. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 4, 3-21-2018) 
ARTICLE IV. - JURISDICTION, ENFORCEMENT, AND LEGAL STATUS 

Section 400. - Platting Authority. 
    From and after the passage of this Ordinance, the Planning Commission shall be the official platting authority, and no plat of a land subdivision within the City shall be entitled to record in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Glynn County unless it shall have the final approval of the Planning Commission inscribed thereon. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without the final approval of the Planning Commission, as required by this Ordinance, is declared to be a misdemeanor and is subject to the penalties as provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 915, § 1, 1-19-1994; Ord. No. 1055, § 4, 3-21-2018) 
Section 401. - Use of Plat. 
    The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to or exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval by the Planning Commission and duly recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Glynn County is declared to be a misdemeanor and may be enjoined or invalidated by appropriate action. In addition, such illegal use of a plat is subject to the penalties for a misdemeanor, as provided by law, for each lot or parcel so transferred, sold, or agreed to be sold. 
    The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer, or other document used in the process of selling or transfer, shall not exempt the transaction from such penalties, as stated above. 
Section 402. - Opening and Improving Roads. 
    The City Commission or other public authority shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any road or lay or authorize the laying of any utility lines in any road within the City which had not attained the legal status of a public road prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, unless such road corresponds to a road location shown on an approved subdivision plat or on the official Major Thoroughfare Plan adopted by the Planning Commission, provided that the City Commission may locate and construct, or may accept and improve any road not so platted if it first submits such proposed action to the Planning Commission for its review and recommendation. 
Section 403. - Erection of Buildings. 
    No building permit shall be issued and no building shall be erected on any lot in the City unless the road giving access thereto has been designed and approved in accordance with the provisions of this Ordinance, or unless such road had otherwise attained the legal status of a public road prior to the effective date of this Ordinance, or unless the City Commission constructs or accepts such road after review and recommendation by the Planning Commission, as provided in Section 402. 
    Any building erected in violation of this Section shall be deemed an unlawful structure and the City Building Official may bring appropriate action to enjoin such erection or cause it to be vacated or removed. 
Section 404. - More Restrictive Standards Govern. 
    Whenever the regulations of this Ordinance require more restrictive standards than are required in or under any other statutes or private deed restrictions, the requirements of this Ordinance shall govern. Whenever the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this Ordinance, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
ARTICLE V. - PREAPPLICATION PROCEDURE 

Section 500. - Preapplication Consultation. 
    Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land in the City of Brunswick is proposed, the prospective subdivider should consult early and informally with the Planning Director. 
Section 501. - Preapplication Sketch Plan. 
    After consulting with the Planning Director and generally becoming acquainted with the implications of the proposed subdivision, the subdivider should be encouraged to prepare and submit a sketch plan and other data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity, as well as the proposed layout and development of the subdivision. 
    The sketch plan should follow the suggested format of the Planning Commission (see Appendix A) and should be reviewed by both the subdivider and the Planning Director as to how it relates to the following factors: 
(A)  The Comprehensive Plan; 
(B)  The suitability of the site for development; 
(C)  The availability of necessary services and facilities, and 
(D)  The design, improvements, dedications, and reservations required by these regulations. 
    All data, correspondence and other information relating to a preapplication sketch plan shall be kept strictly confidential. 
ARTICLE VI. - PRELIMINARY PLAT PROCEDURE 

Section 600. - Preliminary Plat Application. 
    On reaching conclusions informally in preapplication consultation with the Planning Director, the subdivider, if he wishes to continue, shall prepare a complete preliminary plat application and submit it to the Planning Commission for review and tentative approval. The preliminary plat application shall include the following: 
(A)  A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the Planning Commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent; and 
(B)  Seven (7) copies of the preliminary plat along with other documents and supporting materials, as specified in Section 601. 
Section 601. - Preliminary Plat Specifications. 
    The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legible drawn at a scale not smaller than one hundred feet to one inch (100' - 1"). The sheet size shall be either eighteen inches by twenty-four inches (18" × 24") or twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" × 36"). If a complete plat cannot be shown on a single sheet of either of these sizes, it may be shown on more than one sheet, provided an index map is included on a separate sheet and all sheets are of the same size. The preliminary plat should follow the suggested format of the Planning Commission (see Appendix B) and shall include the following information: 
    601.1 Identification and Orientation Data: 
(A)  Name and location of proposed subdivision. 
(B)  Name and address of property owner and of subdivision. 
(C)  Name and address of a registered land surveyor and/or engineer who prepared the plat. 
(D)  North point, graphic scale, and date of field survey. 
    601.2 Neighborhood Data: 
(A)  Special vicinity map with north arrow and graphic scale not smaller than twelve hundred feet to one inch (1,200' - 1"). 
(B)  Location of proposed subdivision with respect to major thoroughfares, public facilities, water bodies, and other important physical features within one-half (1/2) mile of the boundaries of the subdivision. 
(C)  Zoning patterns in the area of the proposed subdivision. 
(D)  Names of all platted subdivisions adjoining the proposed subdivision. 
(E)  If the proposed subdivision constitutes a resubdivision of all or portions of a previously recorded subdivision, the name of the recorded subdivision and the portions thereof proposed for resubdivision shall be clearly indicated. 
    601.3 Site Data: 
(A)  Boundary lines of the proposed subdivision with bearings and dimensions provided, and reference made to at least two (2) permanent monuments or control points with bearings and dimensions. 
(B)  Names of owners of all adjoining property. 
(C)  Acreage of the proposed subdivision, total lots, number of lots to be developed, and minimum lot sizes. 
(D)  Existing buildings, streets, roads, utilities and easements both on and adjacent to the proposed subdivision. 
(E)  Proposed layout of the subdivision including all roads with right-of-way widths, pavement widths and proper names, lot lines, approximate bearings and dimensions, easements, land to be dedicated or reserved for public use, and land to be used or reserved for purposes other than single-family dwellings. 
(F)  Block letters and lot numbers in consecutive order. 
(G)  Minimum front yard building setback lines. 
(H)  Percolation and water table determination test sites and test results. 
(I)  Location of marsh areas, lakes, streams, ditches, borrow pits, islands, heavily wooded sections, and other major physical features within or adjoining the tract. 
(J)  When the preliminary plat application pertains to only a part of a tract in which the subdivider has an interest, the subdivider shall show a tentative road plan for all of said tract. 
    601.4 Supporting Documents and Materials: The preliminary documents and materials shall be submitted with the preliminary plat application as supporting information: 
(A)  Drainage plans showing existing conditions and proposed ground elevations at all breaks in grade, along with drainage channels or swales, and at selected points not more than one hundred feet (100') apart in all directions. Spot elevations shall be based on the datum plans of the U.S. Coast and Geodetic Survey. Location and elevation of datum to which elevations are referred shall be shown using a direction line and description of details of datum site if outside proposed subdivision. 
(B)  Utility plans showing provision for water supply, sewerage, electricity, gas, telephone, and other utilities. 
(C)  Detail plans showing proposed cross-section and centerline profiles for each street. 
(D)  Detail plans showing preliminary designs for any required bridges and culverts. 
(E)  Proposed timetable of sequence of development. 
(F)  Draft of restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become covenants in the deeds to lots to be shown on the final plat. 
(G)  Offers of dedications and reservations of land for public use, with all conditions attached thereto. 
(H)  A sewer and water facilities feasibility report as required in Section 1400 below. 
Section 602. - Preliminary Plat Submission. 
    Proposed subdivisions shall be reviewed at regular meetings of the Planning Commission. For consideration at a regular meeting of the Planning Commission, a complete preliminary plat application must be submitted to the Planning Commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of that meeting. 
Section 603. - Preliminary Plat Review. 
    Upon submittal of a complete preliminary plat application, the Planning Director shall check the material for conformance to the rules and regulations of this Ordinance. The Planning Director shall then report his findings and recommendations to the Planning Commission and the Planning Commission shall afford a public hearing of the preliminary plat. 
    Not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the public hearing the Planning Director shall send, by registered or certified mail, a notice of the time and place of the hearing to the person designated in the letter requesting a preliminary plat review. 
    The Planning Commission at the scheduled public hearing shall discuss the preliminary plat with the subdivider or his agent as to the following: 
(A)  Its conformity with these regulations and the Comprehensive Plan. 
(B)  The kind and extent of improvements to be made by the subdivider. 
(C)  The amount and location of land to be dedicated or reserved for public use by the subdivider. 
(D)  Changes considered advisable. 
Section 604. - Preliminary Plat Decision. 
    Within thirty (30) days after the submittal of a complete preliminary plat application and after the required hearing thereon, the Planning Commission shall either give its tentative approval or disapproval of the proposed subdivision. 
    If a preliminary plat is approved, the Planning Commission shall specify on at least three (3) copies what changes or additions, if any, are required before a review of a final plat, and a Certificate of Tentative Approval shall be issued on demand. 
    If a preliminary plat is disapproved, the Planning Commission shall specify on at least three (3) copies the reasons for disapproval. 
    One (1) of the copies of the preliminary plat bearing the notation of the Planning Commission action shall be returned to the subdivider, one (1) copy shall be filed with the City Manager, and one (1) copy shall be retained by the Planning Commission for its files. 
    If the Planning Commission takes no action on a preliminary plat application within thirty (30) days after the date of its submittal, the preliminary plat shall be considered approved as submitted and a Certificate of Tentative Approval shall be issued on demand. However, the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent in writing to an extension of time. 
Section 605. - Certificate of Tentative Approval. 
    A Certificate of Tentative Approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning Commission shall be inscribed on an approved plat as follows: 
Pursuant to the City of Brunswick Subdivision Regulations, all the requirements of Tentative Approval having been fulfilled, this Preliminary Plat was given Tentative Approval by the Brunswick Planning and Appeals Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
This Tentative Approval does not constitute approval of a Final Plat. 
This Certificate of Tentative Approval shall expire and be null and void on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
________________ 
(Date)       _____
Chairman, City of Brunswick Planning and Appeals Commission  
(Ord. No. 1055, § 4, 3-21-2018) 
Section 606. - Effect of Tentative Approval of Preliminary Plat. 
    Approval of a preliminary plat by the Planning Commission constitutes tentative approval of the subdivision as to the character and intensity of development, general layout, and the appropriate dimensions of streets, lots, and other planned features. Such tentative approval binds the subdivider to proceed with the preparation of a final plat and the installation of site improvements, subject to obtaining other necessary permits. 
    Approval of a preliminary plat does not constitute approval of a final plat, and accordingly, does not authorize the sale of lots or the recording of a preliminary plat. 
Section 607. - Revocation of Tentative Approval. 
    The tentative approval of a preliminary plat or any time extension thereof, may be revoked upon written notice after due public notice and hearing by the Planning Commission, where the Planning Commission feels that a material change in conditions has occurred affecting the proposed subdivision, including new information regarding the physical conditions of the site or proposed public works, which would adversely affect to a substantial degree public health, safety or welfare. 
Section 608. - Preliminary Plat Time Limitation. 
    A subdivider may, within one (1) year from the date of tentative approval of a preliminary plat, submit a formal application for the approval of a final plat, as specified in Section 700. 
    If a subdivider does not submit a final plat application within the one-year period and has not received an extension of time by the Planning Commission, as provided in Section 609, the tentative approval of the Planning Commission is voided. 
Section 609. - Preliminary Plat Time Extension. 
    Before expiration of the allowed one-year period for filing a final plat application, a subdivider may request in writing an extension of time. Where the Planning Commission finds sufficient reason, it may grant one or more six-month extensions. The decision to grant an extension shall be communicated to the subdivider in writing on or before the original expiration date. 
    When the Planning Commission has granted an extension of time, it must, prior to the review of a final plat application, determine whether the conditions on which the tentative approval of a preliminary plat was based have been substantially changed and, if so, the Planning Commission shall require the necessary changes in the preliminary plat to reflect these changed conditions. 
ARTICLE VII. - FINAL PLAT PROCEDURE 

Section 700. - Final Plat Application. 
    After the preliminary plat of a proposed subdivision has been given tentative approval, and within one (1) year from the date such tentative approval, the subdivider may submit to the Planning Commission a final plat application, the final plat application shall include the following: 
(A)  A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the Planning Commission on the final plat shall be sent; 
(B)  Seven (7) copies of the final plat, including the original tracing and at least two (2) reproducible copies, along with other documents and supporting materials, as specified in Section 701; 
(C)  An administrative fee of twenty-five ($25.00) dollars, payable to the Planning Commission; 
(D)  Exact boundary lines of the tract, determined by field survey, giving distances to the nearest one-hundredth (100th) foot and bearings to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one to five thousand (1 to 5,000); 
(E)  Exact location, pavement width, right-of-way widths, and names of all roads within an immediately adjoining tract; 
(F)  Road centerlines showing all angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, and lengths of tangents; 
(G)  Exact locations, dimensions, and purposes of any easements and other areas to be reserved or dedicated for public use; 
(H)  All lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-hundredth (100th) foot and bearings to the nearest minute; and 
(I)  Accurate location and description of monuments and markers. 
(Ord. No. 1055, § 4, 3-21-2018) 
Section 701. - Final Plat Specifications. 
    The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in permanent ink on an acceptable grade of tracing cloth or drafting film. The scale of the drawing shall not be smaller than one hundred feet to one inch (100' - 1"). The sheet size shall be either eighteen inches by twenty-four inches (18" × 24") or twenty-four inches by thirty-six inches (24" × 36"). If a complete plat cannot be shown on a single sheet of either of these sizes, it may be shown on more than one (1) sheet, provided an index map is included on a separate sheet and all sheets are of the same size. The final plat should follow the suggested format of the Planning Commission, (See Appendix C.) 
    701.1 Final Plat Data. Information contained on the final plat shall conform to and meet the specifications for the preliminary plat and include the following additional information: 
(A)  Revised Identification and Orientation Data, Neighborhood Data, and Site Data, as required by the Planning Commission in granting tentative approval of the preliminary plat; 
(B)  Exact bearings and distances to the nearest existing public road lines, bench marks, permanent monuments or other satisfactory control points; 
(C)  Municipal boundary lines tied to the lines of the subdivision when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
    701.2 Supporting Documents and Materials. The following documents and materials shall be submitted with the final plat application as supporting information: 
(A)  Final detailed plans and specifications for all improvements shown on the preliminary plat; 
(B)  A complete revised copy of the restrictions of all types which will run with the land and become covenants in the deeds to lots shown on the final plat; 
(C)  Final detailed plans and specifications for the system of sanitary sewage disposal and water supply; and 
(D)  A copy of an ordinance adopted by the City Commission accepting the streets, improvements, easements, and any other property to be dedicated by the subdivider for public use, subject to the final approval of the Planning Commission and the proper recording of the deeds; or, in lieu thereof, a letter from the City Commission certifying that an adequate performance guarantee has been posted to assure the completion of all required improvements in accordance with the standards set forth in these regulations. 
    701.3 Certifications. The following certifications shall be inscribed on all reproducible copies of the final plat: 
(A)  Certification by a registered engineer and/or land surveyor that the final plat is true and correct and was prepared from an actual survey under his supervision; and further that all monuments shown actually exist or are marked as "Future" and their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown, and further that all engineering requirements of this Ordinance have been fully complied with; 
(B)  Certification by the owner setting forth the description of the areas and improvements to be dedicated to the public and the extent of the title to be dedicated; 
(C)  Certification by the County Health Department and the City Engineer that the water supply system and sewage disposal system have been properly installed and approved; or certification by the City Manager that an adequate performance guarantee has been posted to insure the eventual installation and construction of all required water and sewer improvements at the standards required; 
(D)  Certification by the City Engineer that all road and drainage improvements required by this Ordinance have been properly installed and constructed in accordance with the required standards; or certification by the City Manager that an adequate performance guarantee has been posted to insure the eventual installation and construction of all required road and drainage improvements at the standards required. 
Section 702. - Performance Guarantee. 
    If all improvements as required by the Planning Commission in granting tentative approval of the preliminary plat are not properly installed and constructed in accordance with the required standards prior to the submission of a final plat application, the subdivider shall file with the City Manager an acceptable performance guarantee to insure future installation and construction as required. 
    The performance guarantee must be approved by the City Commission and City Attorney, and must include a specific, reasonable and satisfactory date for the completion of the necessary improvements. In no case shall the performance guarantee be valid for more than two (2) years. 
    702.1 Return of Guarantee. When the improvements have been completed and approved for conformity with these regulations the guarantee shall be released and returned. When any portion of the required improvements has been completed and approved a portion of the guarantee commensurate with the cost of these completed improvements may be released and returned. 
    702.2 Default of Guarantee. In the event the subdivider fails to install or construct the required improvements during the specific time allotted and in conformity with these regulations, the performance guarantee is forfeited to the City of Brunswick to be used for the completion of the improvements. 
Section 703. - Final Plat Submission. 
    Final plats of subdivisions shall be reviewed at regular meetings of the Planning Commission. For consideration at a regular meeting of the Planning Commission, a complete final plat application must be submitted to the Planning Director at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of that meeting. 
Section 704. - Final Plat Review. 
    Upon submittal of a completed final plat application, the Planning Director shall check the material for conformance with the tentatively approved preliminary plat and with the rules and regulations of this Ordinance. The Planning Director shall then report his findings and recommendations to the Planning Commission which shall afford a public hearing on the final plat. 
    Not less than five (5) days prior to the date of the public hearing the Planning Director shall send, by registered or certified mail, a notice of the time and place of the hearing to the person designated in the letter requesting review of the final plat. 
Section 705. - Final Plat Decision. 
    Within thirty (30) days after the submittal of a complete final plat application, and after the required hearing thereon, the Planning Commission shall either approve or disapprove the final plat. A notation of the action, including a statement of the reasons for disapproval if such is the case, shall be made on the original tracing and the two (2) reproducible copies of the final plat. If the plat is approved, the inscription shall read as indicated in Section 706 below. 
    If the final plat is disapproved, one of the copies bearing the notation of the Planning Commission action shall be returned to the subdivider, another copy shall be filed with the City Manager, and another shall be retained by the Planning Commission for its files. 
    If the Planning Commission takes no action on the final plat application within thirty (30) days after the date of its submittal, the final plat shall be considered approved as submitted and a Certificate of Approval shall be issued on demand. However, the subdivider may waive this requirement and consent to an extension of time in writing. 
Section 706. - Certificate of Final Approval. 
    If the Planning Commission approves the final plat, an inscription shall be made on each copy of the final plat as follows: 
Pursuant to the Subdivision Regulations of the City of Brunswick, Glynn County, Georgia, all requirements having been fulfilled, this Final Plat was given Approval by the City of Brunswick Planning and Appeals Commission on ____________ / ____________ / ____________ , 20 ____________ . 
______________ 
(Date) _____
Chairman, Brunswick Planning and Appeals 
Commission  
(Ord. No. 1055, § 4, 3-21-2018) 
Section 707. - Final Plat Recording. 
    Upon approval of a final plat, and within thirty (30) days, the Planning Director shall have the original tracing of the final plat recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Glynn County, Georgia. The subdivider shall be responsible for payment of the fee, as provided in Section 700.3. 
    A reproducible linen or film copy of the approved final plat, along with all certificates endorsed thereon, shall be retained for the records of the Planning Commission. In addition, the Planning Commission shall maintain an accurate public record of all other plans, documents and materials submitted to it in conjunction with a subdivision plat application, as well as the findings, decisions, and recommendations thereon. 
    Another reproducible linen or film copy of the approved final plat, along with all certificates endorsed thereon, shall be filed with the City Manager. 
ARTICLE VIII. - DEDICATIONS AND RESERVATIONS 

Section 800. - Improvements. 
    The final responsibility for the installation of the improvements required by this Ordinance at the standards imposed rests with the subdivider. Upon proper installation of these improvements, the subdivider shall take the final steps to dedicate the improvements and have them accepted by the City Commission. 
Section 801. - Effect of Recording. 
    Recording the approved final plat constitutes a dedication of all public roads to public use, a dedication of all neighborhood parks and other public areas to public use, and a reservation for possible future public acquisition of such additional areas as may be required by the Planning Commission or the City Commission. 
Section 802. - Effect of Offers of Dedication. 
    The offer to dedicate roads, parks or other areas or portions of them, does not impose any obligation upon the City Commission concerning maintenance or improvements until the City Commission has made actual appropriation by ordinance, by entry, or by improvement. 
    If land is dedicated for public use and such use is not imminent, the subdivider may be permitted to dedicate the land with the privilege of using the surface rights until the City Commission is ready to use the land. Such dedication with the temporary privilege of use shall be noted on the final plat. 
Section 803. - Effect of Land Reservation. 
    On sites reserved for eventual public acquisition, no building development is permitted during the period of reservation. The Planning Commission may require the reservation of such sites in addition to land to be dedicated for public use. The reservation period shall not be longer than eighteen (18) months, unless with the consent of the subdivider. Land reserved for public acquisition, along with the period of reservation, shall be indicated on the final plat. 
Section 804. - Dedication of Local Recreation Sites. 
    Where a proposed park, playground, open space, or other local or neighborhood recreation site is shown on the Comprehensive Plan, or where the Planning Commission considers that a local recreation site is necessary to carry out the purpose of these regulations, the Planning Commission may require the dedication of all or a portion of such site in accordance with the following standards: 
(A)  The land to be dedicated shall be of suitable size, dimensions, topography, access, and general character for the proposed use; and 
(B)  The amount of land so required for this purpose shall not be less than five percent (5%) of the total area of the subdivision. 
Section 805. - Fee In Lieu of Required Dedication. 
    Where the area required for dedication for recreation or open space use would result in a site too small to be usable, or if the Comprehensive Plan calls for such local recreation site to be located elsewhere, or if a suitable local recreation site cannot be properly located in the subdivision, as determined by the Planning Commission, a payment of a fee in lieu of dedication of such land is required. The following procedure shall be followed: 
(A)  The amount of the fee shall be substantially equal to the value of the land that would be set aside if the standards specified in Section 804 were to be applied; 
(B)  The fee shall be paid to the City of Brunswick, Georgia, prior to the approval of the final plat; and 
(C)  All money paid to the City in this manner shall be kept in a special capital reserve fund and shall be used only for the acquisition of land for recreation and open space purposes. 
Section 806. - Alternative Method of Providing Local Recreation Sites. 
    In lieu of requiring the dedication of a recreation site, or a fee for this purpose, the Planning Commission may permit a private site to be used under the following conditions: 
(A)  If in the judgment of the Planning Commission the purposes of this Ordinance regarding recreation and open space land will be accomplished; and 
(B)  If the private site is permanently devoted to recreation use and adequately secured for such use by proper deed covenants or other private restrictions. 
Section 807. - Drainageways. 
    Where a subdivision is traversed by a water course, stream, channel, or other drainageway, the subdivider shall provide a drainage easement conforming substantially with the line of the drainageway. The easement shall be of a width adequate to preserve the unimpeded flow of natural drainage, to allow for the widening, deepening, relocation, improvement, or protection of the drainageway, and to allow installation of a storm water sewer. 
    Any change in an existing drainageway must first be approved by the City Engineer. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 807, 9-18-1968) 
ARTICLE IX. - MODIFICATIONS AND AMENDMENTS 

Section 900. - Resubdivision. 
    For any replatting or resubdividing of land, the same procedure and regulations apply as are prescribed for an original subdivision. 
Section 901. - Preliminary Plat Waiver. 
    In the case of a subdivision of no more than five (5) lots, a prospective subdivider may request the Planning Commission to waive the requirement that a preliminary plat be submitted and approved before consideration of a final plat, provided no new street is required. 
    The Planning Commission may not grant any waiver unless the prospective subdivider has first thoroughly reviewed the proposed subdivision with the Planning Director, as specified in Article V. 
    If the Planning Commission grants the waiver, the subdivider may begin preparation of a final plat in accordance with the procedure required in Article VIII. 
Section 902. - Variances. 
    These subdivision regulations are the minimum standards for the protection of the public welfare. However, where a regulation would cause demonstrably unique and undue hardship as it applies to any particular subdivider's property, the Planning Commission, by an affirmative vote of at least five (5) of its total membership, or the Commissioners of the City of Brunswick on appeal may grant the subdivider a variance from the strict application of the regulation if such variance will not nullify the objectives of these subdivision regulations. 
    In granting a variance, the Planning Commission or the Commissioners of the City of Brunswick on appeal may impose conditions that will substantially secure the objectives of the particular regulation that is varied. A complete record of the reasons for the approval of any variance must be entered in the official minutes of the Planning Commission, or the official minutes of the City of Brunswick on appeal. 
Section 903. - Planned Large-Scale Developments. 
    In the case of plans for large-scale developments, the standards and requirements of these regulations may be modified by the Planning Commission if the development: 
(A)  Achieves substantially the objectives of these regulations; 
(B)  Is further protected by covenants or other legal provisions as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan; 
(C)  Contains or is bounded by major streets as necessary; 
(D)  Contains reserved areas of sufficient size to serve its population for playgrounds, parks, and other such open space; 
(E)  Is provided with public water and sewage facilities; and 
(F)  Is situated in a PD - Planned Development Zoning District and developed in accordance with the provisions that apply to this district. 
Section 904. - Amendments. 
    This Ordinance may be amended from time to time by the Commissioners of the City of Brunswick. Upon the proposal of an amendment, the Commissioners of said City may in their discretion submit such proposed amendment to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation. Upon such submission the Planning Commission shall within 30 days submit a report thereon to the Commissioners of said City. If such report is not received within the specified 30-day period, the proposed amendment shall be deemed to have a favorable recommendation of the Planning Commission. 
ARTICLE X. - GENERAL SITE REQUIREMENTS 

Section 1000. - Comprehensive Plan. 
    The location and design of any subdivision must conform to the adopted Comprehensive Plan for the development of Brunswick and Glynn County. 
Section 1001. - Zoning. 
    The use of the land in the subdivision shall conform to the provisions of the City of Brunswick Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 1002. - Subdivision Name. 
    The name of the subdivision must have the approval of the Planning Commission and shall not duplicate or closely approximate the name of any other existing subdivision in the City of Brunswick and Glynn County. 
Section 1003. - Subdivision Access. 
    Access to every subdivision must be provided over an approved public road. 
Section 1004. - Surrounding Development. 
    A proposed subdivision must be coordinated with existing nearby developments or neighborhoods so that the area as a whole may be developed harmoniously. 
Section 1005. - Water Frontage. 
    Where a proposed subdivision is adjacent to an ocean, lake, river, marsh, or other such sizable water body, no building shall be located so that its lowest floor is less than ten (10) feet above Mean Sea Level, based on the U. S. Coast and Geodetic Datum. 
    No dwelling shall be erected beyond an established marsh line, pier line or dock line. 
ARTICLE XI. - STANDARDS FOR BLOCKS AND LOTS 

Section 1100. - Block Dimensions. 
    In general, the dimensions of blocks in a proposed subdivision shall be determined with regard to the following: 
(A)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(B)  Zoning requirements; 
(C)  Need for safe and convenient access and circulation; and 
(D)  Limitations and opportunities of the existing topography. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 1100, 9-18-1968) 
    1100.1 Length. Blocks shall not be greater than twelve hundred (1,200) feet nor less than three hundred (300) feet in length, unless the unusual characteristics of a particular site dictate otherwise. 
    1100.2 Width. Blocks shall be wide enough to provide two (2) tiers of lots of minimum depth, except where the property abuts upon a major street or a railroad and double frontage lots are, as a result, desirable. 
Section 1101. - Blocks in Commercial Areas. 
    In commercial areas, the general block layout shall be designed as follows: 
(A)  To permit good traffic circulation and automobile parking; 
(B)  To permit efficient pickup and delivery; and 
(C)  To encourage the best possible design of the individual units in the commercial area. 
Section 1102. - Blocks in Industrial Areas. 
    In industrial areas, the general block layout shall be designed to encourage the most efficient arrangement of space for present use and future expansion, and to provide for adequate and safe access and parking for workers as well as visitors. 
Section 1103. - Lot Dimensions. 
    The dimensions of all lots shall conform to the provisions of the City of Brunswick Zoning Ordinance. In addition, the areas and dimensions of lots shall be determined with regard to the availability of public water and sewerage, and the results of soil percolation tests, as follows for one- and two-family dwellings: 
Utilities Available Minimum Lot Size 
in Square Feet Minimum Lot Width in Feet Public Water and Public Sewer  6,000  60 Public Water Only 10,000 100 No Public Water or Public Sewer 30,000 150  
    The Planning Commission, with the cooperation of the County Health Officials, shall analyze the results of any soil percolation tests performed on the site of a proposed subdivision, and, on the basis of this analysis, may require that the lot sizes and widths be increased beyond the minimum sizes and widths, as shown above. 
Section 1104. - Lot Layout. 
    Each lot in a subdivision must abut upon an approved road. However, no lot shall have direct access to a major arterial road, but only to a minor local access road. 
    Side lot lines should be substantially at right angles or radial to road lines. A building line meeting the front-yard setback requirements of the City of Brunswick Zoning Ordinance shall be established on all lots. 
Section 1105. - Double Frontage Lots. 
    Double frontage, or reverse frontage, lots are not permitted except where essential to provide separation of residential development from major traffic arteries or railroads, or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. 
    A planting screen easement of at least ten (10) feet must be provided on all double frontage lots on the side abutting the major road, railroad, or other use creating an adverse effect. No right-of-way access shall be provided from the abutting property either onto or through the required planting screen easement. 
Section 1106. - Lots That May Be Further Subdivided. 
    Where the lots in a subdivision are large enough for possible future resubdivision, or where a portion of a tract is not subdivided, suitable access for these eventualities must be provided in accordance with Section 1202. 
Section 1107. - Minimum Lot Elevation. 
    The elevation within the building area of all lots shall be a minimum of eight (8) feet above Mean Sea Level based on the U. S. Coast and Geodetic Datum. The building area shall be of such size as to permit all land within twenty (20) feet of the front and rear of the building and within ten (10) feet of the sides of a building to conform to the minimum lot elevation requirement. The minimum lot elevation may be increased by the Planning Commission where necessary to meet proper standards for sanitation and drainage as specified by the County Health Department and the City Engineer. 
ARTICLE XII. - GENERAL ROAD REQUIREMENTS 

Section 1200. - Location Principles. 
    The roads in a proposed subdivision shall be properly located and built with regard to the following: 
(A)  Existing and planned roads; 
(B)  Topographical conditions; 
(C)  Public convenience and safety, including facilitating fire protection and pedestrian traffic; 
(D)  The proposed uses of the land to be served by the roads; 
(E)  Probable future traffic volume; 
(F)  Further subdivision possibilities; 
(G)  Providing proper access to abutting property; 
(H)  Proposed traffic functions, including the minimizing of through traffic on minor roads and the protection of major road capacities from excessive marginal access; and 
(I)  Such other principles as the Planning Commission may consider significant. 
Section 1201. - Coordination. 
    The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all roads shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan. 
    In particular, the arrangement of roads in a subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing major roads in surrounding areas and shall provide for road stubs to the property line when access to the adjoining area is desirable. 
Section 1202. - Continuation of Existing Roads. 
    Existing roads shall be continued at the same or greater width, but in no case shall they be less than the required width. 
Section 1203. - Road Names. 
    Road names shall require the approval of the Planning Commission. Roads that are obviously in alignment with roads already existing and named shall be given the name of the existing thoroughfare. Names of new roads shall not duplicate or closely approximate those of existing roads. 
Section 1204. - Subdivisions Abutting Major Arterials. 
    Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major arterial road, the Planning Commission may require one of the following: 
(A)  Marginal Access Road -access or service road, between an arterial and the abutting property; 
(B)  Double Frontage -deep lot frontage on a minor road and backing, without access, onto an arterial which is screened by an appropriate fence or wall and planting; 
(C)  Rear Service Drive -deep lot with additional building setback and a vehicular service drive in the rear; or 
(D)  Such other treatment as may be necessary for protection of residential properties and protection of the capacity of arterials from excessive marginal access. 
Section 1205. - Alleys. 
    Alleys may be required at the rear of lots used for multi-family, commercial, or industrial developments, but shall not be provided in one- and two-family residential developments unless the subdivider provides evidence satisfactory to the Planning Commission of the need for alleys. Dead-end alleys must be avoided, if possible. However, where dead-end alleys are necessary for proper access, they shall terminate with a turn-around having a radius of not less than forty (40) feet. 
Section 1206. - Reserve Strips. 
    Reserve strips preventing access to streets, alleys, and public areas shall not be permitted in any subdivision. This does not preclude the establishment of buffer zone planting. 
(Ord. No. 568, § 1206, 9-18-1968) 
ARTICLE XIII. - STANDARDS FOR ROAD DESIGN 

Section 1300. - Right-of-Way Widths. 
    The right-of-way width shall be the distance across a road, measured at ninety (90°) degrees, from property line to property line. Except as noted in Section 1302, the minimum right-of-way widths shall be as follows: 
(A)  Major Arterial Road -120 feet or as indicated in the Major Thoroughfare Plan and in accordance with State and Federal specifications; 
(B)  Major Collector Road -90 feet; 
(C)  Minor Local Road -60 feet; 
(D)  Permanent Cul-de-Sac -50 feet; 
(E)  Marginal Access Road -60 feet; and 
(F)  Service Drive or Alley -20 feet. 
Section 1301. - Pavement Widths. 
    The minimum street pavement widths shall be as follows: 
(A)  Major Arterial Road -as indicated in the Major Thoroughfare Plan and in accordance with State and Federal specifications; 
(B)  Major Collector Road -39 feet; 
(C)  Minor Local Road -31 feet; 
(D)  Permanent Cul-de-Sac -31 feet; 
(E)  Marginal Access Road -31 feet; and 
(F)  Service Drive or Alley -18 feet. 
Section 1302. - Width Exceptions. 
    Additional right-of-way widths shall be provided when determined by the Planning Commission to be necessary for the following purposes: 
(A)  Public safety and convenience; 
(B)  Parking in commercial, industrial or high-density residential areas; and 
(C)  Widening existing roads where the right-of-way does not meet the minimum requirements of Section 1300. 
Section 1303. - Half or Partial Roads. 
    1303.1 New Roads. New half or partial roads are permitted only in the following instances: 
(A)  Where the subdivider obtains agreement in writing from the adjoining property owner to dedicate and improve as required the other half of the road when the adjoining property is subdivided; and 
(B)  Where essential to the reasonable subdivision of a tract in conformance with the other requirements and standards of these regulations; or 
(C)  Where needed to complete existing half roads. 
    1303.2 Existing Roads. Where an existing road traverses or abuts the subdivision, the entire right-of-way required by these regulations, or as much as is possible within the subdivision, shall be provided. The right-of-way shall be measured from the centerline of the existing roadway. 
Section 1304. - Cul-de-Sacs. 
    Cul-de-Sacs should not, in general exceed six hundred (600) feet in length, except where topographic or other conditions make a greater length unavoidable. 
    All cul-de-sacs shall be provided with a paved turn-around having a minimum diameter of eighty (80) feet to the outside edge of the pavement and one hundred (100) feet to the legal right-of-way line. Dead-end roads with no turn-around are not permitted. 
Section 1305. - Road Elevation. 
    The minimum elevation of any road centerline shall be at least seven (7) feet above Mean Sea Level, based on the U. S. Coast and Geodetic Datum. 
Section 1306. - Horizontal Curvature. 
    Where connecting right-of-way lines deflect from each other at any one point by more than ten (10°) degrees, the lines must be connected with a true, circular curve. The minimum radius of the centerline for a horizontal curve shall be as follows: 
(A)  Major Arterial Road -573 feet (ten (10°) degrees); 
(B)  Major Collector Road -573 feet; 
(C)  Minor Local Road -150 feet; and 
(D)  Other Minor Roads -100 feet. 
    Straight portions of roads must be tangent to the beginning or end of curves. Except for minor roads there must be a tangent of at least one hundred (100) feet between reverse curves. Between a horizontal curve and an intersection with another road or railroad, there shall be a tangent having a length of not less than sixty (60) feet. 
Section 1307. - Sight Distances. 
    Proper sight distances must be provided with respect to both vertical and horizontal alignment. Measured along the centerline at a point six (6) feet above grade this sight distance shall be as follows: 
(A)  Major Arterial Road -500 feet; 
(B)  Major Collector Road -200 feet; and 
(C)  Other minor Roads -100 feet. 
Section 1308. - Intersections. 
    Intersections involving the junction of more than two roads are prohibited. Three-way intersections shall be used wherever possible in residential areas. 
    Right-angle intersections shall be used wherever practicable; however, in no instance shall the angle of intersection of the street centerline be less than seventy-five (75°) degrees. 
Section 1309. - Intersection Curve Radii. 
    The design of a curb or an edge of pavement at an intersection should take into account such conditions as types of turning vehicles, likely speed of traffic, angle of turn, number of lanes, and whether parking is permitted or not. However, the radii of a curb or edge of pavement at an intersection shall not be less than the following: 
(A)  Arterial with Arterial -25 feet; 
(B)  Arterial with Collector -25 feet; 
(C)  Collector with Collector -20 feet; 
(D)  Collector with Minor Road -20 feet; 
(E)  Minor Road with Minor Road -20 feet and 
(F)  Service Drive or Alley -10 feet. 
Section 1310. - Intersection Sight Distances. 
    Proper sight lines must be maintained at all intersections. Measured along the centerline, there shall be a clear-sight triangle with sides as follows: 
(A)  Major Arterial Road -150 feet; 
(B)  Major Collector Road -75 feet; and 
(C)  Other Minor Roads -75 feet. 
    No building or other obstruction shall be permitted within the area defined by a clear-sight triangle. 
Section 1311. - Distances between Intersections. 
    The distance between intersections shall be as follows: 
(A)  Intersection on Arterials -Minor and Collector Roads shall not empty into Arterials at intervals of less than six hundred (600) feet and shall be in alignment with existing and planned roads entering the arterial from the opposite side. 
(B)  Intersections on Collector or Minor Roads -The distance between any two (2) minor or collector roads which are not in alignment on opposite sides of an existing or proposed road shall be no less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet, measured from centerlines. 
Section 1312. - Surfacing. 
    All roads except alleys are required to be surfaced to the grades and dimensions drawn on the plans, profiles, and cross-sections submitted by the subdivider and approved by the Planning Commission. 
    Before paving a road surface, the subdivider must install the required utilities and provide adequate drainage in accordance with City standards. 
    The Planning Commission shall determine if a collector or arterial road is required as a direct result of a subdivision, and in such a case the subdivider shall be responsible for paving the additional width required. 
Section 1313. - Curb and Gutter. 
    Concrete curbs and gutters shall be installed in all new subdivisions in accordance with City standards. 
Section 1314. - Sidewalks. 
    In subdivisions where multi-family dwelling, townhouse dwellings, or group dwellings are planned, and in subdivisions which have an average lot width of seventy (70) feet or less at the building setback line, sidewalks shall be installed on at least one side of the right-of-way in accordance with City standards. 
    The Planning Commission may also require the installation of sidewalks in the following instances: 
(A)  In subdivisions where lot widths are greater than seventy (70) feet, but where the character of the neighborhood is such that they are considered necessary; 
(B)  In subdivisions where it would be desirable to continue sidewalks that are existing in adjoining subdivisions; or 
(C)  In subdivisions where sidewalks are necessary to provide pedestrian access to community facilities such as schools, shopping areas and recreation areas. 
    Where sidewalks are required, they shall be at least four (4) feet in width and located fully within the road right-of-way. However, in the vicinity of schools, shopping areas, recreation areas, and other such facilities, sidewalks shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. 
Section 1315. - Public Crosswalks. 
    Where considered necessary to provide adequate pedestrian circulation or access to schools, shopping areas, recreation areas, or other such facilities, public crosswalks not less than ten (10) feet wide shall be provided. 
Section 1316. - Access Drives. 
    Access drives and curb cuts shall be designed in accordance with the provisions of the City of Brunswick Zoning Ordinance. 
Section 1317. - Temporary Dead-End Roads. 
    Temporary dead-end roads are generally discouraged. However, where temporary dead-end roads are determined to be necessary by the Planning Commission, they shall terminate with a turn-around area having a radius not less than forty (40) feet. 
Section 1318. - Unspecified Standards. 
    Where standards for required improvements are not specifically set forth in these regulations, the applicable standards or requirements of the City Commission and the State Highway Department shall govern. All work must be performed in the manner prescribed in the standard specifications for road construction of the City Commission and the State Highway Department. 
ARTICLE XIV. - UTILITY IMPROVEMENTS AND STANDARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Utilities, Ch. 22. 

Section 1400. - Sewer and Water Facilities Feasibility Report. 
    The subdivider must submit to the Planning Commission a feasibility report on sewer and water facilities to serve the proposed subdivision. The report should be prepared by a registered professional engineer and shall be submitted to the City Engineer, the County Health Officials, and the State Health Officials for review prior to submission to the Planning Commission. The report, together with the comments of the appropriate agencies, shall accompany and be a part of the preliminary plat application. 
    If sewer and water facilities are available and adequate to meet the anticipated needs of the subdivision, the requirement for a feasibility report may be waived, provided however that the proposed water and sewer service arrangements be mutually agreed upon among the subdivider, the City Manager, the appropriate utility agency or agencies, the County Health Officials, and the State Health Officials. 
    1400.1 Existing Systems. A report on the feasibility of connecting the subdivision to an existing approved sewerage system and/or an existing approved water supply system shall be made. The study shall include the distances from the subdivision to the nearest public utilities and the capacity of the existing systems to handle the proposed additional loads. 
    1400.2 Separate Sewerage System. If connection to an existing sewerage system is not deemed feasible, the feasibility of constructing a separate sewerage system and treatment facility shall be investigated. This study shall give the location of the treatment facility, the receiving stream, the degree of treatment, and the design population. 
    1400.3 Separate Water System. If connection to an existing water supply system is not deemed feasible, the possibility of constructing a separate water supply system shall be investigated. The study shall give the location and nature of the water source, the degree of treatment, and the design population. 
    1400.4 Priorities. The Planning Commission shall give consideration to the method of waste disposal and water supply in the following order of preference: 
(A)  Connection to an approved public sewerage system and an approved public water supply system; 
(B)  Connection to an approved public water supply system and an approved private community sewerage system; 
(C)  Connection to an approved public sewerage system and individual water supply system; and 
(D)  Connection to an approved private community sewerage system and individual water supply system. 
    1400.5 Approval of Systems. In the event it proves feasible to either connect to existing systems or construct separate community systems, a formal application must be submitted to the County Health Officials and the State Health Officials. Evidence of the approval of these applications must accompany the feasibility report submitted to the Planning Commission. No construction shall take place on any water and sewer facilities before the proper permits are obtained from the County Health Officials and the State Health Officials. 
    1400.6 On-Site Disposal. For reasons of protecting present sources of water supply and safeguarding the health of the public from possible contamination by improper methods of sewage disposal, the Planning Commission will approve on-site, subsurface sewage disposal systems only when the feasibility study indicates the following: 
(A)  Justification of the project necessitates consideration of this method; 
(B)  The soil absorption is satisfactory; and 
(C)  On-site disposal will not endanger ground water supplies below the level of the absorption system. 
    1400.7 Percolation Tests. In the event it is necessary to install on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems, soil absorption and water table determination tests shall be performed in accordance with the requirements of the County Health Officials. 
Section 1401. - Water Supply Requirements. 
    Based on the results of the feasibility report required in Section 1400, the subdivider shall be required to either install or have installed by the appropriate agency an adequate, approved water supply system as follows: 
    1401.1 Existing System. Where there is an existing public water supply system on or near the proposed subdivision, a complete water main supply system connected to the existing public water supply system is required. 
    1401.2 Separate Community System. Where there is no existing public water supply system on or near the subdivision, a separate community water supply system approved by the City Engineer and the County Health Officials may be required, along with satisfactory provision for its future maintenance. 
    1401.3 Individual Lot Supply. Where there is no existing public water supply system available and a separate community water supply system is not feasible, each lot in a subdivision must be provided with an individual water supply system in accordance with the requirements of the County Health Officials. 
    1401.4 Fire Hydrants. Fire hydrants must be installed as an integral part of any public water supply system, in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer and the State Fire Marshal. 
Section 1402. - Sanitary Sewerage Requirements. 
    Based on the results of the feasibility report required in Section 1400, the subdivider shall be required to either install or have installed by the appropriate agency an adequate, approved sanitary sewerage disposal system as follows: 
    1402.1 Existing System. Where there is an existing public sanitary sewer system on or near the subdivision, a complete sanitary sewage disposal system must be installed and connected to the existing system. 
    1402.2 Planned Public System. Where there is no existing public sanitary sewer system on or near the subdivision, but a public sanitary sewer is to be installed on or near the subdivision within a reasonable time, as determined by the Planning Commission, a complete sanitary sewage collection system must be installed and 
(A)  Connected to a community treatment facility until such time as the planned public sanitary sewer system is complete and adequate connection is provided thereto; or 
(B)  Capped, and on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems provided, if it is determined that a temporary community treatment facility is not feasible. 
    1402.3 Separate Community System. Where there is no existing public sanitary sewer system, a separate community sanitary sewer system and treatment facility are required, if possible. Separate community sewerage facilities must be installed in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer, the County Health Officials, and the State Health Officials, and must receive their written approval. Satisfactory provision must be made to insure future maintenance of the separate community system. 
    1402.4 On-Site Disposal. Where there is no existing public sanitary sewer system and a community sanitary sewer system and treatment facility are not feasible, on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems shall be installed on individual lots in accordance with the requirements of the City Engineer, the County Health Officials, and the State Health Officials. An appropriate County Health Department official must inspect and approve each private on-site disposal system. 
    1402.5 Connection Prior to Development. If it is determined by the County Health Officials or the State Health Officials that on-site subsurface sewage disposal systems are not feasible, connections to an approved public or community sanitary sewer system must be made prior to the development of the subdivision. 
    1402.6 Sewer Pipe. All sewer mains must be at least eight (8") inches in diameter and all sewer laterals must be at least four (4") inches and stubbed out to the road right-of-way lines. Sanitary sewers shall not be used as storm sewers. 
Section 1403. - Storm Drainage Requirements. 
    Storm sewers and other related facilities which comprise complete storm drainage system shall be designed and installed in accordance with City standards in each subdivision as necessary to permit the unimpeded flow of natural water courses, to insure the drainage of all low points along the line of roads, and to intercept storm-water runoff along roads. In addition, storm sewers and other related facilities shall be designed not only for the anticipated peak discharge from the property being subdivided, but also for the anticipated run-off that will occur when all other property in the drainage area is fully developed. 
    1403.1 Responsibility of Subdivider. The subdivider shall be responsible for installing, at his own expense, all improvements necessary to provide proper drainage for his property and to tie the drainage system of the subdivision into the existing City drainage system. All drainage improvements must be completed and approved by the City Engineer prior to the development of the subdivision. 
    1403.2 Abutting Properties. In the design of storm sewers and other related facilities, special consideration shall be given to preventing excess run-off onto adjacent developed or undeveloped land. When a storm drainage outlet will abut another property, the subdivider should secure the approval, in writing, of the adjoining affected owners. 
    1403.3 Storm Water Drainage from Roads. A road must be designed so as to provide for the discharge of surface water from its right-of-way. The slope of the crown of a road shall not be less than one-eighth ( 1/8 ) of an inch per foot. Adequate facilities must exist along all roads to properly intercept and carry away storm water drainage. 
Section 1404. - Utility Easements. 
    When easements are required in the design of a subdivision, they must be a minimum of ten (10) feet wide and, to the fullest extent possible, be adjacent to, or centered on, rear or side lot lines. All easements shall be designed in accordance with City standards. 
    Every effort should be made in new subdivisions to install electric and telephone facilities underground and/or along rear lot lines, whenever possible. 
    When a subdivision is traversed by a water course, drainage way, channel, or stream there shall be provided a storm-water or drainage easement of adequate width. Parallel streets may be required by the Planning Commission on either side of such easements where necessary to facilitate both drainage and circulation. 
Section 1405. - Utility System Plans. 
    The plans for the installation of a water supply system, a sanitary sewer system, and a storm drainage system must be prepared by a registered professional engineer. Such plans shall be prepared with the cooperation and approval of the appropriate utility agency, the City Engineer, the County Health Officials, and the State Health Officials. Upon completion of the water, sewer, and storm drainage systems, copies of the plans as built and approved shall be filed with both the Planning Commission and the City Commission. 
Section 1406. - Improvement Expenses. 
    The subdivider shall be required to install all improvements required in these regulations at his own expense, as follows: 
(A)  By arrangement with the appropriate department or public agency to make the installation as a part of its regular work program; or 
(B)  By private contract with the written approval of the appropriate department or public utility agency. 
ARTICLE XV. - MONUMENTS AND MARKERS 

Section 1500. - Monument Location. 
    Monuments shall be set at the intersection of lines forming angles in the boundaries of the subdivision and at the intersection of right-of-way lines. 
Section 1501. - Marker Location. 
    Markers shall be set at the beginning and ending of curves along street property lines, at points where lot lines intersect curves either front or rear, at angles in property lines or lots, and at all other lot corners. 
Section 1502. - Construction. 
    Monuments shall be constructed of stone or concrete and be at least six inches by six inches by thirty inches (6" × 6" × 30") in size. 
    Markers shall be iron pipes or iron or steel bars and be at least three-fourths (3/4") inches in diameter and thirty (30") inches long. 
Section 1503. - Placement. 
    Monuments and markers shall be so set that their tops are about level with the surface of the surrounding ground. Monuments shall be marked on top with a copper or brass dowel bearing a punch mark at the point of intersection of the lines being monumented. 
Section 1504. - Removal. 
    Any monuments or markers that are removed shall be replaced by a registered engineer or land surveyor at the expense of the person removing them. 
ARTICLE XVII. - ORDINANCE VALIDITY; REPEAL; EFFECTIVE DATE 

Section 1700. - Ordinance Validity. 
    Should any section or provision of this Ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such declaration shall not affect the validity of the Ordinance as a whole or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. 
Section 1701. - Repeal of Conflicting Ordinances. 
    The provisions of any ordinance or regulation or parts thereof in conflict with this Ordinance are hereby repealed. 
Section 1702. - Effective Date. 
    This Ordinance shall take effect and be in force upon the 2nd and 3rd Reading. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE 1953 CODE 
 This tables gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1953 Code which are included herein. Sections of the 1953 Code not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1953 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1.1, 1.2 1-1, 1-2 1.4 1-3 1.6 1-5 2.8 2-96 2.10, 2.11 2-97, 2-98 3.2, 3.3 19-1, 19-2 8.1-8.10 13-151-13-160 10.2 10-1 11.2 7-1 13.1-13.4 13-456-13-459 16.1-16.14 2-186-2-199 17.5 10-5 17.6-17.8 10-4 17.9, 17.10 10-6, 10-7 22.2-22.10 14-2-14-10 22.13 14-11 22.77-22.79 14-61-14-63 22.81 14-64 22.83-22.89 14-65-14-71 22.91-22.101 14-72-14-82 24.3 16-1 24.5 16-3 24.27 16-4 24.35 16-2 25.1-25.4 13-301-13-304 28.1-28.5 19-61-19-65 28.7 19-66 30.1 2-256 33.1, 33.2 19-3, 19-4 33.8-33.11 19-5-19-8 33.15-33.17 19-9-19-11 33.19-33.22 19-12-19-15 33.26, 33.27 19-16, 19-17 33.38-33.44 19-36-19-42 35.1-35.4 21-1-21-4 35.4A 21-5 35.5 21-6 35.6-35.10 21-8-21-12 35.11-35.14 21-21-21-24 35.15-35.24 21-31-21-40 35.25-35.31 21-51-21-57  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE ORDINANCES 
 This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1953 Code, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to 1952 were incorporated into the 1953 Code. Ordinances not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Ordinance 
Number Date Section  Section 
this Code 396  3-27-1957 2-52 403  9- 4-1957 2-52 409 10-23-1957 24.30-1 16-41 24.30-2 16-43 24.30-2(a) 16-42 24.30-2(b)-24.30-2(d) 16-44-16-46 24.30-3 16-47 412 12- 4-1957 2-5 2-136-2-139 413 12- 4-1957 2-96 436  7-15-1959 2-52 448 11- 2-1960 6 2-52 511 12-15-1965 art. II, § 1- 2-216-2-218 art. II, § 3 526 11-14-1966 1 13-71 536 11-14-1966 2(1)-2(4) 13-91-13-94 2(5) 13-77 3 13-76 4(1)-4(3) 13-73-13-75 5 13-72 553  1-19-1968 1 13-305 568  9-18-1968 807 App. B, § 807 1100 App. B, § 1100 1206 App. B, § 1206 1601 App. B, § 1601 582  5-21-1969 1(a)-1(j) 13-117-13-126 599  8- 5-1970 1-5 2-236-2-240 616  7- 7-1971 1-3 13-481-13-483 633  6-21-1972 1 2-326 634  7- 5-1972 13-49 20.1-20.18 13-26-13-43 20.19 13-1 20.20, 20.21 13-44, 13-45 20.22-22.25 13-46 20.26 13-47 20.30 13-46 20.31 13-48 635  7- 5-1972 70.01-70.03 12-1-12-3 70.04 12-6 70.05, 70.06 12-36, 12-37 70.07(f), 70.07(g) 12-38, 12-39 70.08 12-7 70.09, 70.10 12-4, 12-5 70.11-70.17 12-61-12-67 70.18 12-81 70.18(a)-70.18(d) 12-82-12-85 70.19, 70.20 12-8, 12-9 650  6- 6-1973 1 18-1 2(a), 2(b) 18-3, 18-4 2(c) 18-36 2(d), 2(e) 18-5, 18-6 3(a)-3(d) 18-37-18-40 4(a)-4(c) 18-41-18-43 5(a)-5(d) 18-13-18-16 6 18-12 6(a), 6(b) 18-10, 18-11 7 18-7 8 18-9 9 18-8 10 18-2 665  6- 5-1974 1 2-1 674  9-18-1974 art. 1 13-241 art. 2-art. 6 13-266-13-270 art. 7 13-271-13-273 art. 8, art. 9 13-274, 13-275 art. 10- 13-243-13-245 art. 12 art. 13 13-246 art. 14 13-247 art. 15 13-277 art. 16 13-276 art. 17 13-248 art. 18 13-242 art. 19, 13-249, 13-250 art. 20 678 12-18-1974 1 13-119 686  8- 6-1975 1 18-1 18-44 705 12- 8-1976 1 20-27 2 20-26 3-11 20-28-20-36 715  6-15-1977 1 14-61 727  3- 1-1978 14-31 7351/2  6-21-1978 1 13-521 2, 3 13-506 4-7 13-522-13-525 8 13-526, 13-527 9 13-507 10, 11 13-528, 13-529 12 13-508 13 13-530 738  8- 2-1978 1 13-45 757  1- 2-1980 1, 2 16-21 758  2- 6-1980 14-31 761  9-17-1980 1-4 16-66 764 10- 1-1980 1 13-346 2 13-326 3-7 13-347-13-351 8-11 13-327-13-330 12 13-352 13 13-331 774 10-21-1981 1, 2 13-431 3-5 13-432-13-434 7, 8 13-435, 13-436 786  9- 1-1982 1 2-51 787  8-23-1983 1 22-3  9- 1-1982 1, 2 22-1, 22-2 4-13 22-4-22-13 14-18 22-15-22-19 19 22-21 20-25 22-23-22-28 797  8-23-1983 2, 3 22-16 7 22-28 807  7-18-1984 1 22-8 810  8-17-1984 1-23 6-1-6-23 811 12-19-1984 1-6 13-181-13-186 813  1-16-1985 1 22-14 820  7-11-1985 1-3 9-21-9-23 4 9-1 6 9-2 823  9-14-1985 1 13-528 832  2-19-1986 1-3 13-556-13-558 4 13-560 5-8 13-586-13-589 9 13-561 10 13-562-13-564 11-13 13-565-13-567 14-16 13-590-13-592 17 13-568 18 13-593 19, 20 13-569, 13-570 21-25 13-594-13-598 26 13-559 837  5- 7-1986 1 13-586 2 13-565 3 13-591 4 13-595 854  9- 2-1987 2 18-8 857  9-16-1987 1 18-37 861  1- 6-1988 1 21-7 2 21-21 3 21-53 862  1-20-1988 1-12 11-1-11-12 13-15 11-41-11-43 16(a), 16(b) 11-66, 11-67 16(b)(i)-16(b)(v) 11-68-11-72 17 11-73 18 11-13 869  9-21-1988 1 22-19 2, 3 22-21, 22-22 872 11-16-1988 1-9 13-211-13-219 874  3- 1-1989 1 10-2, 10-3 877  4-19-1989 1-1-1-1 23-1-1-23-1-4 3-1-3-25 23-3-1-23-3-25 4-1-4-4 23-4-1-23-4-4 5-1-5-4 23-5-1-23-5-4 6-1-6-5 23-6-1-23-6-5 7-1-7-4 23-7-1-23-7-4 8-1-8-4 23-8-1-23-8-4 9-1-9-4 23-9-1-23-9-4 10-1-10-4 23-10-1-23-10-4 11-1-11-4 23-11-1-23-11-4 12-1-12-4 23-12-1-23-12-4 13-1-13-4 23-13-1-23-13-4 14-1-14-4 23-14-1-23-14-4 15-1-15-8 23-15-1-23-15-8 16-1-16-7 23-16-1-23-16-7 17-1-17-4 23-17-1-23-17-4 18-1, 18-2 23-18-1, 23-18-2 19-1-19-4 23-19-1-23-19-4 20-1-20-3 23-20-1-23-20-3 21-1-21-5 23-21-1-23-21-5 22-1-22-15 23-22-1-23-22-15 23-1-23-7 23-23-1-23-23-7 24-1-24-7 23-24-1-23-24-7 25-1-25-7 23-25-1-23-25-7 26-1-26-3 23-26-1-23-26-3 878  7-19-1989 1 23-3-21 2 23-25-5, 23-25-6 879  8-21-1989 2-26 880  9-20-1989 2 5-2 app. § 2-5-1 5-1 app. § 2-5-20, 5-21, 5-22 app. § 2-5-21 app. § 2-5-23- 5-23-5-28 app. § 2-5-28 app. § 2-5-30- 5-46-5-64 app. § 2-5-48 app. § 2-5-50- 5-65-5-67 app. § 2-5-52 app. § 2-5-60 5-86 app. § 2-5-62 5-87, 5-88 app. § 2-5-63- 5-89-5-95 app. § 2-5-69 app. § 2-5-70- 5-111-5-125 app. § 2-5-84 app. § 2-5-85 5-126, 5-127 app. § 2-5-90- 5-146-5-154 app. § 2-5-98 3, 4 5-3, 5-4 882 10- 1-1989 1 5-24 10-19-1989 1 5-4 883 11- 1-1989 1 13-49 884 11- 1-1989 1, 2 22-21, 22-22 3 22-25 885 12-27-1989 1 12-111 2, 3 12-114, 12-115 4, 5 12-112, 12-113 6-14 12-116-12-124 886 12-27-1989 1-7 5-221-5-227 889  3-26-1990 I-III 17-1-17-3 IV(A), IV(B) 17-61, 17-62 V(A) 17-31 V(B)(1)-V(B)(5) 17-32-17-36 V(C) 17-37 V(D)(1), (2) 17-38 V(D)(3), V(D)(4) 17-39, 17-40 VI-VIII 17-4-17-6 890  5- 2-1990 I, II 16-51, 16-52 IV-IX 16-54-16-59 891  7-18-1990 I-XVII 5-176-5-192 892  8-15-1990 1 23-24-3 893  9-19-1990 1 22-19 2(18A) 22-20 897 12-19-1990 1 2-346 2-4 2-348-2-350 5 2-347 899  2-20-1991 1, 2 15-1, 15-2 3-6 15-7-15-10 7 15-6 8-10 15-3-15-5 900  2-20-1991 1 4-1 2, 3 4-9, 4-10 4 4-13 5 4-15 6 4-14 7 4-4 8, 9 4-11, 4-12 10 4-8 11-13 4-5-4-7 14, 15 4-2, 4-3 901  2-20-1991 1 3-1 2 3-36 3-5 3-2-3-4 6 3-7 7 3-37 8 3-40 9, 10 3-38, 3-39 11 3-43 12 3-41 13-15 3-46-3-48 16 3-42 17, 18 3-44, 3-45 19 3-51 20, 21 3-49, 3-50 22, 23 3-5, 3-6 24 3-8 902  3- 6-1991 1, 2 22-8 3 22-9 903  6- 5-1991 1, 2 16-5, 16-6 3 16-67 4 16-22 5 16-7 904  7- 3-1991 1 12-120 905 11- 6-1991 Adopting ordinance, p.vii 1 1-9 906 11-26-1991 1, 2 22-19(a), (f) 3 22-20(a) 907 12-18-1991 1 11-4 2 11-66(10) 3 11-70.5 4, 5 11-71, 11-72 908 11-18-1992 1-4 14-34 909  1-20-1993 2 14-32, 14-33 910  2- 3-1993 1 14-12 911  2-17-1993 2 14-32, 14-33 913  8-18-1993 1-3 16-5-16-7 4 16-22 5 16-67 914  9- 1-1993 1       Rpld 6-18       Added 6-18 2 6-24 915  1-19-1994 1 App. B, § 400 916  2-16-1994 1       Rpld 5-1-5-4       Added 5-1-5-5 2       Rpld 5-21-5-28, 5-46-5-67, 5-86-5-95, 5-111-5-127, 5-146-5-154 917  4- 6-1994 1 12-118 2 12-120 918 12-21-1994 1 2-351-2-359 919 12-24-1994 1       Rpld 13-26-13-49, 13-431-13-436 920  2-15-1995 1 22-18(c) 2 22-19(a) 3 22-19(f) 4 22-20(a) 5 22-21 6 22-22(a) 921  3-15-1995 2 3-7 922  8- 2-1995 1       Rpld 12-111-12-124       Added 12-111-12-123 923  9- 6-1995 1 9-2 924  2- 7-1996 1       Rpld 20-40-20-69       Added 20-40-20-69 925  2-21-1996 1 23-18-2 2 23-25-1(b) 3       Rpld 23-25-6       Added 23-25-6, 23-25-7 926  4- 3-1996 1 23-3-16 927  8-21-1996 1       Rpld 17-1-17-6, 17-31-17-40, 17-61, 17-62       Added 17-1-17-8 928 11-20-1996 1 13-595(b) 2 13-588 3 13-570 929  7-10-1997 2 13-601-13-613 930  7-24-1997 2       Rpld 13-601-13-613       Added 13-601-13-615 931  8-20-1997       Rpld 13-151-13-160       Added 13-151-13-160 932  1- 7-1998 2 14-32, 14-33 933  4-15-1998       Rpld 7-1       Added 7-1-7-3 934  7-15-1998 2       Rpld 13-601-13-615       Added 13-601-13-615 936 10-21-1998 1 22-18(c) 2 22-19(a) 3 22-19(f) 4 22-20(a) 5 22-20(c) 6 22-21 7 22-22(a) 8 22-22(c) 937  2- 3-1999 1 20-1-20-11 938  2- 3-1999 1       Rpld 12-111-12-123       Added 12-111-12-124 939  4- 7-1999 5-6-5-12 5-21-5-27 5-15 5-28 940  9- 1-1999 1 3-37(d) 2 3-39(e) 3 3-40(6) 941  3-15-2000 1 22-5 2 22-7(a) 3 22-7(i)-(k) 4 22-8(b) 5 22-8(j) 6 22-8(m) 7 22-8(v), (w) 8, 9 22-15(d)(1), (2) 10 22-15(d)(5) 11 22-15(d)(10)-(17) 12 22-15(f) 13, 14 22-16, 22-17 15 22-25 942  6- 7-2000 1 5-35 943  7- 5-2000 1 8-31-8-46 944  9-20-2000 2       Rpld 2-351-2-359       Added 2-351-2-361 945 12-13-2000 2 20-40, 20-41, 20-43, 20-47       Rpld 20-51, 20-69 946  3- 7-2001 1 3-1, 3-4(c), 3-7(4), 3-9, 3-37(i), 3-49-3-51 947  1-16-2002 1 ch. 13, art. XIV(note) 2 13-507 3 13-522 4 13-509 948  3- 6-2002 1       Rpld 19-36-19-42       Added 19-36-1945 949  3- 6-2002 1       Rpld 10-2, 10-3       Added 10-2, 10-3 950  3- 6-2002 1 23-25-1(b), 23-25-2, 23-25-3 2 Ch. 23, Adden., Pt. II 951  6- 5-2002 1 3-1, 3-2(5), 3-7(4), 3-9-3-11, 3-40(6) 2 3-61 952  6-19-2002 1 16-47 953  2- 5-2003 1 3-40(6) 954  2- 5-2003 1       Rpld 22-1-22-28       Added 22-1-22-29 956  6- 4-2003 5-21-5-35 5-251-5-265 957  8- 6-2003 1 22-18(a)(2)d 958 12-17-2003 1 14-34 959  3- 3-2004 1 5-35 960  3- 3-2004 1       Dltd 14-9       Added 16-81-16-91 961  4- 7-2004 1       Dltd 12-111-12-124       Added 12-111-12-124 962  5-20-2004 1 16-84-16-89 965  8-18-2004 1       Dltd 4-1-4-5       Added 4-1-4-23 968  1-19-2005 1       Added 16-8 977  3- 1-2006 1 14-10 983  9- 6-2006 1       Dltd 11-1-11-73       Added 11-1-11-71 984 12-13-2006 1       Added 22A-1-22A-106 986  3-21-2007 1 14-35 988  5-16-2007 1       Added 8-1-8-13 990  6-20-2007 1 5-22 991  6-20-2007 1 20-43 993  9-20-2007 1       Added 16-9 995 11-20-2007 1       Added 16-23 996 12-12-2007 1, 2 5-3 997  1- 2-2008 1 14-12 998  3- 5-2008 1       Added 16-10 1000  6-18-2008 1       Dltd 10-1-10-7       Added 10-1-10-30 1001  7- 2-2008 1       Dltd 3-1-3-61       Added 3-1-3-61 1002  7- 2-2008 1 23-24-2 23-24-9 23-24-12, 23-24-13 23-24-17 23-24-25 1003  8-20-2008 1 23-24-2 23-24-9 23-24-13 1005  9-17-2008 1 4-4 1006 11-19-2008 1       Dltd 23-1-1-23-26-3       Added 23-1-1-23-28-1 1007 11-19-2008 1 16-56 1008 12-17-2008 1       Added 2-53 1009 12-17-2008 1 22-27 1010  2-18-2009 1       Dltd 18-1-18-44       Added 18-1-18-47 1011  5- 6-2009 1 22-26 1012  9- 2-2009 1 23-7-2, 23-7-3 23-8-2, 23-8-3 23-9-2, 23-9-3 23-11-2 1013 10-21-2009 1 18-2 1014  5- 4-2010 3       Rpld 22-1-22-29 1       Added 22-1-22-16 22-21-22-29 22-36-22-50 22-61-22-65 22-71-22-75 2-4       Added 22-76-22-78 1015  6-16-2010 1 22-25(c) 2 22-27 1016  7- 7-2010 1 3-1 2       Added 3-40(9) 3       Added 3-52 1017  7- 7-2010 1       Added 23-26-3 23-27-1 1018  8- 4-2010 1 16-22 1019 11- 3-2010 1 3-40(6) 1020 11-17-2010 1 22-61(a) 1021 11-17-2010 1 22-7(a) 1022  3- 2-2011 1 3-46 2 3-52 1023  5- 2-2012 1 3-1 2 3-4(b) 1024  7-18-2012 1       Added 12-61(9) 1025  9-19-2012 1 16-23 1026  9-19-2012 1       Added 15-11-15-19 1028  3-20-2013 1 3-38 1029  4- 3-2013 1 3-7(1), (2)       Added 3-7(6) 1030  4-17-2013 1       Added 2-27 1032  8-21-2013 1       Added 2-28 1033 12-18-2013 1 15-16 1034  1-22-2014       Rpld 5-21-5-28       Added 5-21-5-28 1035  2-19-2014 1 10-2       Rpld 10-3(c) 10-3(d), (n) 10-9(d)       Added 10-10(d)       Rpld 10-19       Added 10-19 1036  4-16-2014 1 18-1 18-10 1037  9-17-2014 1       Added 3-14 1038  1- 7-2015 1 22-7(g) 2       Added 22-7.1 3 22-8(a)-(c) 4 22-62(a), (d) 5       Rpld 22-63       Added 22-63 6 22-65(tit.) 1039  2-18-2014 1       Added 5-36 1040  4- 1-2015 1 3-61 1042 10-21-2015 1 3-1       Added 3-2(6)       Added 3-4(d) 1044 11- 4-2015 1       Added ch. 13, art. II, 
§§ 13-26-13-34 1041  5- 6-2015 1       Added 24-1-24-10 1045  9-21-2016 1 13-587-13-590 13-594, 13-595 1046 12- 7-2016 1       Added 13-616-13-633 1047  4- 5-2017 1       Added 25-1-25-15 2 16-7 1048  4- 5-2017 1       Added 19-70-19-74 1049  5-17-2017 1       Added 5-37 1050  6- 7-2017 1 2-346-2-350.1 1051 10-18-2017 1       Added 26-1-26-6 1052 12-20-2017 1 11-1-11-13, 11-31-11-33, 11-51-11-57, 11-71 1053  1- 5-2018 1 23-3-16 1054  3- 7-2018 1 20-2, 20-3 1055  3-21-2018 1       Added 2-327-2-338 2 23-1-3 23-15-2, 23-15-3 23-15-5 23-16-3, 23-16-4 23-16-11 23-25-1-23-25-7 3(Exh. A) 23-26-1-23-26-89 4 App. B, §§ 300, 301 App. B, § 400 App. B, § 605 App. B, § 700 App. B, § 706 5       Rpld App. B, §§ 1600, 1601 1056  3-21-2018 1 15-2, 15-3  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
 This table shows the location within this Charter and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the state law or related matters. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-7 1-4 1-3-1(d)(3) 1-2 1-3-2, 1-3-3 1-2 1-3-3 17-3 22-7 1-4-1 1-2 2-10-105 20-59 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 3 3-1-1-3-10-15 3-1 3-5-4 3-14 3-5-4(e) 3-14 3-5-36 3-1 4-1-1 et seq. Ch. 4 4-8-24 4-3 4-8-24 et seq. 4-3 4-11-1 et seq. 4-7 5-4-1 11-71 5-18-15 15-12 tit. 8 Ch. 5 5-1 12-112 8-2-200 et seq. 5-192 8-3-4 Ch. 12 9-11-6 1-2 12-2-8 17-4 12-4-72 17-3 12-5-20 et seq. 17-2 12-5-29 17-4 12-5-440 et seq. 17-4 12-7-1 et seq. Ch. 17 17-2 12-7-6 17-3 12-7-12-12-7-15 17-7 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 18 12-15-21(a)(3) 22-28 12-15-21(d) 22-29 15-18-22 15-18 15-18-96 15-17 tit. 16 Ch. 16 16-12-80 13-603 20-5-41 Ch. 2, Art. V, Div. 2 tit. 21 Ch. 9 21-3-1 et seq. Ch. 9 9-1 21-3-14 Char., § 2.17 21-3-61(a) Char., § 2.15 21-3-63 Char., § 2.15 Char., § 2.17 21-3-95 Char., § 2.14 tit. 25 Ch. 10 25-2-13(b)(3) 5-177 25-3-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 2 31-3-5.2 22-7 32-4-90 et seq. Ch. 19 33-3-5 13-218 33-8-4 13-218 33-8-8 et seq. 20-59 33-8-8 Ch. 13, Art. VII 33-8-8.1 13-214 13-216 33-8-8.2 13-215, 13-216 tit. 35 Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 5 tit. 36 Ch. 2 36-1-20(a) 11-1 36-32-1 Char., § 3.14 36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 15 36-34-2(7) Ch. 6 36-34-3 Ch. 19 36-35-3(a) Char., § 1.12 36-35-4 2-26 36-36-11 23-26-30 23-36-31 36-36-11(b)(8) 23-26-30 36-37-6 Char., § 1.14 36-64-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, Div. 4 2-338 36-66 et seq. 23-26-20 36-66-4 23-25-3 36-66-4(d) 23-26-20 36-66-5(a), 
36-66-5(b) 23-26-3 36-66-6 23-26-9 23-26-27 36-67-1 23-26-72 36-71-2 20-41 36-71-13(b) 22-16 36-81-3 2-1 36-91-1 2-351 36-91-20 2-352 36-91-21 2-352 36-91-22 2-352 36-91-22(e) 26-4 38-3-4 26-3 38-3-5 26-3 38-3-56 26-5 tit. 40 Ch. 14 tit. 40, ch. 6 14-31 40-1-1 14-1 40-2-95 Ch. 21 40-6-1-40-6-395 14-31 40-6-371(a)(1) Ch. 14, Art. III 40-6-372 14-1 14-31 40-6-373 14-1 14-31 40-6-374- 
40-6-376 14-31 tit. 41 Ch. 12, Art. IV 41-2-1 12-124 41-2-7 12-111 41-2-7-41-2-17 12-121 41-2-8 12-111 41-2-9 12-121, 12-122 41-2-9(b)(4) 12-124 41-2-9(b)(5) 12-121 41-2-9(b)(6) 12-122 41-2-9(b)(7) 12-122 41-2-10 12-111 41-2-10(b) 12-112 41-2-12 12-118 tit. 43 20-53 44-3-141 7-3 43-32-1 et seq. Ch. 13, Art. XIV 43-37-5 Ch. 13, Art. X 44-3-1 et seq. App. B, 44-3-130 et seq. Ch. 7 44-10-20 et seq. 5-177 5-192 44-10.1-5 5-23 44-12-130 13-618 ch. 46-3 20-59 46-3-15 Ch. 19, Art. III 46-7-15 20-59 47-18-1 et seq. 2-52 tit. 48 Ch. 13 Ch. 20 ch. 48-3 20-8 tit. 48, ch. 4, art. 5 20-11 48-5-32 20-1 48-5-42 20-9 48-5-45 20-9 48-5-352 20-1 48-5-355 20-59 48-5-356 20-59 48-6-93 13-181 20-59 48-6-93(b), 
48-6-93(c) 13-182, 13-183 48-6-98 13-186 48-8-91 20-1 48-13-7 20-40 20-43 48-13-5- 48-13-26 20-49 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) 20-47 48-13-14 20-43 48-13-51 Ch. 20, Art. II 48-13-55 20-59 50-36-1 26-5 50-36-2 26-5  
