Article I
Article TI
Article ID
Article IV
Article V
Article VI
Article VII
Articlevm
Chapter 18
ZONING
Title and Objectives
Section 18.l Title and Objectives
Sections 18.2 - 18.5 Reserved _
Legislative Authority
Section 18.6 Legislative Authority
Sections 18. 7 - 18.10 Reserved
Method of Regulation
Section 18.11 Method of Regulation
Sections 18.12 - 18.15 Reserved
Jurisdiction
Section 18.16 _Jurisdiction
Sections 18.17 - 18.20 Reserved
Word Usage and Definitions of Terms
Section 18.21 Word Usage
Section 18.22 Deimitions of Terms
Sections 18.23 - 18.25 Reserved
Establishment of Districts
Section 18.26 District Designations
Section 18.27 Official Zoning Maps
Section 18.28 Map Amendments
Section 18.29 Interpretation of District Boundaries
Section 18.30 Conformity
Sections 18.31 - 18.35 Reserved
Zoning Classifications
Section 18.36 General Agriculture and Forestry District
--- -Section-18.3-7~--Rural-Residential-D.istr:ict ____ _
Section 18.38 Residential District
Section 18.39 Commercial District
Section 18.40 Industrial District
Section 18.41 Commercial Outdoor Recreation Development District
Section 18.42 Manufactured Housing Unit District - Parks
Section 18.43 Planned Unit Development District
Sections 18.44 - 18.45 Reserved
District Regulations
Section 18.46 Uses Permitted
Section 18.47 Conditional Uses Permitted
Section 18.48 District Regulations
Section 18.49 Detailed Regulations for MHU-1 Park
Section 18.50 Detailed Regulations for PUD
Section 18.51 Regulations for a CORD
18-1
Article IX
ArticleX
Article XI
Article XII
Section 18.52 Number of Dwellings Per Lot
Section 18.53 Regulations for a Commercial Outdoor Recreations
Development (CORD)
Section 18.54 Number of Single Family Detached Dwellings Per Lot
Sections 18.55 - 18.60 Reserved
Permitted Uses in Zoning Districts
Section 18.61 Permitted Uses in Zoning Districts
Section 18.62 - 18.65 Reserved
Determination of Unclassified Uses
Section 18.66 Determination of Unclassified Uses
Sections 18.67 - 18. 70 Reserved
Non-Conforming Use
Section 18. 71 Continuation of a Non-Conforming Use
Section 18.72 Changing a Non-Conforming
Section 18.73 Applications for Changing a Non-Conforming Use
Section 18.74 Conditions on Approval
Sections 18. 7 4 - 18.80 Reserved
Supplementary District Regulations
Section 18.81 Corner Visibility
Section 18.82 Off-Premise Signs
Section 18.83 Off-Street Signs
Section 18.84 Off-Street Loading and Unloading
Section 18.85 Public Street Frontage
Section 18.86 Accessory Building
· Section 18.87 Auto Wrecking, Junkyards, Body Shops, and Motor Vehicle
Section 18.88
Section 18.89
_Garage
Cemetery (Commercial)
Customary Home Occupations
Section 18.90 Swimming Pools
-- .--- - -- ----·-Section-1-8.91 ·---GasolineServiceStations.
Section 18.92 Storage of Certain Vehicles and Equipment
Section 18.93 Airports
Section 18.94 Inert Landfills
Sections 18.95 -18.100 Reserved
Article XIII Exceptions and Modifications
Article XIV
Section 18.101 .Front Yard
Section 18.102 Height Limits
Section 18.103 Temporary Uses
Section 18.104 Existing Lots of Record
Sections 18.105 - 18.110 Reserved
Administration and Enforcement
Section 18.111 Enforcing Officer
Section 18.112 Building Permit Required
Section 18.113 Approval of Plans and Issuance of Building Permit
18-2 .
. -
Article XV
Section 18.114 Certificate of Occupancy Required
Section 18.115 Penalties for Violating Zoning Ordinance
Section 18.116 Remedies
Sections 18.117 - 18.120 Reserved
Variances
Section 18.121 Variances
Sections 18.122 - 18.125 Reserved
Article XVI Amendments and Alterations
Section 18.126 Initiation of Amendments
Section 18.127 Public Notification
Section 18.128 Public Hearing Procedures
Section 18.129 Planning Commission Public Hearing and Action
Section 18.130 Board of Commissioners Public Hearing and Action
Section 18.131 ZoningStandards
Section 18.132 Conditi.onal Use Standards
Sections 18.133 -18.135 Reserved
Article XVII Alteration of Zoning Conditions
Section 18.136 Minor Alterations Approval
Section 18.137 Amendments of Zoning Ordinance
Sections 18.138 - 18.140 Reserved
Article XVIII Fees
Section 18.141 Fees
Sections 18.142 - 18.145 Reserved
Article XIX Legal Status
Section 18.146 Interpretation
Section 18.147 Saving Clause
Section 18.148 Effective Date
Sections 18.149 - 18.150 Reserved
APPENDIXAZONINGMAPATTACHMENTS
ART1CLE I. TITLE AND OBJECTIVES
Section 18.1 TITLE AND OBJECTIVES.
This Ordinance shall be known as the "Zoning Ordinance of Randolph County, Georgia,"
for the purpose of setting forth standards and permissible uses designated to conserve and protect
the natural, economic, and scenic resources of Randolph County; to secure safety from fire, panic,
and other dangers: to promote health, aesthetics, convenience, order, prosperity and general welfare;
to provide adequate light and air; to prevent the overcrowding of land; to promote desirable living
conditions and stability of neighborhoods; to facilitate the adequate provision of transportation,
water, public and private sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements by regulating the
uses of the land. This Ordinance shall be known and may be cited as the "Zoning Ordinance of
Randolph County, Georgia."
Sections 18.2 - 18.5 RESERVED.
18-3
--· -
ARTICLE II. LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY
Section 18.6 LEGISLATIVE AUTHORITY.
Whereas, counties of the State of Georgia are authorized by the 1983 Georgia State
Constitution, Article 9, Section 2, Paragraph 4, and Chapter 66 of Title 36 of the Official Code of
Georgia Annotated, to exercise the powers of planning and zoning; and whereas it has been
determined by the Board of Commissioners of Randolph County, Georgia that it is necessary and
desirabl.e to adopt zoning regulations under the authority of the above cited Constitutional and
statutory provisions.
Sections 18. 7 - 18.10 RESERVED.
18-4
. . -
ARTICLE UL METHOD OF REGULATION
Section 18.11 METHOD OF REGULATION.
Now therefore be it resolved that the Board of Commissioners of Randolph County, Georgia
as authorized by the Constitution of the State of Georgia has created a planning commission known
as the Randolph County Planning Commission and does hereby adopt zoning .regulations for the
following purposes: to define certain words used therein; to create zone boundaries; to regulate the
location of trades, professions, businesses, and industries; to regulate the density in distribution of
population; to provide for the gradual elimination of nonconforming uses of land, buildings, and
structures; to define and limit the powers and duties of the planning commission; to provide for the
imposition ofpenalties for violations; repeal conflicting ordinances and resolutions; and for other
purposes.
Sections 18.12 - 18.15 RESERVED .
18-5
. ---·
ARTICLE IV. JURISDICTION
Section 18.16 JURISDICTION
This Ordinance shall govem the use of all land development therein and within the
unincorporated limits of Randolph County, Georgia in accordance with 3 6-70-2 of the Official Code
of Georgia Annotated.
Sections 18.17 - 18.20 RESERVED.
18-6
. ·---=-- ARTICLE V. WORD USAGE AND DEFINITIONS OF TERMS
Section 18.21 WORD USAGE AND DEFINITION OF TERMS
l. Word Usage
For the purpose ofthis Ordinance, certain words or terms used herein are interpreted as
follows:
(a) Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the
singular include the plural, and words in the plural include the singular.
(b) The word "shall" is always mandatory.
( c) The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, trust company,
or corporation as well as an individual.
( d) The work "lot" includes the words "plot" or "parcel."
( e) The word "building" includes the word "structure."
(f) The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or buildings, shall be
construed to include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be
used or occupied."
(g) The word "map" or "zoning map" means the "official zoning map of
Randolph County."
(h) The words "governing body" refer to the Randolph County Board of
Commissioners.
(i) The words "planning commission'' refer to the Randolph County Planning
Commission.
Section 18.22 DEFINITIONS.
When used in the Ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings herein ascribed
to them in this Section. Terms not herein defined shall have their customary dictionary definjtions
where not inconsistent with the context.
Accessory Building or Use. A subordinate building or use customarily incidental to and
located on the same lot with the main building or use, such as a garage, workshop and the like. An
accessory use shall not include any used injurious or offensive to the neighborhood.
Agriculture or Agricultural. The bona fide use of a parcel ofland of five acres or more for
the cultivatfon ofland, raising of poultry or livestock or similar agrarian activity (to include tree
18-7
farms) for gain or profit and the related buildings, structures, and appurtenances necessary to carry
out the aforementioned activities.
Airfield. Any area of land or water utilized for the landing and taking off of aircraft.
Airport. Any area of!and or water designed and set aside for the landing and taking off of
aircraft and utilized or to be utilized in the public interest for such purposes. An airport shall include
all runways, terminal buildings, hangers, and related facilities located on the airport premises.
Alley. A private or public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to
a building or property and not intended for general traffic circulation.
Apartment Building. A multi-family dwelling located on a parcel of land under a single
ownership designed for use by four or more housekeeping units living independently of each other
and doing their own cooking on the premises.
Aquifer. Any stratum (rock layer) or zone ofrock beneath the surface of the earth capable
of containing or producing water from a dug well.
Automobile Sales Lot. An open premise arranged, designed, or used for storage and dispfay
for sale of any motor vehicle or any type of trailer.
Bed and Brealifast. A dwelling unit in which room(s) or lodging unit (or units) and
"continental" breakfast service only is provided to guest clients, for lengths of stay ranging from one
night to seasonal, by owner of the principal structure.
Boarding House. A dwelling in which lodging and meals are furnished for consideration for
four or more but not exceeding nine guests. Such dwelling shall contain no more than five guest
rooms.
Building. Any structure, either temporary or permanent, above or below ground, having a
roof or other covering and designed, built, or used as a shelter or enclosure for persons, animals; or
property of any kind including tents or awnings used for purposes of a building.
Building Line. A line beyond which the foundation wall and/or any roofed porch, vestibule
or other such portion of a building shall not project.
Building Principal. A building' in which is conducted the principal use of the lot in which
the structure is situated.
Buffer. A buffer is a strip ofland which separates two (2) or more zoning districts by the use
of shrubs and trees which will form an opaque barrier of a prescribed width and be at least six (6) .
feet in height within three (3) years of planting.
Care Home. A rest home, nursing home, convalescent home, home for the aged or similar
18-8
use established and operated on a profit or non-profit basis to provide lodging and/or meals and/or
care forthe aged, infirm, chronically ill or convalescent persons. The term "care home" shall include
the term "extended care facility" as defined by Georgia Law.
Caretaker of Employee Residence. An accessory residence (including mobile homes) placed
on an occupied tract for use by a bona fide caretaker, employee or the owner himself.
Church, Club or Lodge. Building in which organized religious, fraternal, social or
educational meetings are conducted on a regular non-profit basis. Fraternal organizations must show
that they have received recognition and sanction from a parent group or organization. A private club
must show that its membership is limited by either: a) the use and operation of an amateur athletic
facility including but not limited to golf courses, tennis courts, shooting ranges and/or swimming
pools; or b) residence in a particular subdivision, condominium, apartment project or other
residential development.
Commercial Outdoor Recreation Development (CORD). A development of at least five (5)
acres or more that is a commercial enterprise that encompasses active and/or passive outdoor
recreational activities. A CORD district may be located in any zoning district with prior approval
by the Randolph County Board ·of Commissioners.
Comprehensive Plan. A composite of the joint Randolph County/ Cities of Cuthbert and
Shellman Comprehensive Plan, all accompanying maps, charts explanatory materials, together with
all amendments thereto, adopted by the Randolph County Planning Committee and the Randolph
County Board of Commissioners, as well as each municipal government.
Conditional Use. Is a use which is not automatically permitted inherently but which may be
permitted within a zoning district subject to meeting specific conditions contained in this regulation
or required by the Randolph County Board of Commissioners. Public Notification procedures
described in Section 16.2 shall be followed for all conditional use permits except for those
..... conditionaLuses .listecLin .. Section.82.liereof..... . . _ ---- ____ -----···- --·· __ ..
Condominium. A building or complex of multiple-unit dwellings in which a tenant hold full
title to his unit and joint ownership in common grounds.
Day Care Center. An establishment which provided care and education for six or more
children from infancy, opened for the major portion of the day or night and in which meals are
served.
District. Any section or sections of the county for which the regulations governing the use
ofland and the use, density, bulk, height, and coverage ofbuildings and other structures are uniform.
Drive-In. A retail or service enterprise wherein service is provided to. the consumer on the
outside and/or inside of the principal building. The term "drive-in" includes drive-in restaurants and
dairy bars, theaters, banks, laundries, food stores and/or car washes.
Duplex. Two (2) dwelling units, each of which is attached side to side, each one(!) sharing
18-9
only one (1) common wall with the other; also referred to as duplex when place on a single lot or a
townhouse when each is on a lot.
Dwelling Unit. A building or portion thereof arranged or designed for occupancy by not
more than one family for living purposes and having cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities.
Dwelling, Attached Three (3) or more adjoining dwelling units, each of which is separated
from the others by one (1) or more unpierced walls from ground to roof; also referred to as a
townhouse.
Dwelling, Multi-Family. A dwelling unit contained in a building composed of three (3) or
more dwelling units. Also referred to as an apartment.
Dwelling, Single Family Detached A dwelling designed for and occupied by not more than
one (I) family and having no roof, wall, or floor in common with any other dwelling unit.
Easement. A grant to a person or to the public by a property owner of a strip of his/her land
for road right-of-way or other specified purposes.
Equestrian Center. A tract ofland of twenty-five (25) acres or more on which more than four
adult horses are kept for the purpose of training, boarding, sale or breeding or where instruction
pertaining to the same is given for a fee. For the purposes .of this ordinance this term also includes
facilities for riding trails and rings, shows, competitive equestrian events and riding lessons.
Family. One (1) or more persons permanently occupying a single dwelling unit provided that
unless all members are related by blood, marriage, or adoption, and including foster chiidren (as that
term is defined under Georgia Law) no such family shall contain over five persons, but further
provided that domestic servants employed on the premises may be housed on the premises or in an
accessory building.
Farm. A parcel ofland twenty-five (25) acres or more on which bona fide agricultural and
related uses are conducted as specified in "agricultural."
Flea Market. A building or open area in which stalls or sales areas are set aside, and rented
or otherwise provided, and which or intended for use by various unrelated individuals to sell articles
tat are either homemade, homegrown, hand-crafted, old, obsolete, or antique and may include the
selling of goods at retail by businesses or individuals who are generally engaged in retail trade.
Floating Zone. A zoning technique under which the county adopts a zoning district in the
text of the zoning ordinance but is not placed on the official zoning map. The county reserves the
· mapping decision until developer makes an application to have the floating zone applied to his
property. Each floating zone will have density and site development standards.
Floodplain. Floodplains may be either riverine or inland depressional areas. Riverine flood
plains are those areas contiguous with a lake, streai;i or stream bed whose elevation is greater than
18-10
the normal flowing water or waterpool elevation but equal to or lower than the 100-year (one (1)
percent annual probability) flood elevation. Inland depressional floodplains are floodplains not
associated with a stream system but which are low points to which surrounding lands drain.
Garage, Repair. Building and premises designed or used for the purpose of service and/or
major commercial repair of motor vehicles provided that the body work and painting shall be
conducted within fully enclosed buildings and provided further that the storage of junk, wrecked
vehicles, dismantled parts or supplies shall not be visible beyond the premises.
Garage Sale (includes yard sale; rummage sale). The sale or offering for sale to the general
public of over five items of personal property on any portion ofa lot in a residential zoning district,
whether within or outside any building. Sales of programs and food and beverage items at school
athletic events shall not be deemed to constitute a garage sale.
Groundwater Recharge Area. The land area where the water that eventually seeps down into.
an aquifer first enters the ground as mapped on the Most Significant Groundwater Recharge Area
of Georgia and the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map.
Group Home. A dwelling unit which is used to provide assisted community living for
persons with physical, mental, emotional, familiar or social difficulties. A group home must comply
with all state and federal regulations applying to such facilities.
Governmental Landfills and/or Governmental Waste Disposal Facilities. Any landfill or
other type waste disposal facility to include, but not be limited to, an incinerator, which is owned or
operated by any county, municipality, or other governmental agency, entity, or authority not located
within the corporate limits of Randolph County, Georgia.
Hazardous Waste. Any waste product listed, characterized or designated as hazardous by the
United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the Resource Conservation and
.. - ---'Recovery.A.ct, .42-USC.,69.0 l,..et.seq.,.and its.implementing.regulations,. or.the.GeorgiaBazardous .... _ .
·Waste Management Act, 0. C. G.A. § 12-8-60, et seq., and the regulations promulgated thereunder,
as the foregoing currently exist or are hereafter amended.
Hazardous .Waste Disposal Facility. All structures, other appurtenances, and improvements
on the land used for treating, storing, or disposing of hazardous waste, including all operations or
storage areas, diked overflow, or emergency spillway areas. A hazardous waste disposal facility may
consist of several treatment, storage, or disposal operational units; it includes all areas where
hazardous waste may ·be received, stored, handled, or processed.
Home Occupation. An occupation or profession conducted entirely within a dwelling and
which is carried on by an occupant thereof and no.more than three nonresidents, and which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. There is no
access by the public. A Home Occupation is designed to be less restrictive than a Home Office but
more restrictive than a Residential Business in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number
· ·- of employees and types of business.
18-11
~-----
Home Office. An office use conducted entirely within a dwelling which is carried on by the
occupant thereof and no other individual, and which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use
of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes. The office may be for the purpose of service or
trade workers who customarily work at various locations, such as electricians, plumbers, appraisers,
. real estate salespersons or individuals who work at home, such as writers or computerprogrammers.
There will be no changes which would alter the character of the dwelling or reveal from the exterior
that the dwelling is being used in part for other than residential purposes. The office will be
restricted to no more than two rooms of the dwelling and cannot exceed more than six hundred
square feet in area. Such office uses shall be limited to routine office clerical or bookkeeping
procedures which can be conducted within a residence. Home Office shall not include any business
which involves the sale, manufacture or repair or merchandise on the premises. Home Offices shall
also include any business requiring access by the public including but not limited to customers,
clients or vendors. No outside storage or display including signs is permitted and no one other than
family members who reside on the premises may be employed in the office.
Hospitals. Any institution receiving in-patients and rendering medical care including those
wherein mentally retarded, mentally disturbed, epileptic, alcoholic, drug addicted, chronically ill and
physically handicapped patients are treated or cared for.
Hotel. Any building containing principally sleeping rooms in which transient guest are
lodged with or without meals, with no provision made for cooking in any individual room or suite.
For structural and safety purposes, such buildings must conform to state laws regulating hotels.
Industrialized Building Any structure or component thereof which is wholly or in
substantial part made, fabricated, formed, or assembled in manufacturing facilities for installation
or assembly an installation on a building site and has been manufactured in such a manner that all
parts or processes cannot be inspected at the installation site without disassembly, damage to, or
destruction thereof, and bearing the approved insignia of the Commissioner of Community Affairs,
Georgia Department of Community Affairs.
Industrial Park A tract ofland subdivided and developed according to a Comprehensive
Development Plan in a manner that provides a park-like setting for industrial establishments.
Junkyard The use of any space whether inside or outside a building for the storage, keeping,
salvage and/or sale of junk, scrap metals or other scrap materials including dismantling, demolition
or abandonment of one oi: more automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof
Kennel. Commercial. Any place in or at which more than four adult dogs (or cats) are kept
for the purpose of sale, boarding, care, breeding or training and for which any fee is charged.
Laboratory. An establishment or premises where scientific services are provided including
testing or analysis of medical, chemical, physical, mechanical, electric or electronic nature or the
calibration of instruments ..
Land Application Waste Disposal Facilities. Any facility at which pollutants are applied to
18-12
----
the surface or beneath the surface of a parcel of land and which creates the opportunity for such
pollutants to percolate, infiltrate, or be absorbed into soil and/or into the waters ofRandolph County,
Georgia.
Lot. A portion of a subdivision or any other parcel ofland intended as a unit for transfer or
ownership or lease to, or separate use of, another, or for development. The word "lot" includes, but
is not limited to, the words "plot" or "parcel."
Lot Area. The horizontal area contained within the boundary lines of a1ot.
Lot Corner. A lot abutting two or more streets at their intersection.
Lot Depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in
the general direction of the side lot lines.
Lot. Double Frontage. A lot, other than a comer lot, which has frontage on more than one
street.
Lot Frontage. Lot width measured at the street lot lines(s), being the length of the property
line of any one premise along each legally accessible public right-of-way it borders.
Lot Line. A line bounding a lot which divides one lot from another or from a Street or any
other public or private space.
Lot Line, Front. That lot line along which the lot takes primary access to a street.
Lot Line, Rear. That lot line which is parallel to and most distant from the front lot line of
a lot or, in the case of an irregular lot, a twenty (20) feet in length, entirely within the lot, parallel to
and at the maximum possible distance from, the front lot line.
Lot Line, Side. Any lot line other than a front or rear lot line ..
Lot of Record. Any validly recorded lot which at the time of its recordation complied with
all applicable laws, ordinance and regulations. ·
Lot Width. The mean horizontal distance between the side lot lines measured parallel to the
front and rear lot lines at the building line. In the case of only one side lot line, lot width shall be
measured between such lot line and the opposite lot line or future right-of-way line.
Manufactured Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on
a permanent chassis, and designed to be used as a dwelling yvith orwithout permanent foundation,
when connected to the required utilities, and includes plumbing, heating, air conditioning and
electrical systems contained therein. Manufactured Homes are constructed to the federal
Manufacture Home Construction Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as
amended, 42 USC 5401, et seq.
18-13
·.~
Mobile Home. A structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling
mode, is eight bodyfeet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on site,
is 320 or more square feet and which is designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a
permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating,
air-conditioning and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976.
Modular Home. A factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to
be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a permanent structure to be used
for residential purposes and which bears a seal of compliance with regulations of the Southern
Building Code Congress International, the Georgia Industrial Building Act, or the National
Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act, as amended.
Motel. A building or group of buildings containing guest rooms and having a separate
outside entrances for each guest room. To be used primanly for automobile transients and including
such terms as "auto court" and "motor lodge" but not "boarding house" as defined in this section.
Nonconforming Use. Any building, structure or use ofland which lawfully exists atthe time
of adoption of this resolution and which does not conform to the regulations of the zoning district
iri which it is located.
Occupy. To use land or buildings for any length or time for a purpose for which the land or
a building or part thereofis used or is intended to be used. Any variation of the term "occupy'' shall
be encompassed by this definition.
Park, Community. A parcel ofland owned by a unit of government or a private organization
used or intended to be used for recreational or leisure time activities. Such parks may include food
and/or recreational sales and accessory uses.
Planned Unit Development (PUD). A large, unified development of ten acres or more
.. adheringJ:o_a_comprehensi.v..e_deYelopment.plan.ancllo.cated.on.asingle_trac.Lofland,_or_on.tlll:o or.
more tracts of land which may be separated only by a street or other right-of-way, whose approval
would serve to implement the plans ofRandolph County (see Section 8.5 Planned Unit Development
for other requirements).
Plat. A sketch, map or survey of a lot, tract or parcel ofland including lot lines, street rights.
of-way and easements with the dimensions of these features inscribed thereon.
Plat Development. A preliminary design which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision
in sufficient detail to indicate its workability and conformation to the design requirements of the
subdivision regulations in all aspects but is not final in form for recording and the details are not
completely computed. The development plat shall be approved by the planning commission prior
to any development.
Plat. Final. A finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal .
· --- and engineering information and certification necessary. The streets shown on the plat shall be
18-14
approved by the planning commission and the Randolph County Board of Commissioners prior to
recording.
Pollution Susceptibility. The relative vulnerabrlity of groundwater to pollution from
chemical spills, leaching of pollutants from dump sites, animal waste from agricultural operations
or pollution generated by other human activities.
Pollution Susceptibility Map(s). Maps prepared by the Georgia Department of Natural
Resources (DNR) that show the relative susceptibility of groundwater to pollution. Pollution
susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the State into areas of high, medium and low
groundwater pollution potential.
Private Landfill and/or Private Waste Disposal Facility. Any landfill or other type of waste
disposal facility to include, but not limited to, an incinerator, which is owned or operated by any
private entity.
Public Utility or Utilities. A service or services provided by a public utility company or a
private entity which provides such service or services, and all equipment arid structures necessary
to pr9vide such services.
Public Way. A street or road which has been dedicated for public use by deed, plat and/or
prescription.
Residence. A building containing only dwelling units and which meets all the applicable
requirements of the Standard Building Code for conventional construction. The term "residence"
or any combination thereof shall not be deemed to include hotel, boarding house, rooming house,
motel or other accommodations used for transient occupancy and shall not for the purpose of this
ordinance include mobile home, manufactured home or modular home.
·-·-· ----Restaurant ... An.establishmenthowe¥er..designated.at-w.hich£o.odis.sold£or.c.onsumption_on
the premises. However, a snack bar or refreshment stand at a public or non-profit community
swimming pool, playground, park or marina operated solely for the convenience of patrons of the
facility shall not be deemed a restaurant.
Residential Business. An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, and which
is carried on by an occupant thereof and no more than five nonresidents, and which is clearly
incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential dwelling purposes .. The business
may require access by the public. The Residential Business is designed to be less restrictive than a
Home Office or Home Occupation but more restrictive than a Rural Business in regard to access by
the public, size visibility, number of employees and types of business.
Right-of Way. Access over or across particularly described property for a specific purpose
or purposes.
Right-of-Way Line. The outside boundary of a right-of-way, whether such right-of-way be
established by usage, recorded easement, deed, dedication or by the official right-of-way map of
18-15
Randolph County.
Road See definition of"Street - Highway - Road."
Rural Business. An occupation or profession conducted within a dwelling, an accessory
structure or outside and which is carried on by a resident of that property and which is clearly
incidental and secondary to use of the property for residential dwelling purposes. The rural business
is designed to be less restrictive than the Home Office, Home Occupation or Residential Business
in regard to access by the public, size, visibility, number of employees and types of business.
Setback. The minimum horizontal distance between the right-of-way line, rear or side lines
of the lot and the front, rear or side lines of the building. The term "required setback" means a line
beyond which a building is not permitted to extend under the provisions of this resolution
establishing minimum depth and widths of yard.
Sewage Sludge (Biosolids) Land Application and Disposal Facilities. Any tract of!and or
facility at which solid, semisolid, or liquid residue generated during the treatment of domestic
sewage, industrial wastewater or a combination or domestic sewage and industrial wastewater is
sprayed, deposited, spread, injected or applied upon or beneath the land's surface, or otherwise
applied to land. Sewage Sludge includes, but in not limited to, scum, or solids removed in primary,
secondary or advanced wastewater treated processes conducted by any governmental or private
wastewater treatment facility.
Shopping Center. A group of commercial establishments planned, developed and owned or
managed as a unit with on-site parking and of similar architectural characteristics.
Sign, Off Premises. Any outdoor sign, notice or advertising device used to advertise,
announce or promote a business, professional, commercial or industrial enterprise or undertaking
which is located and which is operated at a site other than the premises upon which the sign is
-- ___ Jocated ... Such..signsshalllle.permitted.upon..astandard.sign.anclthen..only .on..zonesin..w.hich.snch ________ .
are allowed by this ordinance_
Sign, On-Premises. Any outdoor sign, notice, or advertising device used primarily to direct
attention to a business, professional, commercial or industrial enterprise, or undertaking being
conducted upon the premises on which such sign is located. Such signs shall not exceed two
hundred (200) square feet in area.
Sign, Public or Semi-public directional, off-premises. A sign which directs attention to a
public or semi-public activity, such as a school, church, :fraternal organization, or the like. Such
signs shall not exceed ten (I 0) square feet in area.
Sign, Standard. A sign which does not exceed five feet in face height and is no more than
ten feet in face width, supported by metal tubing posts of the type specified by the latest edition of
the Standard Building Code or other approved material. Any such sign shall be constructed with
twenty-gauge sheet metal, wood or plastic, painted on each side, the trim of which may be treated
wood.
18-16
Significant Groundwater Recharge Areas. Areas mapped by DNR in Hydrologic Atlas 18
(1989 edition). Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology (chemical nature and
form of the rock), soil type and thickness, slope, density oflithologic contracts, geologic structure,
presence of"karst" topography (sinkholes, caves and fissures associated with limestone and other
carbonate rocks), and potentiometric surfaces.
Slow Rate Land Treatment System. A system for wastewater treatment by spray irrigation
(land application). The term refers to the advanced treatment of wastewater by irrigation onto
support vegetative growth. When properly sited, designed and operated as defined by state and local
regulations, there is no direct discharge to surfaced waters. The irrigated wastewater evaporates and
transpires to the atmosphere or enters the groundwater through percolation. Organic constituents
in the wastewater are stabilized by soil bacteria, lost to the atmosphere through denitrification, and
leached into the groundwater. Phosphorus and other constituents are absorbed in the soil profile and
· taken up by plants. Properly sited, designed and operated irrigation systems produce a percolate
water of high quality and thus protect ground and surface water resources. For purposes of this
ordinance, the use may include ponds (lagoons) for the temporary storage of the treated wastewater
before application to the spray fields. The treated wastewater stored in the lagoons must have been
treated to a level that could be sprayed without further treatment. These ponds shall have liners to
prevent seepage. This land use is permitted only with the approval of the Randolph County Board
of Commissioners after a recoIIimendation by the planning commission.
Solar Panel Field. An area or parcel of land containing one or more solar panels used to
produce electricity commercially for the purpose
Steep Slopes. All 1and that has a slope of20% or greater for at least 500 feet apart as shown
on a United States Geologic Survey (USGS) Quadrangle Map.
Street. A public or dedicated thoroughfare or a private right-of-way or easement shown on
a recorded plat and which has been approved by the planning commission.
Street, Connector. A street supplementary to the major state and U.S. highway systems
running throughout the country and primarily a means ofinterconnectivity between this system and
smaller areas.
Street, Cul-de-sac. A short street designed to have one end permanently closed. The closed
end terminated by a vehicular turnaround.
Street,.Dead-end. A street having no outlet at one end.
Street, Highway, Road. Shall mean a road or street that forms a part of the existing or
projected Federal Aid Highway System or the State or County Highway System.
Street, Centerline. That line surveyed and monumented or accepted by Randolph County as
the centerline of the street; or in the event no centerline has been so determined, that line running
midway between and generally parallel to the direction of the outside right~of-way lines of the street.
18-17
Structure. Anything constructed or erected that requires location on the ground or attached
to something having a location on the ground, to include, among other things, buildings, towers,
monuments, statues; but not to include telephone and other utilities poles, overhead wires, retaining
walls and-terrace walls, wire fences, and any other thing less than three feet in height.
Subdivision. Division of a tract or parcel ofland into five or more lots, building sites, tracts,
parcels, or other divisions ofland for the purpose, whether immediate or future, of sale, lease, rent,
or building development, including all divisions of land involving a new street or a change in
existing streets. The term "Subdivision" does not apply to the division of !arid into parcels of five
(5) or more where no new street is involved. All subdivisions are to be divided and developed in
accordance with the Subdivision Regulations of Randolph County, Georgia.
Townhouse. Residential structures containing three or more attached single-family units
designed as a single structure having common or party walls. Each unit shall have its own front door
which opens to the outdoors and the units shall have one or two floors but without access between
adjoining units.
Travel Trailer. A vehicular portable structure not over eight feet by thirty-five feet and
designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreational and vacation uses which may or may not
have kitchen equipment, toilet, lavatory and bathing facilities, but if such facilities are included, a
sewage holding tank for sanitary waste is required.
Travel Trailer Park · A parcel of land which has been planned and developed to
accommodate two or more travel trailers, tents or other camping units for temporary occupancy of
not over sixty days' duration. The definition of Travel Trailer Park shall include RV parks,
campgrounds, campsites, and primitive campsites.
Tree. Any object of natural growth.
Use. The specific purpose for which land or building is designed, arranged, intended, or for
_:__ -which.it-isor.may.be-occupiedor.maintained.... . . __ --·--··-- ----···-- ... .. __ ..
Use, Principal. The primary purpose for which a lot or building is designed, arranged,
intended, occupied or maintained.
Use, Temporary. Any use established, for a fixed period of time, without construction or
alteration of a permanent structure, with the intent to discontinue such use upon expiration of such
time.
Variance. A modification of the strict terms of zoning regulation granted by the Randolph
County Planning Commission where such modification will not be contrary to the public interest,
and where, owing to conditions unique to the individual property on which the variance is sought
and not as a result of any action on the part of the property owner, a literal enforcement of this
resolution would result in unnecessary and undue hardship provided, however, that no variance shall
be granted which shall authorize a land use not otherwise permitted in a particular district.
18-18
Vehicle. Any device or contrivance for carrying or conveying persons or objects, said device
being designed to be self-propelled by its own motor or power.
Water System, C<;>mmunity. A potable water supply and treatment system other than an
individual public water system serving more than one building, residence or other facility designed
or used for human occupancy or congregation. The system is one which is owned by a person or
legal unit other than a unit or government.
Water System, Individual. A potable water system other than a community or public water
system serving a single building, residence or other facility designed or used for human occupancy
or congregation.
Water System, Public. A potable water supply and treatment system other than individual
or community water systems ·owned by a unit of government.
Wetland. An area of one acre or more where standing water is retained for a portion of the
year and unique vegetation had adapted to the area; as mapped by the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Wireless Communications. Wireless communications shall mean any personal wireless
service as defined in the.Telecommunications Act ofl 966, which includes FCC licensed commercial
wireless communications services (PCS), enhanced specialized mo bile radio (ESMR)privatemobile
radio(PMR) paging, and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed.
Wireless Communication Tower. A structure designed and constructed specifically to support
an antenna array, and any include a monopole, self-supporting Oattice) tower, guy-wire support tower
and other similar structures. Tower Structures shall be designed to accommodate a minimum of three
(3) antenna arrays.
Yard. A required open space on the same lot with a principal building, and which is
···· -unoccupied,-and-unobstructed-by-buildings.or-structures .. from-the-ground-to-thesey, .exceptwhere ..
encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted.
Yard, Front. The full width of the lot between the street right-of-way and the front building
line.
Yard, Rear. The full width of the lot between the rear line of the lot and the rear building
line.
Yard, Side. The space between the building and the side line of the lot exclusive of front and
rear yard.
Zoning Condition. Any stipulation made by the county commission as a zoning decision
affecting property which imposes a requirement on the use or development of property which is
different from the use or development regulations set forth in .the zoning district to which the
property is being rezoned. By way of example, but not as a limitation, such zoning conditions may
18-19
relate to the use, density, construction material, architectural style and design, location of structures
and buffer area.
Zoning Decision. Final action by the Randolph County Board of Commissioners which
result in
a. the adoption of a zoning ordinance;
b. the adoption of any amendment to a zoning ordinance which changes the text of the
zoning ordinance;
c. the adoption of an amendment to the zoning ordinance which rezones property
from one zoning district to another; or
d. the approval of a conditional use.
Zoning Official. The official or other designated authority charged by the Randolph County
Board of Commissioner with administration and enforcement of this resolution or his duly appointed
representative.
Sections 18.23 -18.25 RESERVED.
18-20
ARTICLE VL ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS.
Section 18.26 DISTRICT DESIGNATIONS.
Randolph County, Georgia is hereby divided into the following zoning district:
A-1 General Agriculture and Forestry District
R-R Rural Residential
R-1 Residential
C-1 Commercial District
I-1 Industrial District
In addition, the following designations will be utilized as floating zones:
CORD
MHU-1
PUD
Overlay Zones
Commercial Outdoor Recreation District
Manufactured Housing Unit District - Parks
Planned Unit Development
Natural Resource Conservation
Wetland Protection
Groundwater Recharge Protection Area
River Corridor Protection Plan
Section 18.27 OFFICIAL ZONING MAP.
The boundaries of these districts are hereby established as shown in the map entitled "The
Zoning Map of Randolph County, Georgia." Said map shall also be identified by the signature of
the clerk and the Board of Commissioners .and the date and adoption of this of this ordinance. The
---zoning--map·-and-all-explanatocy:-matters--thereon-are.-hereby~adopted--and-made-.a..parLoLthis ....
ordinance. Said documents are made a public record and shall be kept in the office of the County ·
Commissioners.
Section 18.28 MAP AMENDMENTS.
In accordance with the provisions of this ordinance, changes may be made in the district
boundaries or other information portrayed on the official zoning map by the o'fficial action of the
Board of Commissioners. Such changes shall be made on the official zoning map promptly, together
with a numerical entry on the official zoning map referring to the application and other records on
file which state the date of the official action and description of the nature of the changes.
No changes of any nature shall be made to the official zoning map or matters shown thereon
except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this ordinance. Any unauthorized change or
whatever kind by any person shall be considered a violation of this ordinance and is punishable as
provided by law in this ordinance.
18-21
Section 18.29 INTERPRETATION OF DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.
Unless otherwise specified, district boundary lines shall be property or lot lines, the center
lines of streets, or such lines extended, a line midway between the main tracks of the railroad, a line
lying in the ceriter of a stream or drainage way, or the county line of Randolph County, Georgia
Such lines drawn or to appear on these lines are to be considered thereon. Where district boundary
line divides a lot which was in single ownership at the time of adoption of this Ordinance, the
Planning Commission may permit, as a conditional use, the extension of the regulations for either
portion of the lot to exceed fifty (50) feet beyond the district line into the remaining portion of the
lot.
Section 18.30 CONFORMITY.
No building or land shall be used or occupied except in conformity with the provisions of this
zoning ordinance herein specified for the district in which it is located from the date of the enactinent
of this ordinance. No owner or any lot located within this county shall subdivide said lot such that·
remaining lots would have an area less than that required under the applicable zoning district
requirements. (See Section 11 - Non-Conformity)
Sections 18.31 - 18.35 RESERVED.
18-22
ARTICLE VII. ZONING CLASSIFICATIONS.
The following sections define the purpose and intent of the zoning districts established by
this ordinance. Uses specified in this section are simply examples. Specific uses allowed in each
district are defined in:
Section 18.36 A-1 GENERAL AGRICULTURE AND FORESTRY DISTRICT.
The agricultural district is established.to main:tain those areas with land characteristics, such
as soil moisture, temperature, and content suitable for farming, dairying, forestry operations, and
' other agricultural activities; to protect land used or needed for food production and other agricultural
uses from encroachment by untimely and unplanned residential, commercial, or industrial
development; to permit the continuation of agricultural uses in areas where development is
anticipated, but where the present application of zoning controls for future, more intensive uses
would be unreasonable and premature; to prevent the subdivision ofland forresidential development
that requires public services such as paved roads, water, and sanitary sewer; and to preserve the rural,
open space character of certain areas.
No new A-1 Agriculture and Forestry District may be created which contains less than
twenty-five (25) acres.
Section 18.37 R-R RURAL RESIDENTIAL DISTRICT.
The rural residential district is composed of open land areas and forest lands located on non~
prime agriculturaI soils where a more intensive use of land is unlikely to occur in the near future.
This district in intended to preserve lands best suited for large parcel residential uses and preserve
land suited to the eventual economical and practical provisions of streets, utilities, schools, and other
facilities in the development of the county.
.. --..Section-18.38-- ... --R-1-RESIDEN.'.fJAL-DIS'.f.RICT . . -
The residential district is established for more concentrated medium-to-higher density
residential are~ of the county. These areas are intended to be geographically defined and protected
from the encroachment of uses not performing a function necessary to a residential environment.
Certain nomesidential uses that are more compatible with residential uses may be permitted on
review of the planning commission.
Section 18.39 C-1 COMMERCIAL DISTRICT.
The commercial district is established to provide suitable areas for a broad range of retail,
wholesale, and service tises. General compatibility with abutting different uses is required, this may
be achieved through buffering, screening, and/or development plan review. Development in this
district should be located on major thoroughfares (highways), arterial streets or collector streets and
the associated street network, the location and development of commercial activities shall be
encouraged so as to minimize traffic hazards and interference with adjacent uses.
18-23
Section 18.40 I-1 INDUSTRIAL DISTRICT.
The industrial district is established to provide areas for the development of industrial and
assembly plants and their related activities. It is also the intent of this district that noise, odor, dust,
and glare associated with uses permitted in this district by confined as much as possible. It is also
the intent of this district that traffic generated by uses permitted including raw materials, finished
products, and employees be minimal but that transportation facilities and routes be easily accessible.
Development in these districts should be served by sanitary sewer or have provision for on-site
disposal.
No new I-1 Industrial Districts may be created which contains less than five (5) acres.
Section 18.41 CORDCOMMERCIALOUTDOORRECREATIONDEVELOPMENT
DISTRICT.
This district is a floating zone. The CORD district is established to provide areas for
co=ercial recreational facilities and activities. This does not include seasonal hunting rights
between consenting parties. CORDs may be located in any district subject to approval by the
Randolph County Board of Commissioners.
Section 18.42 MHU-1 MANUFACTURED HOUSING UNIT DISTRICT - PARKS.
The Manufactured Housing Unit District - Parks is established to provide areas within the
county for the placement of manufactured housing units in parks which are designed for placement
of manufactured housing units. The specific intent of this district is .to require adequate space and
facilities for healthful living conditions; to require all such districts to have access to a major arterial
county road for easy accessibility; to insure suitable water and sewer facilities are provided according
to health regulations and statutes of the State of Georgia and the county commission; and to
encourage the development of manufactured home parks for long term residential use rather than
transient travel trailer use.
Section 18.43 PUD PLANNED UNIT DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
Planned Unit Development District is a method of development which permits a tract ofland
to be developed as one lot, rather than separate lots. The technique is used to encourage coordinated
development; to permit higher densities in conjunction with functional open space; to promote
efficient use of existing natural landscape features and to be developed in compliance with and
approved development plan.
Sections 18.44 - 18.45 RESERVED.
18-24
ARTICLE VIII. DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 18.46 USES PERMITTED.
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected and nci existing building or structure or any
part thereof shall be reconstructed or moved, nor shall any land, structure, or building be used or
altered except in conformity with the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is
located.
Section 18.47 CONDITIONAL USES PERMITTED IN ALL DISTRICTS WITH
REVIEW.
There shall be· permitted in all districts the following conditional uses only after site plan
review by the planning commission, specifics for which include the submission of an overall
development scheme stating the development intentions of the landowner, including but not limited
to the following: a statement oflocation and intensity of proposed uses(s) and activity(ies ), a physical
description of proposed facilities accommodating such uses, and a general location of public utilities.
1.. Public Buildings of a government nature, including libraries.
2. Public Utilities, not otherwise specified, including power and gas substations,
communication systems and pumping stations.
3. Customary Home Occupations/Offices.
4. Semi-public buildings and uses, including private schools and churches.
5. Public and Private School Buildings and Associated Uses, Vocational Schools,
Research and Training Facilities.
6. Public Recreational Facilities, including parks, playgrounds, stadiums, etc.
7. · General Recreational Facilities, including parks, playgrounds, stadiums, etc.
8. Day Care Centers, Nurseries, and Kindergartens.
All other conditional uses which may be allowed for under Section 9 hereof must be
approved by the Board of Commissioners in accordance with Section 16 hereof.
Section 18.48 DISTRICT REGULATIONS.
The following pages contain specific regulations for each district including uses permitted,
uses prohibited, required lot area, density limitations, setbacks, and height limitations. All lands,
18-25
buildings, and structures shall be developed in accor1
applicable to the zoning district in which such land, t
development of land not in accordance with that pe
prohibited.
Zoning District Regulations
DISTRICTS
AREA
REQUIREMENTS A-1 R-R
Minimum Lot Size 1.5 acres 1.5 acres l.
Minimum Lot Area
1 l~·tl ~
tD ~ - s;;~ Ce-o. i_9_1<p
per Dwelling Unit 1.5 acres 1.5 acres 1.5 acres*** NIA NIA
Minimum Lot
Width in Feet 150 150 150 75 100
Front Yard Setback
(Feet) 75 50 50 20 75
Rear Yard Setback
(Feet) 75 25 25 20** 75**
Side Yard Setback
(Feet) 50 10 10 * 40*
Street Side Yard
Setback (ft) ..
. lYfAJO_E. RQAD ··--- __ 5.\L __ ----·-- .. ±Q_ - ·---- --- ... AQ __ ---- ... _20 ---- -- _7_'L -------
MINOR ROAD 35 35 35 20 75
Maximum Building 25% 25% 33% 50% 50%
Area%
Maximum Building
Height (Feet) 120 35 35 35 35
* A side yard setback of25 feet shall be required where a side yard abuts a residential
district.
A minimum of 20 feet of setback shall be planted with a buffer strip of shrubs and trees.
18-26
** A minimum of 5 feet of required setback must be planted with a buffer strip where a rear
yard abuts a residential district.
*** Minimum Lot requirements are as stated unless public utilities (water and/or sewer) are
provided. In this case, minimum lot size and area shall be 3/4 acre.
Section 18.49 DETAILED REGULATIONS FORMHU-1 PARK.
Minimum Park Requirements:
Area: 3 acres and ten spaces available for immediate occupancy. 7,500 square feet ofland
area for each manufactured housing unit to be placed.
Yards: Front - 50 feet; rear and side 25 feet.
Height: Maximum one story or 15 feet.
Open Space: 15 square feet of park and recreation area per mobile home space.
Space Width: 40 feet minimum.
Space Front Yard: 10 feet minimum.
Space Side Yard: 20 feet between manufactured housing units.
Space Rear Yard: 25 feet minimum.
Parking: 20 spaces for each manufactured housing unit.
OTHER REOUIREivfENXS:- .... - ···- .. -
1. Survey site plan required shall include the following: name and address of owner; vicinity
map; with a minimum scale of I" = I 00'; north arrow; numbered lots; lot numbers; size of
lots; street layout; trash container location(s ); location of all utilities including sewage, unless
originally approved with site plans, no accessory building or additions to manufactured
housing units allowed.
2. Access roads within manufactured housing unit parks shall ·not be less than twenty (20) feet
in width and shall be paved with a hard surface treatment.
3. There shall be established and maintained guest parking facilities at a ratio of one (1) space
per three (3) manufactured housing unit spaces. If access roads are paved to a width of
thirty-two (32) feet, guest off-street parking spaces shall not be required.
18-27
-----
4. Each manufactured housing unit space shall be equipped with a pad ten (10) feet wide for
a single-wide, twenty (20) feet wide for a double-wide by forty five (45) feet long of six (6)
inches of compacted gravel or other similar material.
5. Each manufactured housing unit space shall be furnished with connections to·water, sewer
or septic (tank), and electricity utilities; and all will be approved by the appropriate
department/agency. · ·
6. Manufactured housing units may not be used for nomesidential use within the manufactured
housing unit park except for the manufactured housing Unit park office.
7. Standards for manufactured housing unit shall also apply to the latest edition of the Council
of American BUilding Officials (CABO) One and Two Family Dwellings (Code).
8. No owner of a manufactured housing park shall allow a manufactured housing unit to locate
or relocate within the park without a location placement permit from the county inspector's
office and proof of tax paid.
9. An approved trash container(s ), to be compatible with Randolph County's sanitation service,
shall be furnished to each manufactured housing unit in the manufactured housing unit park
The owner of each manufactured housing unit shall be required to pay any solid waste
collection fee imposed by Randolph County.
10.
11.
12.
13.
All owners/operators of said manufactirred housing park shall be responsible for the upkeep
of all drives (access roads) within the confines of said park; and the grounds shall be clear
of all litter, trash, garbage, inoperable automobiles, trucks, etc. as well as maintaining
grounds (cutting of grass, maintenance of other landscaping), and drainage to assure a clean,
habitable and sanitary environment.
It shall.t>ethe-:responsibility--0f.theowner/manager.ofsaid.manufactured.housing-parks.to.not.--~·------ .
rent, lease, or otherwise' convey the use of property ·within confined said manufactured
housing park until proper permits have been issued by the Randolph County Building
Official for said location. A registration shall be required to be kept on the premises of all
lots rented, leased, or otherwise conveyed to include date, name, address, phone, lot number,
size and model.
An evergreen buffer strip of at least twenty-five 25 feet in width and ten (10) feet in height
shall be planted along the side and rear yards lines of the manufactured housing unit park.
Skirting: All manufacturing housing units shall have suitable skirting between the base of
the unit and the ground. This skirting shall be made of either concrete block, brick, wood,
or other materials intended for such use. ·Openings in the skirting shall not be more than two
(2) inches square.
18-28
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
Access doors: All units shall have a minimum of an 18" x 24" latchable access d-0or and
required crawl space venting.
Anchors: All units shall be provided with anchors as required by the latest published edition
of the CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code.
Inspection: Any unit not purchased directly from a factory or purchased new from a dealer
must be inspected for condition before it is moved into the county. All units must meet the
standards contained in the Southern Building Code. Once a unit passes inspection and
required fees are paid, the county inspector shall issue a permit.
Travel Trailers. Manufactured housing unit space shall not be used for the acco=odation
of travel trailers or recreational vehicles under any circumstances. The occupancy of travel
trailers shall be prohibited except in Travel Trailer Parks approved pursuant to this
ordinance.
Age of units. The manufactured housing unit to be placed must be certified under the U.S.
Department of Housing and Urban Development and as applicable by the Georgia State Fire
Marshall's Office and manufactured after June 15, 1976 prior to issuance of a permit:
Section 18.50 DETAILED REGULATIONS FOR TRAVEL TRAILER PARKS.
Travel Trailer Parks may be permitted as a conditional use inA-1 zoning districts and CORD
zoning districts subject to approval by the Randolph County Board of Commissioners and in
accordance with the following standards and criteria:
1. Submittal of a site plan showing, at minimum, the following: name and address of
owner, vicinity map with minimum scale ofl" = 100'; proposed site improvements including streets,
paved areas, parking areas, building areas, etc.; and proposed placement and type of any temporary
... -structures.-.. ···--- . ·-· ---- ·-·-·-·--- --- ------- -··-·--- ·--·. --
2. An approved method of sewage disposal must be submitted; provided that the
owner is not required to provide for sewage disposal if such owner requires each travel trailer to have
a sewage holding tank for. sanitary waste. If the owner requires each travel trailer to have a sewage
holding tank for sewage disposal, the owner shall not allow the contents of the tanks to be dumped
or improperly disposed of in the Travel Trailer Park, and the owner shall be in violation of this
ordinance if such dumping or improper disposal occurs. All sewage must be disposed of in an EPD
permitted disposal facility. ·
3. Each Travel Trailer Parle shall have electrical service hook-up and potable water
hook-up; provided, however, Travel Trailer Parks designated for tents or primitive camping only are
not required to provide these services.
4. Trash receptacles shall be provided in convenient locations for use by guests of the
park and in such number and of such capacity that there is no uncovered accumulation of trash at any
time. Randolph County solid waste collection fees must be paid by the owner of the Travel Trailer
Park.
5. An address of the Travel Trailer Park must be obtained.
6. No site can be occupied by the same Travel Trailer or tent for any longer than 120
days.
7. Accessory structures that may be included to serve the tenants of the Travel Trailer
Park include:
(a)
(b)
(c)
a manager's office or residence
recreational areas and equipment
clubhouses
( d) laundry, restroom and shower facilities
( e) . storage and/ or maintenance buildings
(f) other similar uses as determined by the Randolph County Board of
Commissioners.
8. With the exception of the accessory structures listed above, there shall be no
permanent structures. allowed in the Travel Trailer Park.
9. Any change or expansion of any Travel Trailer Park from that approved in the
conditional use permit shall require approval of a new conditional use permit.
Section 18.51 DETAILED REGULATIONS FOR PUD PLANNED UNIT
DEVELOPMENT DISTRICT.
The regulations established for this district are intended to provide optional methods ofland
development-with-prcwisions-for.-residential,-commercial, .;religious, .. educati-0nal, .and-cultural
facilities, which are integrated with the total project by unified architectural and open space
treatment.
Section 18.51.1 Permitted Uses
Single family attached and detached dwellings; duplexes; multi-family dwellings;
condominiums and townhouses; uses permitted in the C-1 district and CORD districts; educational
uses; and other religious and cultural uses.
Section 18.51.2 Preliminary Development Plan
A person applying for a zoning amendment to establish a PUD district shall submit a
Preliminary Development Plan to the planning commission, consisting of:
1. A site plan showing:
a. The direction of north, ·appropriate scale and topography.
18-30
2.
3.
4.
b. The location of subject property in relation to the entire county.
c. The use of the property adjacent to the site.
d. The proposed use of!and and density of development for the site.
e. Proposed access to, and traffic circulation within, the site.
A proposed development schedule for the project.
The PUD shall be located in an area for which public facilities and services are
available and adequate for the uses that are proposed; provided, however, that the
applicant may provide such facilities which are not presently available, and written
assurance of such provision shall be included as a part of the preliminary
development which is submitted.
The planning commission and Board of Commissioners shall review and act on the
proposed zoning request and any amendment to an approved Preliminary
Development Plan in accordance with the zoning ordinance.
Section 18.51.3 Final Development Plan
Prior to the removal of natural vegetation, restructuring of the land or construction of any
improvements, an approved final development plan is required. A plan shall be submitted to the
planning commission, which is consistent with the Preliminary Development Plan, and containing:
I. A site plan showing:
a. The direction of north, appropriate scale and existing and finished topography
in not greater than five foot contour intervals.
b. The. proposed location and height of all structures.
c. The use of all structures and land.
d. The location and use of structures adjacent to the site.
. . ··- c-e.- .-Tue-location,-area-and-number-of.parking spaces.an<imaneu'lering..areas_.
f. The location and dimensions of streets, driveways, and walks on and off the
site.
g. All service and loading area and spaces.
h. The location, size, number and character of all exterior sigris and lighting.
I. · The location, character and extent of existing vegetation landscaping,
retaining and screen walls and other treatment for the protection of adjoining
property.
J. The facilities for surface drainage of the premises.
k. Location and character of all public.improvements including utilities.
2. A copy of any deed restrictions to be recorded.
3. A comprehensive traffic analysis indicating the probable effect of the proposed
18-31
development on traffic patterns and capacities of adjacent streets in the immediate
area, prepared by a registered engineer or professional planner.
4. A development schedule indicating the appropriate date when construction of the
planned development or stage there0f can be expected to begin and be completed.
5. Any other information necessary to establish compliance with this and other
ordinances of the availability of adequate utility capacity.
6. A fire prot_ection plan, approved by the Volunteer Fire Department servicing the
area, indicating the location and size of all proposed fire mains, fire hydrants, and
fire access lanes, as well as a description of all fire protection measures and devices
for structures.
7. The public improvements included in thefinal development plan shall be consistent
with the Randolph County Subdivision Regulations. Compliance with said
regulations shall be reviewed as part of the final development review process.
8. The applicant shall provide for and/or establish an organization or other legal entity
for the control and maintenance of any common open space designated on the final
development plan. Such organization shall be created by covenants running with
the land, and such covenants shall be included as a part of the final development
plan(s) and subject to the approval of the Randolph County Board of
Commissioners.
9. Structures and open spaces shall be arranged in such a way as best to serve the
needs or residents and coIIlIIiercial users of the planned development, and to
minimize any adverse effects on the neighboring districts.
_____ ··--·--·· .. JD_ . __ Scenic.assets.andnatura!£eatures,.such.as_trees,.streams,_and1opographicfeatures,.
shall be protected and preserved to the greatest extent possible.
IL Not more than 50% of the gross tract area shall be covered by buildings in the
PUD.
12. At least 50% of the area remaining after the developmentofthe buildings, parking;
right-of-way, and utility or drainage easements, shall be developed to serve the
needs of the residents of the development; including but not limited to landscaping,
patios, walks, play areas, recreation, and other uses consistent with the character
ofthePUD.
13. Buffers and building set-backs shall recognize and honor existing adjacent land
development. However, in no case shall a building be constructed closer than 15
- 18-32
feet from the PUD district boundary, nor closer than 50 feet from any public road
right-of-way.
14. Adequate screening and separation between different land uses shall be provided
by means of buffering or other acceptable methods.
15. Vehicular access .to the PUD shall be from streets capable of supporting existing
and projected traffic. No streets or roads within the PUD shall connect to the
public street system in such a way as to encourage use of minor streets for through
streets.
16. The PUD shall include provisions for safe and convenient pedestrian access and
circulation.
Section 18.51.4 Final Development Plan Review
1. Upon receipt of an applicant's Final Development Plan, the planning commission
shall transmit a copy of the plan to the appropriate departments and agencies for
their review, report and recommendation. Such officials and agencies shall each
within thirty (30) days from receiving the plan and documentation, furnish to the
planning commission a report pertinent to their respective jurisdiction and
concerns.
2. The planning commission shall review the applicant's Final Development Plan and
within ninety (90) days following the applicant's submission of the plan to the
planning commission shall also prepare a written report stating clearly the reasons
and justifications therefore, and identify what changes are necessary in order for the
plan to be approved. Said written disapproval shall be transmitted to the applicant.
- · -- -- ···- · --- --Section-18.Sl.5 ---Amending--Final-Development-P-lan---- -- --------- --- --····- .
1. The Fina! Development Plan may be amended by the planning commission,
provided the procedure specified in Section 8.5.4 for review and approval is
followed.
Minor changes in the location, siting, or character of buildings and structures, as
shown on the Final Development Plan may be authorized by the Building Official.
No change authorized by the Building Official under this section may increase the
size of any building or structure by more than five (5) percent, nor change the
location of any building or structure by more than ten (10) feet in any direction;
provided, notwithstanding anything in the foregoing, the Building Official may not
permit change beyond the minimum or maximum requirements set forth in this
ordinance. All other changes in the Final Development Plan, including changes in
18-33
Section 18.52
the site plan and in the development schedule, must be made under the procedures
that are applicable to the initial approval of a Final Development Plan.
DETAILEDREGULATIONSFORGENERALAGRICULTUREAND
FORESTRY DISTRICT CA-1).
No commercial poultry house, structure forthe keeping oflivestockfor commercial purposes,
commercial kennel, or structure for the storage of organic waste shall be constructed closer than
1,000 feet from any property line. Commercial or on farm composting operations must also maintain
a minimum 1,000 foot setback from all property lines.
Section 18.53 REGULATIONS FORA COMMERCIAL OUTDOORRECREATION
DEVELOPMENT CCORD).
1. A site plan for the total acreage must be submitted to the planning commission for
review and approval to ensure consistency with the overall plans for the appropriate development
of the county. Final approval of the plan rests with the governing authority.
2. Amendments to the site plan must be submitted to the planning commission for
review and forwarded to the Board of Commissioners for final approval.
3. When a CORD abuts a public road, the minimum setback requirements shall be
those of the most restrictive adjacent zoning district.
4. A green belt of20 feet shall be required on 3 sides of the property.
5. Off-street parking as required in Section 12.3.
Section 18.54 NUMBER OF SINGLE FAMILY DETACHED DWELLINGS PER
LOT.
-- - . ____ J'Jomore-than-0ne.single.farnily-detached.dwelling.and'or.principal.building.andits ___ .
customary accessory building shall hereafter be erected on any one lot. In the A-1 Agricultural
· District, there may be up to four ( 4) single family residential dwellings on any parcel ofland under
single ownership (three plus the owner's dwelling) where-the following conditions can be met:
I. The additional dwellings may be occupied by either blood relatives to the owner
of the property and said blood relationship shall extend to but not beyond the second descending and
ascending generation, or full time caretaker employees of the property owner who are part of the
farming operations and responsible for the agricultural production of the property.
2. Each single family detached dwelling shall occupy a land area not less than one and
one-half (1.5) acres and conform to the lot requirements of a R-1 district.
3. Each such land area shall receive approval from the county environmental health
specialist as to the suitability of the site for an effective sanitary sewage disposal system.
4. No commercial uses of the buildings are allowed and no rental charges can be
placed on these units.
18-34
5. Each dwelling shall be accessible to the public roadway.
6. Individual power supply sources shall be provided to each dwelling and each utility
installation shall meet all code requirements.
7. _Permits for construction will not be issued prior to the approval of each of the
aforementioned conditions by the building inspector or other designated agent.
Sections 18.55 -18.60 RESERVED.
18-35
.. __,
ARTICLE IX. PERMITTED USES IN ZONING DISTRICTS
. Section 18.61 PERMITTED USES .
Uses allowed in each zoning district are determined from the matrix located on the following
pages with (A) being uses allowed, (N) being uses not allowed, and (C) being conditional uses
requiring further review by the planning commission and approval by the Board of Commissioners
in accordance to the zoning procedures to this Ordinance (see Section 16) .
18-36
\
Permitted Uses in :t,oning Districts
i
'
A-1 R-R R-1 C-1 1-1 MHU-1 CORD
USES !
Agricultural I
Chin mill 'i c N N N A N N
Concentrated Animal Feeding Operation I' c N N N N N N
Crons <Field) I A N N N N N N
Dairies I c N N N N N N
Deer & Game Process A N N c N N N
Fruits, tree nuts, vegetables: Processing ! A N N N A N N
Non Processing ' A A A c N N N
Greenhouse or Plant Nursery, Commercial · 'i A N N A N N N
Livestock, fish & birds I A N N c c N N
Livestock sales pavilion, or fa1mers' market I A N N c c N N
Poultry Prnducers, egg prnducers i c N N N c N N
Prnduce Stands ' A N N A N N N I
Slaughterhouses; process plant I c N N N c N N
'
wable (J'idin;Q/rivate (Conditional Use in R-R District': one A c N N N N N
orse p r ac r
Tree Farms ! A N N N N N N
i
Animal Care Facilities I
Animal Hospital & Veterinary Clinics A N N A N N N
Kennels: Boarding and Breeding I A c N c N N N
Pet Grooming Shops . A N N A N N N
;
Automotive & Farm Eauinment Sales & Service
Automobile sales ' N N N A N N N I
Boat sales N N N A N N N
Boat sel'vice 'I N N N A N N N
Farm Equipment: ' i
Sale Lease and Rentals !nrincinal use) c N N A N N N
Sale Lease and Rentals laccessorv use\ c . N N A N N N
Pat1s and Tire Store I N N N A N N N
Paint Shons ·r N N N A N N N
Renairs Shons c N N A N N N
Service Station ' c N N A N N N I
Tire Retreadino & RecaMino ! c N. N A A N N
Tri:ii1" .. "'-'nlo ... ! "' 1'1 1'1 A hl 1'.1 N
18-37
(
'
1 Permitted Uses in Zoning Districts
I
I I A-1 R-R R-1 C-1 I-1 MHU-1 CORD
Upholste1y Shop
'
c c N A N N N
Vehicle Storage (see storage) t
.
Wash Service II N N N A c N N
I
Building Materials 1.
Retail Building Material Establishments 'I N N N A A N N
Electrical Sunnly Store i N N N A A N N
Paint, Glass & Wallpaper Stores I N N N A N N N
Plumbing & HVAC Equipment Dealers I N N N A A N N
Wood and/or Lumber Production (saw mill) II c N N N A N N
I
Communication I
I
Billboards j c N N N c N N
Broadcasting Stations
., c N N c c N N I
Telephone Business Exchange I' c N N c c N N
Wireless Communication Towers ! c N N c c N N
. I
Construction Contrnctor I
With Eouioment & Material Yard I N N N c A N N
Without Equipment & Material Yard ! A N. N A A N N
I
Education I
Research and Training facilitv II c N N A c N N
Schools (public & private) i c c c c c c c
Vocation schools I c c c c c c c
Day Care Centers, Nurseries, and Kindergartens I N c c A N c N
!
Manufacturing I .
Alcohol or alcoholic beverage I N N N N A N N
Asphalt plants i N N N N A N N
Automobile and truck manufacture . [ N N N N A N N
Industrial buildings manufacture I N N N N A N N
Brick, clav, tile or concrete products I' N .N N N A N N
Cement, lime gypsum or olaster of par is l · N N N N A N N
Chemical, organic and inorganic ; N N N N A N N
Distillation of beverages I' N N N N A N N
18-38
I,
Permitted Uses in Zoning Districts
i A-1 R-R R-1
Dve works ! N N N
Explosive manufacture or storage I N N N '
Fat rendering and fertilizer manufacture I N N N
lce manufacturing plants '' N N N
Petroleum refining .
i N N N
Sand mining I N N N ' Smelting of metal ores I N N N '
Solar Panel Fields · 'r c N N Sugar refineries i N N N
Food orocessing I N N N
Pellet manufacture I A N N
Any other orocessing or assembly of goods i N N N
i
Recreation, Amusement, Entertainment I
I
Assembly Halls c N N
Billiard & Pool/Game Room . ' N N N
Bowling Alley & Skating Rinks ! N N N
Civic, Social & Fraternal Organizations ·. c N N
Cultural Facilities· I c. N N
Indoor Fitness Center ; c N N
Indoor/Outdoor Fitness Center i c N N
Movie Theater/Live Performance Theater II c N N
Parks (Private) I c c c
Parks (Public) i c c c
Recreation Centers I c c c I
i
Activity Conducted Primarily Outside Enclosed Buiidillg
1
Structure · . I
Public or Privately owned Outdoor Recreational Facili!Ies i.e.,
Golf & Countty Clubs, Hunting Preserves, swimming o~
c N N
Tennis Clubs, Shooting, Trao & Skeet Ranges etc. '
Golf Driving Range, Miniature Golf I c N N '
Skateboard Park, Bicvcle Race Track i c N N '
Automobile or Motorcycle, go-catts, etc. I' c N N Stables (riding) commercial I A N N
Carnival, rodeo, horse show, shooting event, athletic eV.ent or c N N
communitv fair I
18-39
C-1 I-1
N A
N A
N .N
N A
N A
N A
N A
N A
N A
N A
N A
N c
c N
c N
c N
c N
A N
A N
c N
c N
c N
c c
c· c
N N
N. N
N N
N N
N N
N N
MHU-1
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
c
c
N
N
N
N
N
N
i
I
CORD
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
N
c
c
c
A
A
A
A
A
c
A
A
A
A
c
A
A
( \
Permitted Uses in :t,oning Districts
i A-I R-R R-1 C-1 1-1 MHU-1 CORD
Residential Uses I'·
Single Family I A A A N N N N
Duplex I N N A N N N N
Aoartments I, N N c N N N N
Townhouse I N N c N N N N
Patio Houses i N c c N N N N
Other High Density I' N N c N N N N
Manufactured Housing Unit II s A c N N s N
Personal Care Home (Family) I c c c c N N N
Personal Care Home (Grouo or Congregate) I c c c c N N N
Nursing Homes, Convalescent and Rest Home II c c N c N N N
I
Rooming Ren.tals/Lodging I
I
Rooming House, Boarding House 'i A c c c N N N
Bed & Breakfast Inn I A N N A N N N
Hotels, Motels, & Similar Business ; N N N A N N N
Temporary Emerr;ency Construction Repair Residences! c c c N N c N
(5raa1~n5 ,1s 1· J.raller Parks, Campgrounds, Campsites & Primi'tive es ! c N N N N N c
i
Religious Facilities i
Churches I c c c c N c N
Meetings (temporary) ' c c c c N c N
!
Restaurants, Bars, Night Clubs i
Alcohol drinking establishments II N N N A N N N
Drive-In-Restaurants I N N N c N N N
Dine-In Restaurants (only) I c N N A N N N
Dine-in, cany-out, deliveiy restaurants c N N c N N N
Carry-out, delive1y services (only) c N N c N N N
i
Retail Trade i
Annarel and accessorv stores I N N N A N N A
.Bicycle sales I N N N A N N A
Book and stationa1y stores ' N N N A N N A '
Camera and ohotograohic I N N N A N N A
Drugstores i N N N A N N N
Farm and garden sunnlv stores I c N N A N N N
18-40
\
Permitted Uses in :t. .. ming l)istricts
Retail Trade (cont) A-1 R-R R-1 C-1 I-1 MHU-1 CORD
Flea market I' c N N c N N N
Florists ! . N N N A N N N
Food stores i' N N N A N N N
Food stores (including the.minor manufactm:ing offoo~ N N N A c N N
Furniture, home furnishings and equipment stores '' N N N A N N N
Gift, novelty, antique and souvenir ' N N N A N N N
Hardware and general merchandise shoos
'
N N N A N N N
Hobby, toy and games shops I N N N A N N c
Jewelry stores N N N A N N N
Liquor stores I N N N A N N c I
Merchandise store (specialized) ' N N N A N N c
News dealers and newsstands N N N A N N c
Sales of goods (Produced and orocessed on oremises) ; N N N A N N c
Sporting Goods Stores N N N A N N A
Tobacco Shoo or Stand I N N N A N N A
i
' Services I
Artisan ' c N N A N N N '
Barber and beauty shops ' c N N A N N N
Business service establishments i N N N A N N N
Dancing School !' c N N A N N N
Diaper Service I c N N A N N N
D1y cleaning olants and oower laundries
'
N N N c A N N
Laundries ( coio operated) I N N N A A N N
Laund1y and d1y cleaning oick-uo stations II N N N A A N N
Alterations i y N N A -N N N
Moving Service I N N N A A N N
Offices (i.e., accountants, financial institutions, lawyersl, N N N A N N N
doctors, real estate, other professionals and businesses)\
Photographic studios I N N N A N N N
Repair shops (i.e.,jewelrv, small aooliances, TV, radio) c N N A N N N
!
Services (Health) !
Clinics ! N N N A N N N
Hosoitals .,' N N N A N N N
Offices/Pharmacies N N N A N N N.
18-41
\ (
Permitted Uses in Zoning Districts
A-1 R-R R-1 C-1 I-1 MHU-1 CORD
Storage
Mini-Warehouses N N N c A N N
Scrap or Junkyards N N N N A N N
Storage and maintenance (eauioment-& vehiCJe) N N N N A N N
Warehousing N N N N A N N
Transportation
Railroad vards . i N N N N A N N
Terminal (truck) : N N N N A N N
Truck vards I N N N N A N N
I ;
Wholesale Trade I
Distribution Establishments ; N N N N A N N
Petroleum bulk stations I N N N N A N N I
I
Miscellaneous Public Semi-Public & Private Facilities
Post Office i c c c A c c N
Airport i c N N N N N N
fnert Landfill I c N N N A N N
Cemetery i c N N N N N N
Funeral Home I N N N A N N N I
Sewage Sludge (Biosolids) Land Application ·and Dispdsal c N N N c N N
F= T1.~ . II
Governmental Landfills and/or Governmental Waste Disposal
Facilities, Private Landfills and/or Private Waste Dispo$al
c N N N c N N
Facilitie.s, Hazardous Waste Disposal Facilities, Land '
Application Waste Disposal facilities
i .
18-42
ARTICLE X. DETERMINATION OF UNCLASSIFIED USES
Section 18.66
In the event an applicant wishes to use property for a use which is not specifically identified
under permitted uses or uses permitted subject to the approval of the Board of Commissioners, and
where such use is not specifically prohibited from the district, the following provision shall apply:
L The building inspector or other designated agent shall submit to the planning
commission a written request for determination of the unclassified use.
2. The planning commission determines that the use is of a similar character and
meets
the intent of the uses permitted within the district, then they shall instruct the building inspector or
other designated agent to issue a permit.
3. In the event that the planning commission determines that the proposed use in the
district is consistent with the character and intent of permitted uses which are subject to the approval
of the Board of Commissioners, then the applicant shall apply for a: conditional use permit subject
to the approval in the regular manner.
4. In no event shall the provisions of this section be used to allow an incompatible use
or use specifically prohibited by this ordinance within a certain district.
5. Once the use has been allowed or disallowed by the planning commission, it shall
then be considered classified under the appropriated category in the district.
Sections 18.67 - 18. 70 RESERVED.
18-43
Section 18.71
ARTICLE XI. NON-CONFORMING USE
CONTINUATION OF A NON-CONFORMING USE.
Any structure of use ofland existing at the time of enactment or subsequent amendment of
this zoning ordinance, but not in conformity with its use provisions, may be continued with the
following limitations:
1. A non-conforming use may not be changed to another non-conforming use.
2. A non-conforming use may not be re-established after discontinuance of that use
for
one year.
3. A Jbn-conforming use or structure may not be enlarged beyond its size at the time
the use or structure became non-conforming. This includes, .but is not limited to, the size of the
building, the number of employees, operation during other hours of the day or night, the use of
additional land, and additional or more powerful.equipment.
4. A non-conforming structure may not be rebuilt, altered, repaired, or replaced after
incurring damages exceeding 75% of the fair market value of the structure at the time immediately
preceding such damage occurring. A non-conforming mobile home may be replaced after it is
removed from the property with a manufactured housing unit that is in compliance with the standards
set forth in Section 8.4 as long as such replacement occurs within 12 months ofremovaL Any period
longer than 12 months, a non-conforming mobile home can not be replaced after it is removed from
the property.
Section 18.72 CHANGING ANON-CONFORMING USE.
The Board of Commissioners may grant the change, re-establishment, or enlargement of a
non-confo=ing-use-or-the-enlargement,-r.ebuilding,-alteration,.repair,--or .. replacemenLof.a .. non--
conforming structure upon the following finding: ·
1. The change, establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or
replacement
would be no more detrimental to the surrounding area than the existing or previous use.
2. The structure cannot be economically modified so as to be suitable for uses in the
district.
3. The structure would have to be removed to permit development of the property for
conforming uses.
4. The structure has such value that removal to permit development of the conforming
uses would cause economic hardship to the owner.
18-44
5. The proposed change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration;
replacement, or repair would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the
purposes and intent of this Zoning Ordinance; and
6. The requirements of the Zoning Ordinance for rezoning would prevent the current
zoning from being changed to a classification that would allow the proposed change, reestablishment,
enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement.
Section 18.73 APPLICATIONS FOR CHANGING A NON-CONFORMING USE.
Applications submitted to the Board of Commissioners requesting the change, reestablishment,
enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement of a non-conforming use
structure shall include the following information:
I. The applicant shall bear the burden of providing conclusive evidence to the Board
of Commissioners that the use or structure is legally non-conforming. The evidence may include,
but is not limited to, business lic.enses, tax receipts, utility bills, telephone bills, IRS documents and
affidavits.
2. The applicant shall submit a plat of an accurate site plan, drawn to scale, showing
the dimensions of the lot size and location of all structures and their distance from all property li.r\es,
the names of all streets which the property abuts, and parking spaces.
3. If the request is for a commercial use or structure, a written description shall be
submitted to describe the business. The description shall include hours of operation, number of
emiJloyees, equipment used, products made or sold, type of signs, and other information.as needed
for the Board of Commissioners to reach a decision.
4. The applicant shall provide evidence to the Board of Commissioners on how the
proposed change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair, or replacement will
----comply-with-the..zoning,-11ealth,2ndbuilding.requirements_ -- --- ----·-· -·- ----------------·-------
Section 18.74 CONDITIONS ON APPROVAL.
If the requested change, re-establishment, enlargement, rebuilding, alteration, repair or
replacement is approved, the Board of Commissioners may place conditions on the approval to
ensure protection of the surrounding area. The applicant is responsible for conformance with these
conditions.
Sections 18.75 -18.80 RESERVED.
18-45
ARTICLE XII. SUPPLEMENTARY DISTRICT REGULATIONS
Section 18.81 CORNER VISIBILITY.
On a comer lot in any zoning district nothing shall be erected, placed, planted, or allowed to
grow in such a manner as to materially impede vision between a height of two and a half (2 Yz) and
ten (10) feet above the centerline grades of the intersecting streets in the area bounded by the street
lines of such comer lots and a line joining points along said street lines fifty (50) feet from the point
of the intersection.
Section 18.82 OFF PREMISE SIGNS.
The following regulations shall apply to all off-premises signs:
1. Off-premise signs are permitted in C-1 and I-1 zoning districts.
2. Off-premises signs 'shall be permitted on a standard sign, which does not exceed
five
(5) feet by ten (10) feet, is constructed of twenty-gauge sheet metal painted on each side, and is
supported by metal tubing posts of tlie type specified by the Standard l;luilding Code.
3. There shall be a minimum distance of eight hundred (800) feet between all offpremises
signs.
Section 18.83 OFF STREET PARKING.
Section 18.83.1 Requirements for Off-Street Parking:
1. Agriculture Uses: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift.
2. Agriculture-SuppGrt-U ses:-One-0-)-space-per-emplo;ycee-on-the-lai:gestshift,--- --- ----- - -
plus one (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area
prnvided for customer sales and service operations.
3. Co=ercial and Entertainment Uses, except as specifically designated
below: One (1) space per one hundred fifty (150) square feet of gross floor
area of customer sales and service, plus one (1) space per two hundred (2:00)
square feet of office gross floor area, or if the uses have at least one hundred
thousand (100,000) square feet of gross floor: area, five and one-half (5.5)
spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet of gross floor area.
4. Other co=ercial and entertainment uses:
Banks: One (1) space per two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales
and service, plus five ( 5) spaces off-street waiting (loading) spaces per drive-in lane, plus one
(1) space per employee on the largest work shift.
18-46
·.~
Funeral Home: One (1) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area of
customer sales and service.
Hospital: Two (2) spaces per three (3) patient beds, plus one (1) space per staff doctor and
each other employee on the largest work shift.
Hotel or Motel: One (!}space per room or suite, plus one (I) per every three (3) employees
on the largest work shift, plus one (1) space per three (3) persons to the maximum capacity
of each public meeting and/or banquet room, plus fifty (50) percent of the spaces otherwise
required for accessory uses (e.g., restaurants and bars).
Private Clubs: One (1) space per four (4) persons to the maximum capacity of the facility.
Repair Services: One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor area of
customer sales and service, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift.
Restaurant. standard: One (1) square per four ( 4) patron seats or one (I) space per hundred
(I 00) squarefeet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, whichever is greater, plus
one (1) space per employee on the. largest work shift.
School. commercial or trade: One (I) space per four students, plus one (1) space per
employee (including faculty) at capacity class attendance-period.
Shopping Center: Five (5) spaces per one thousand (1,000) square feet bf gross floor area of
customer sales and service.
Theaters and Auditoriums: One (I) space per four ( 4) patrons based on maximum capacity.
This requirement may be satisfied on a space-by-space basis by the facility providing written
proof that it has the use of nearby parking lot available to its patrons (e.g., by contractual
arrangement) ..
Commercial/Recreational Uses, except as designate below: one (1) ~pace per five (5) patrons
to the maximum capacity of facility, plus one (1) space per two (2) emplqyees on the largest
work shift.
Other commercial/recreational uses:
Beautv and Barber Shops: Three (3) spaces per operator or one (I) space per one hundred
(100) square feet of gross floor area of customer sales and service, whichever is larger, plus
one (1) space per employee on the largest shift.
Bowling Alley: Five (5) spaces per lane, plus one (I) space per employee on the largest work
shift.
Convenience Store: One (I) space per one hundred (100) square feet of gross floor area of
customer sales and service.
18-47
Drive-in Theater: One (I) space per automobile station, plus one (1) space per employee.
Fast-food Restaurant: One (1) space per fifty (50) square-feet of gross floor area of customer
sales and service, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest work shift
Golf courses (nine and eighteen hole): Thirty (30) spaces per nine (9) holes, plus one (1)
space per employee on the largest shift, plus (5) percent of spaces otherwise required for any
accessory uses (e.g., bars, restaurants).
Golf Driving Range: One (1) space per tee, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest
work shift.
Golf par three: Twenty (20) spaces per nine (9) holes, plus one (1) space per employee on
the largest shift.
Medical Offices: One (1) space per each two hundred (200) square feet of gross floor area,
including phamJ.acies an other retail uses, but excluding corridor and lobby areas, plus one
(I) per each separate medical or dental treatment room or laboratory.
Miniature Golf: One and one-half (1.5) spaces per hole, plus one (1) space per employee on
the largest working shift.
Outdoor Recreational Uses: One (1) space per five (5) expected patrons at capacity.
Outdoor Swimming Pool: One (I) space per seventy-five (75) square feet of gross water area.
Outdoor Theater: One (1) space per three (3) patrons to the maximum capacity of the facility
inclusive of both indoor and outdoor capability.
Public Services Uses: One (1) space per employee on the largest work shift plus one (1)
space-per-c0mpanyvehiele-n01mal!y-st0red-0n-the-prernises, - ---- ---- - -- ···-: - - ----·--·---- -
Recreational Vehicle Park: One and one-half (1.5) spaces per each recreational vehicle site,
plus one (I) space per employee on the largest shift.
Skating rink. ice or roller: One (1) space per three hundred (300) square feet of gross floor
area or customer sales and service.
Taverns, dance halls. night clubs and lounges: One (I) space per fifty (50) square feet of
gross floor area of customer sales and service, plus one (1) space per employee on the largest
shift.
·Truck Stop: One (1) space per each twenty-five hundred (2,500) square feet of gross site
area, but not less than eight (8) per .each such use.
18-48
Vehicle Sales and Service: One (1) space per fifteen hundred (1,500) square feet of gross
floor area of customer sales and service. In addition all area used for outside display of
automobiles must be hard surfaced according to standards for parking areas.
Mini-warehouse: One (1) space per ten (10) storage cubicles, plus two (2) spaces per
manager's residence, plus one (I) space per twenty-five (25) storage cubicles located at the
warehouse office.
Manufacturing: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per
company vehicle normally left on the premises.
Other heavv industrial uses:
Truck Terminal: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per truck
normally parked on the premise, plus one (1) space per three (3) patrons to the maximum
capacity. All spaces where trucks will be parked and associated drives must be surfaced to
the minimum requirements for parking lots.
Junkyard: One (1) space per ten thousand (10,000) square feet of gross land area, plus one
(I) space per employee on the largest work shift. .
Warehouse: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1) space per four
thousand (4,000) square feet of gross floor area.
Institutional, indoor. recreational, and ~ecial residential uses. except as specifically
. designated below: One (1) space perthree(3) patrons to the maximum capacity, plus one (1)
space per employee on the largest shift.
Other indoor institutional, indoor recreational, and special residential uses:
· - ·- -·-Ghurch:·Gne-{-l}space-per-four-(4)-seats-of-maximum-eapacity, - · -
Community and Recreation Center: One (1) space per two hundred and fifty (250) square
feet of gross floor area, or one (1) space per four ( 4) patrons to the maximum capacity, plus
one (1) space per four ( 4) patrons to the maximum capacity, plus one (I) space per employee
on the largest shift.
Day or Nursery School: One (1) space per two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross
floor area of customer service or one (1) space per four (4) seats to the maximum capacity,
whichever is greater, plus one (I) space per employee on the largest shift.
Nursing Homes: One (1) space per six (6) patient beds, plus one (I) space per employee on
the largest shift, plus one (I) space per staff member and visiting doctor.
Swimming Facility: One (1) space per seventy-five (75) square feet of gross water area, plus
one (I) space per employee on the largest shift.
18-49
Tennis, Racquetball, Handball Courts: Four (4) spaces per court, plus one (1) space per
employee on the largest shift.
Commercial Support Uses: One (1) space per employee on the largest shift, plus one (1)
space per company vehicle regularly stored on premises.
Veterinary Office with enclosed kennels and/or pens: Three (3) spaces per doctor, plus one
(1) space per employee on the largest shift.
Nursery uses: One (1) space per each five hundred (500) square feet of display and sales area
both indoor and outdoor, excluding areas used exclusively for the storage or propagation of
plants, but not less than five (5) for each such use.
Office Uses: One (1) space per two hundred and fifty (250) square feet of gross floor area of
customer sales and service and office area.
' Residential uses: Two (2) spaces per each dwelling unit.
Section 18.83.2 Establishment of Off-Street Parking
Whenever off-street parking is required for the development of a lot, it shall be established
and maintained as follows:
l. Each off-street parking space shall consist of a designated and defined area of at
least ten (10) feetin width and twenty (20) feet in length exclusive of access drives
and aisles.
2. Except for lots devoted to single and two (2) dwelling units per structure uses, all
areas established for off-street parking shall be designed and be of such size that
no vehicle is required to back into a public street to obtain egress.
3. All area devoted to off-street parking shall have clearly defined access drives of
ingress and egress not to exceed twenty-five (25) feet," to include curbs.
4. All area devoted to permanent off-street parking shall be of a hard surface or
covered in such manner that no dust will result from continuous use. Each offstreet
parking space shall be clearly marked or other wise defined. Gravel or plant
mix is also acceptable.
5. No off-street parking space shall extend beyond any lot line; and where an offstreet
parking space abuts a residential lot line, a set back line of five (5) feet shall
be established.
6. All areas devoted to ingress or egress in a commercial, industrial or multi-family
zone shall be denoted by curbing.
18-50
Section 18.84 OFF-STREET LOADING AND UNLOADING.
In all zoning districts where permitted uses require the receipt or distribution of materials or
merchandise by truck or similar vehicle, off-street loading and unloading space shall be provided.
Such requirements will apply to new structures or that portion of existing structures which are altered
or expanded after the effective date of this ordinance.
Section 18.84.1 Requirements of Off-Street Loading and Unload.ing Space:
I. One (1) space shall be required for the first twenty thousand (20,000) square feet
of floor area plus one (1) additional space for each twenty thousand (20,000) square
feet of floor area up to one hundred thousand (100,000) square feet and one (1)
space for each.additional forty thousand (40,000) square feet thereafter. ·
2. The minimum size of an off-street loading and unloading space shall be ten (10)
feet by fifty (50) feet exclusive of driveway and maneuvering space.
3. No street or alley shall be considered as part of the off-street loading or unloading
area.
4. All areas for loading and unloading shall be so designed and located to permit
vehicles to exit while facing a street or alley.
5. Off-street loading and unloading spaces may occupy all or any part of any required
yard area, except required vegetated buffer areas.
Section 18.85 PUBLIC STREET FRONTAGE.
No building shall be erected on a lot which does not abut for at least twenty-five (25) feet on
a public street.
Section 18.86 ACCESSORY BUILDINGS.
An accessory building may be erected either attached or unattached to a princip8.l. building
on the same lot. An attached accessory building shall be considered a part of the principal building
and shall comply with the requirements of the district in which it is located.
An unattached accessory building shall be located in the rear yard of the principal building,
shall not occupy more than thirty (30) percent of the area of the rear yard, shall not be located closer
than fifteen (15) feetto the principal building on an adjoining lot, shall not be located closer than ten
(10) feet to any rear or interior side lot line, and shall not project into·anyrequired front or street side
yard. On comer lots, the accessory building may not be located closer to the road right-of-way than
the minimum setback requirement.
18-51
Section 18.87 AUTOMOBILE WRECKING, JUNKYARDS. BODY SHOPS, AND
MOTOR VEHICLE GARAGE.
Section 18.87 .1 Location of Automobile and Junkyards:
No operation shall be located nearer than six hundred ( 600) feet from any residential district.
Section 18.87.2 Screening:
All outdoor storage of salvage and wrecking operations shall be conducted within all
enclosed solid opaque fence or solid opaque wall not less than six (6) feet in height nor more
than ten (10) feet in height. All of the above businesses shall ensure that the storage of
vehicles is screened from public view from any public road. Additional screening may be
required. Any fence or wall erected for screening purposes shall be properly painted or
otherwise maintained in good condition.
Section 18.87.3 Storage of Materials or Vehicles:
The storage of salvaged materials, junk materials or vehicles shall not exceed six ( 6) feet in
height. ·
Vehicles awaiting repair shall not be stored outside of the business establishment or fenced·
area for periods longer than forty-eight ( 48) hours.
Section 18.88 CEMETERY (COMMERCIAL).
Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than ten (10) acres. Structure
setback shall conform to the district regulations in-which the site is located. All burial lots shall be
set back not less than twenty five (25) feet from any lot line.
Section-18.89 .. - CUS'I'.OMARY-HOME~OCCUEA'.I'.IONS ..... _ ... -- -
Customary home occupations in those districts where permitted shall be subject to the
following conditions:
l. A home occupation shall be limited to the gainful occupation or profession
conducted ·
· by members of the family residing entirely within the dwelling unit and no more than three
nomesidents.
2. No internal or external alterations shall be made which are not customary to
dwellings.
3. In any dwelling unit, all home occupations, collectively, shall not occupy more than
twenty-five (25) percent of the gross floor area of the dwelling unit but not to exceed six hundred
( 600) square feet.
18-52
4. The entrance of the space devoted to a customary home occupation may be from
within the building or a private outside entrance.
5. No display shall be permitted of goods or services shall be permitted which is
visible
:from the outside of the structure except for one (1) non-illuminated sign having an area of not more
than two (2) square feet which may be placed flat on a door, wall or window.
6. Customary home occupations shall be limited to goods and services provided to
individuals or groups not exceeding, at any given time, five (5) in number.
7. Telephone Service: Home occupation for telephone service only is permitted but
shall be restricted to that use only.
8. There shall not be any product stored in plain view or in the yard of the residence
and
there shall not be any parking of co=ercial vehicle at said property for over twenty-four (24) hours.
Section 18.90 SWIMMING POOLS.
The following regulations shall apply to swimming pools:
1. Private swi=ing pools may be established in agricultural and residential zoning
· - -- districts provided they are to be used solely by the occupants of the property on which they are
located and their guests. All nonco=ercial pools within a residential zone shall be enclosed by a
secure fence or wall not less than five ( 5) feet in height.
See CORD Section for Co=ercial Swimming Pools.
Section 18.91 GASOLINE SERVICE STATIONS.
The following regulations shall apply to all gasoline service stations:
L There shall be a building setback from all street right-of-way lines a distance of not
less than fifty (50) feet, and the canopy of the gasoline building not less than fifteen (15) feet to any
street right-of-way line. Other yard setbacks shall conform to the zone in which the station is
located.
2. Gasoline pump islands shall not be located closer than fifteen (15) feet to any street
right-of-way line; however, when pump islands are constructed perpendicular to the pavement edge,
the pump island shall be located not less than thirty (30) feet from the right-of-way lines.
Section 18.92 STORAGE OF CERTAIN VEHICLES AND EQUIPMENT.
The storage of certain vehicles and equipment (defined as automobiles, semi-trailer trucks
with greaterthan three (3) axles, camping or travel trailers and boats and boat motors without current
18-53
license plates is prohibited in residential districts for time periods in excess of seven (7) days unless
such vehicles and equipment are stored in a carport, enclosed building, or behind the nearest portion
of a building to a street.
Section 18.93. AIRPORTS.
Future proposed public airports shall be so located and of sufficient size to meet Federal
Aviation Agency requirements and not constitute a nuisance to surrounding uses.
Section 18.93.l Notice of Construction or Alteration
Except as provided in Section 12.13.2 below, each person who proposes any of the following
construction or alteration shall notify the Board of Commissioners of Randolph County and
shall notify the Federal Aviation Administration (the "FAA") as provided in Cod.e ofFederal
Regulations, Title 14, Volume 2, Chapter 1, Part 77, a5 such may be amended from time to
time.
1. Any construction or alteration of more than 200 feet in height above the ground level.
2. Any construction or alteration of greater height than an imaginary surface extending
outward and upward at the following slope:
100 to 1 for a horizontal distance of 20,000 feet from the nearest point of the
:runway at the airport owned by the Lower Chattahoochee Regional Airport
Authority located in Randolph County.
3. The Board of Commissioners of Randolph County shall determine whether such
construction or alteration shall be authorized upon approval of the construction or alteration
by the FAA.
18.93.2- Construction-or Alteration Not Requii:ingNotice
No person is required to provide any notice under Section 12.13.l for any of the following
construction or alteration:
\.
1. Any object that would be shielded by existing structures of a permanent and substantial
character or by natural terrain or topographic features of equal or greater height, and would
be located in the congested area of the county where it is evident beyond all reasonable doubt
that the structure so shielded will not adversely affect safety in air navigation.
2. Any antenna structure of 20 feet or less in height except one that would increase the
height of another antenna structure.
Section 18.94 INERT LANDFILL.
Permits for inert landfills must be approved by the appropriate state agencies and
18-54
notifications of adjacent property owners prior to approval by the Board of Commissioners. Inert
landfills already in operation and approved by the appropriate state agency for handling such permits
and operations will be allowed to continue operation. However, any such expansion must have all
necessary approvals with notifications of all adjacent property owners.
Sections 18.95 -18.100 RESERVED.
18-55
ARTICLE XIII. EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS
The requirements and regulations set forth in this ordinance shall be subject to.the following
exceptions and modifications.
Section 18.101 FRONT YARD.
The front yard requirements in this ordinance shall not apply on lots where the average depth
of existing yards on developed lots located within one hundred (100) feet on each side thereof and
within the same block and zoning district is greater or less than the minimum required front yard
depth. In such case, the depth of the front yard on such lot shall be not less than the average front
yard depth on such developed lots. On double-frontage lots, the required front yard shall be provided
on each street.
Section 18.102 HEIGHT LIMITS.
Height limitations do not apply to the following: Chimneys, church steeples, flagpoles, grain
elevators, distribution lines, towers and poles, radio and television antennas, water towers and
similar structures.
Section 18.103 TEMPORARY USES.
Buildings used in conjunction with construction work may only be permitted thirty (30) days
prior to the construction work. Such temporary buildings shall be removed no later than fifteen (15)
days upon completion of the construction work. Manufactured housing units may be· permitted in
any zone, if a natural disaster has occurred. This use is permitted for only thirty (30) days and then
shall require additional approval for a time extension of thirty days from the planning commission.
Section 18.104 EXISTING LOTS OF RECORD.
Any pai?cel-0f.land-in-any-districtwhich-was-0n-record-in-the . Q.:ffi.ce-0f-the-Cle:i;k-0f.Superior
Court of Randolph County at the date of adoption of this Ordinance, or amended thereof, may be
used as a building site even though such lot or parcel fails to meet the minimum requirements for
a lot area, lot width, or both. With respect to such lots or parcels, yard and other requirements shall
be subject to the following:
I. Meet applicable set-back requirements
2. Not to exceed the maximum lot coverage requirements
3. Must have an approved on-site sewage permit from local Environmental Health
Specialist.
Sections 18.105 - 18.110 RESERVED.
18-56
ARTICLE XIV. ADMINISTRATION AND ENFORCEMENT
Section 18.111 ENFORCING OFFICER
The provision of this ordinance shall be administered and enforced by the county building
inspector or other designated agent. This official shall have the right to enter upon any premises at
any reasonable time prior to the issuance of certificate of occupancy for the purpose of making
inspections of buildings or premises necessary in carrying out his duties in the enforcement of this
Ordinance.· ·
Section 18.112 BUILDING PERMIT REQUIRED.
It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation for or the construction of any building or
other structure, o:r erect temporary field offices, or to. commence the moving, alteration, or repair
(with the exception of necessary repairs not affecting the external or party walls, chimneys,
stairways, or heights ofbuildings ) of any structure until the building inspector or other designated
agent has issued a building permit for such work including a statement that the plans, specifications,
and intended use of such structure in all respects conform with the provision of this ordinance.
Application for a building permit shall be made to the building inspector or other designated agent
on forms provided for that purpose.
Section 18.113 APPROVAL OF PLANS AND ISSUANCE OF BUILDING PERMIT.
It shall be unlawful for the building inspector or other designated agent to approve any plans
to issue a building permit for any excavation or construction until he has inspected such plans in
detail and find them to be in conformity with this ordinance. To this end, the building inspector or
other designated agent shall require that every application for a building permit for excavation,
construction, use ofland, moving or alteration be accompanied by a plan or plat drawn to scale and
showing the following in sufficient detail to enable the building inspector or other designated agent
to ascertain whether the proposed excavation, construction, use of land, moving or alteration is in
conformance-v.zith-this..O:nlinance.and . applicable.building-codes:--- - __ ,. ___ ··------ --... ------- -- - ·- --·--···
I. The actual shape, proportion, and dimensions of the lot to be built upon.
2. The shape, size, and location of all buildings or other structures to be erected,
altered, or moved and any building or other structures already on the lot.
3. The existing and intended use of all such buildings or other structures
4. The setback and side lines of buildings on adjoining lots and such other
information concerning the lot or adjoining lots as may be essential for determiiring whether the
provisions of this ordinance are observed.
If the proposed excavation, construction, moving, or alteration as set forth in application
are in conformity with the provisions of this ordinance and other related laws and ordinances, the
building inspector or other designated agent shall issue a building pennit accordingly. If an
18-57
application for a building permit is not approved, the building inspector or other designated agent
shall state in writing on the application the cause of such disapproval. Issuance of a building permit
shall in no case be construed as waiving any provision of this Ordinance.
Section 18.114 CERTIFICATE OF OCCUPANCY REQUIRED.
No land or building or other structure or part thereof hereafter erected, moved, or altered in
its use shall be used until the building inspector or other designated agent has issued a certificate of
occupancy stating that such land or building or other structure or part thereof is found to be in
conformity with the provision of this Ordinance.
Within three (3) days after the owner or his agent has notified the building inspector that a
building or premises orpart thereof is ready for occupancy or use, it shall be the duty of the building
inspector or other designated agent to make a final inspection thereof, and to issue a certificate of
occupancy if the building or premises or part thereofis found to conform with the provision of this
Ordinance, or if such certificate is reused, to state the refusal in writing with the cause.
Section 18.115 PENALTIES FOR VIOLATION OF ZONING ORDINANCE.
Ordinance violations may be tried in the Magistrate Court of Randolph County, Georgia,
upon citation issued by the county inspector or other designated agent. Each citation shall state the
time and place at which the accused violator is to appear for trial, shall identify the violation with
which the accused is charged, shall have an identifying number by which it shall be filed with the
court, shall indicate the identity of the accused and the date of service, and shall be signed by the
building inspector or other designated agent who shall complete and serve the citation.
Prosecutions for violations of this Ordinance in accordance with this section shall be
commenced by the completion, signing, and service of the citation by the building inspector or other
designated agent either of whom is authorized by this Ordinance to issue citations. The original of
the citation shall be personally served upon the accused, and a copy shall be promptly filed with the
Magistrate Court,- No pei;son-shall-be-arrested-prior-to-the-time-of-trial-for-vfolations-under-thissection,
but any person who fails to appear at trial shall be arrested thereafter on a warrant of the
Superior Court and required to post a bond for his future appearance.
Section 18.116 REMEDIES.
Ill case any building or other structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, .altered, repair,
converted, or maintained, or any building; structure, or land is in violation of this ordinance, the
building inspector or other designated agent, any other appropriate authority, or any adjacent or
neighboring property owner who would be specifically damaged by such violation, in addition to
other remedies may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action or preceding to
prevent such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, repair, conversion,
maintenance, or use to correct or abate such violation or to prevent occupancy of such building,
structure, or land.
Sections 18.117 - 18.120 RESERVED.
18-58
ARTICLE XV. VARIANCES
Section 18.121 VARIANCES.
The Randolph County Planning Commission may grant a variance in the application of the
provision of the Zoning Ordinance. The planning commission may do so only if all of the following
:findings are made.
1. That there are unique physical circumstances or conditions, including irregularity,
narrowness, shaj.lowness, or lot size or shape, exceptional topographical or other physical conditions
peculiar to the particular property, and that the unnecessary ha;dship is due to such conditions and
not to circumstances or conditions generally created by the provisions of the zoning ordinance in the
neighborhood or district in which the property is located.
2. That because such physical circumstances or conditions, there is no possibility that
the property can·be developed in strict conformity with the provisions of the Zoning Ordinance, and
that the authorization of a variance is therefore necessary to enable the reasonable use of the
property.
3. That granting the variance will not result in authorization of a use not otherwise
permitted in the district.
4. The Planning Commission shall establish a reasonabie time for hearing of any
appeals authorized under this section and shall give at least fifteen (15) days written notice by regular
mail to all parties who are involved in the variance request and adjacent property owners.
Any party aggrieved by any final judgment or decision of the Randolph County Planning
Commission, may within thirty (30) days thereafter appeal to the Randolph County Board of
Commissioners. If the party is still aggrieved, the party niay appeal to the Superior Court or court
of like jurisdiction. The party must file with such board a written notice of appeal specifying the
judgment.oLdecisionfrom :w.hich.the. appea!is.Jaken;_ln_case.ofs.uch.appeal,_such.b.uar.d_sha!Lcaus_e
a transcript of the proceedings in the case to be certified to the court to which the appeal is taken and
the case in such court to be tried de novo.
Sections 18.122 - 18.125 RESERVED.
18-59
ARTICLE XVI .. AMENDMENTS AND ALTERATIONS
"Amendment" as used in this section means a change in the text of the Zoning Ordinance;
a change in the official zoning map(s) of the county or the approval of a conditional use (other than
those conditional uses listed in Section 8.2 hereof) authorized by a zoning decision made only after
compliance with the procedures set forth in this section.
1. A proposed amendment to the text may be initiated by the planning commission or
may be submitted to the planning commission by the Board of Commissioners or by any person who
owns property within the zoning jurisdiction of the county. Unless initiated by the Board of
Commissioners or by the planning commission, all proposed map amendments shall be submitted
by the owner of such property or the authorized agent of the owner. An authorized agent shall have
written authorization from the property owner, and such authorization shall be notarized and attached
to the application.
2. A proposed amendment to the map affecting the same property shall not be
submitted more than once every twelve (12) months, beginning with the date of the final decision
by the Board of Commissioners. The Board of Commissioners may at its discretion, reduce or waive
the 12-month interval between applications for proposed amendments to the zoning map affecting
the same property; however, in the case of an application for a proposed amendment to the zoning
map which was defeated by the Board of Commissioners, there shall be at least a six-month interval
between the defeated application and the subsequent application affecting the same property unless .
the board shall find and determine that the conditions under which the previous application for
rezoning made have substantially changed. The 12-month interval shall not apply to applications
for proposed amendments initiated by the Board of Commissioners or by the planning commission,
except for applications for proposed amendments to the zoning map which were. defeated by the
board of commissioners, in which case the interval required before a subsequent application may be
filed shall be at least six (6) months unless the board shall find and determine that the conditions
under which the previous application for rezoning was made have substantially changed. An
application to amend zoning conditions may be submitted at any time:
Section 18.126 INITIATION OF AMENDMENTS.
Each proposed amendment to the text or to the official zoning map or the approval of a
conditional use (other than those conditional uses listed in Section 8.2 hereof) shall be initiated by
filing an application with the building official/zoning office. Applications for proposed amendments
shall include at least the following information:
1. Applications for proposed amendments to the text shall include the following
information:
(a) Name and address of the applicant;
(b) Current provisions of the text to be affected by the proposed amendment;
( c) Proposed wording of the proposed amendment to the text; and
(d) Reason for proposed amendment.
18-60
-. --
4. After all individuals have had an opportunity to speak in accordance with paragraph
3 above, those individuals present at the public hearing who wish to speak in opposition to the
requested zoning decision shall have an opportunity to speak.
5. When a person wishes to speak at a public hearing, he shall raise his hand and after
being recognized by the presiding officer, shall stand and give his name, address, and make any
comment appropriate to the proposed zoning decision.
6. No time limit shall be imposed upon any person speaking at a public hearing, but
all speakers are urged to make their comments brief and avoid repeating other comments.
7. In the case of an application for a proposed amendment to the zoning ordinance
text or map, the applicant shall have an opportunity, after all comments in opposition have been
made, to make summary remarks concerning the proposed zoning decision.
8. Thereafter, the presiding officer shall announce that the public hearing for the
requested zoning decision is closed. The planning commission shall then convene its business
session to consider the proposed amendment and shall, at that time, take action -on its
recommendation to the Board of Commissioners. At the close of the public hearing before the Board
of Commissioners, the board shall immediately convene its business session and consider the
recommendation for the zoning decision and take action on the proposed amendment.
Section 18.129 PLANNING COMMISSIONER PUBLIC HEARING AND ACTION.
1. All applications for proposed amendments shall be reviewed by the planning
commission in a public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in section 16.3.
2. The planning commission shall review and consider arecommendation to the
Randolph County Board of Commissioners with respect to the application for a proposed
amendment. The planning commission may decide not to make a recommendation, or it may make
any o:t°-the-following-recommendations-with-respect-to-an-application-for-a-proposed-amendment:
approval, denial, deferral, withdrawal (if the applicant concurs), change of zoning district requested,
or imposition of zoning conditions. If no recommendation is decided by the planning commission,
then it shall report to the Board of Commissioners that it makes no recommendation on the
application.
3. The planning commission shall submit its recommendation or report of no
recommendation on an application for a proposed amendment to the board of commissioners prior
to the scheduled public hearing in which the board of commissioners will consider the application
for a zoning decision. If the planning commission fails to submit a recommendation or report prior
to the public hearing, the planning commissioner's recommendation shall deemed to be one of
approval.
Section 18.130 BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS PUBLIC HEARING AND ACTION.
I. Before taking action on proposed amendment and after receipt of the planning
18-63
·-._-
2. Applications for proposed amendments to the zoning map or for approval of a
conditional use shall include the following:
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
(g)
(h)
Name and address of the applicant.
A legal description of the tract( s) proposed to be rezoned or proposed for
conditional use.
Three (3) copies of a plat, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and
district, the dimensions, acreage and location of the tract(s) prepared by an
engineer, or land surveyor, whose state registration is. current and valid. The
engineer's or land surveyor's seal shall be affixed to the plat.
The present and proposed zoning district for the tract(s).
Existing intermediate floodplain area.
The names and addresses of the owner(s) of the land and of the agent(s) for
the owner( s ), if any.
The map and parcel number as identified on the county's tax assessor map.
If the application is for the approval of a conditional use, a description of the
proposed use, site plan, including overall development scheme stating the
development intentions of the landowner, a statement of location and
intensity of proposed use(s) and activity(ies), and a physical description of
proposed facilities acco=odating such use.
3. Applications for proposed amendments shall be submitted in accordance witha
schedule adopted annually by the Board of Commissioners. Said schedule shall provide that each
· ·· - application for a proposed amendment shall be submitted at least fifty (50) days prior to the date on
which it is to be considered by the Board of Commissioners. A fee shall not be charged for which
amendments initiated by members of the county commission or by members of the planning
commission when acting as agents of the governillg authority.
4. An applicant may file site plan~, renderings, construction specifications, written
development restrictions and other zoning conditions which the applicant proposes as binding
restrictions-upon--the-development--and-use-of-the- property-that-is~the .subject. of-the-pr:oposed
amendment. However, any such zoning conditions shall be filed with the building inspection/zoning
office at least seven (7) days prior to the public hearing before the-Board of Co=issioners. If such
zoning conditions are proposed by an application and have not been filed as required by this
subsection; the Board of Commissioners, at the time of the public hearing on the proposed
amendment, shall defer any action on such action on such proposed amendment to a specific meeting
date. The date designated for action on the proposed amendment shall be set at a time which is
sufficient to allow the applicant to comply with the filing requirements of this subsection.
5. An applicant shall not be permitted to withdraw an application for a proposed
amendment after the legal advertising for said proposed amendment, as required by this section, shall
have first appeared, unless such withdrawal is made with the approval of the Board of
Commissioners as provided in section 16.5.
18-61
Section 18.127 PUBLIC NOTIFICATION.
1. Legal Notice. Notice of public hearings before the planning commission and the
Board of Commissioners as required by the section shall be published within a newspaper of general
circulation within the county and shall state the time, place and purpose of the hearing and shall also
include the location of property that is the subject of the zoning action, the present zoning district
of said property, and the proposed zoning district of said property or the proposed conditional use.
Such notice shall be published at least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five ( 45)days prior to the
date of the hearing.
2. Signs posted. Randolph County Board of Commissioners shall have a sign(s)
posted in a conspicuous place(s) on the property to be rezoned or subject to a proposed conditional
use, which shall contain information describing the proposed map amendment and the dates, times,
and places of the public hearings before the planning commission and the Randolph County Board
of Commissioners. Such sign shall be continuously displayed for at least fifteen days prior to the
public hearings. Said sign( s) or any part of the sign shall not be removed from said property except
by an authorized agent of the Board of Commissioners.
3. Letters to Abutting Property Owners. Where application is made for a proposed
amendment to the zoning maps or a proposed conditional use, the building inspection and/or zoning
department shall notify, by regular mail, the owners, as shown by Randolph County tax records, of
property that abuts the property that is the subject of the proposed amendment or proposed
conditional use. Such notice shall be mailed at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of the
planning commission public hearing and shall include a description of the proposed amendment or
proposed conditional use and the dates, times and places of the public hearings before the planning
commission and the board of commissioners.
Section 18.128 PUBLIC HEARING PROCEDURES.
Whenever a public hearing is required by these ordinances or by state law prior to a zoning
decision,_such.publ:icJiearing,_whether.conducted.hy_theJ3oard.of.Commissioners_or.the_planning .. _
commission, shall be conducted in accordance with the following procedures.
· 1. The public hearing shall be called to order by the presiding officer.
2. The presiding officer shall explain the procedure to be followed in the conduct of
a public hearing.
3. If the subject of the hearing is a zoning decision initiated by a petitioner other than
the county commission, the petitioner requesting such zoning decision, or the petitioner's agent, shall
be recognized first and shall be permitted to present and explain the request for the zoning decision.
If the request for a zoning decision is initiated by the county commission, all members of the county
commission shall be allowed to speak as they are recognized by the presiding officer, regardless of
whether such a county commission member speaks in favor of or in opposition to the proposed
zoning decision. Thereafter, all individuals who so desire shall be permitted to speak in favor of the
zoning decision.
18-62
commission recommendations or reports thereon, the Board of Commissioners shall hold a public
hearing on the proposed amendment.
2. So the purpose of this zoning ordinance will be served and so that the health, safety
and general welfare will be secured, the Board of Commissioners in its decision on the application
for a proposed amendment, may in it legislative discretion, approve or deny the application for
proposed amendment as submitted, defer a decision until a specific meeting date, require the
applicant to file a site plan or other plans regarding the project development and defer action to a
later meeting date, or allow a withdrawal of the application by the applicant, ifrequested. The Board
of Commissioners shall determine whether the withdrawal shall be subject to the 12-month interval
before refiling. The Board of Commissioners may also require thatthe land areafor such application
for proposed amendment is made be reduced, that the zoning district be changed to one other than
that requested, or that zoning conditions be added or deleted, as the Board of Commissioners deems
appropriate.
Section 18.131 Zoning Standards.
Whenever Randolph County shall exercise its zoning power, the following standards are
considered relevant in balancing the county's interest in promoting the public health, safety,
morality, or general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of property:
· 1. Whether the zoning decision will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and
development of adjacent or nearby properties which will be reasonably affected;
2. Whetherthe zoning decision will adversely affect the existing use of adjacent or
nearby property;
3. Whether the property affected by the zoning decision has a reasonable economic
use as currently zoned;
4. Whether-thezoning-decision-will-result-in-a.use-which.wi!l-or-couldcause-an
excessive or burdensome use or have a significant negative impact upon existing roads,
transportation facilities, utilities, water or other natural resources, schools, churches, or other
facilities;
5. Whether the zoning decision conforms with the policy and intent of an adopted
land use plan to include the general purposes included in the Comprehensive Plan for Randolph
County, Georgia; and
6. Whether other conditions exist that affect the use and development.of the property
in .question and support either approval or denial of the zoning decision.
Section 18.132 CONDITIONAL USE STANDARDS.
Whenever the Board of Commissioners of Randolph County shall consider the approval of
a conditional use (other than the uses in Section 8.2 hereof which may be approved by the planning
18-64
commission), the following standards, in addition to other factors deemed relevant by the Board of
Commissioners of Randolph County, should be considered in balancing the county's interest in
promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to the unrestricted
use of property:
1. Whether the proposed use is contrary to the purpose of this ordinance;
2. Whether the proposed use will be detrimental to the use or development of adjacent
properties or the general neighborhood and whether the proposed use will adversely affect the health
and safety of residents or workers;
3. Whether the proposed use will constitute a nuisance or hazard because of the number of
persons who will be placed on a lot of sufficient size to satisfy the space requirements of such use;
4. Whether access to the site is appropriate considering the volume of traffic resulting from
the proposed use;
5. Whetherthe amount and location of open space and the provision of screening is such that
buffering of incompatible uses is achieved;
6. Whetherthe hours and manner of operation of the proposed use are inconsistent with the
adjacent or nearby uses;
7. Whether public facilities and utilities are capable of adequately serving the proposed use;
and
8. Whether the proposed use will have a significant adverse effect on the level of property
values or the health, safety and general welfare and character of adjacent land uses or the general
area
Sections~.S.1-33---18.135 ... RESERVED.
18-65
ARTICLE XVII. ALTERATION OF ZONING CONDITIONS
Section 18.136 MINOR ALTERATIONS APPROVAL.
The Building Official or other authorized agent shall have the authority to approve the
following minor alterations of zoning. conditions provided such alterations would not change the
purpose intended for such zoning condition and would not adversely affect county services or other
property:
1. Building relocation, curb cut relocation and traffic circulation changes due to
topographic, environmental or other design factors;
2. Parking design, and
3. Utility relocation
Section 18.137 AMENDMENTS OF ZONING ORDINANCE.
An owner of property of his authorized agent may file an application to amend any zoning
conditions which have been made a part of a zoning decision by the Board of Commissioners if such
changes requested cannot be effected under the provisions of section 17 .1. Such application shall
be processed in accordance with the same procedures as those required for applications for proposed
amendments as provided in Section 16.
Sections 18.138 - 18.140 RESERVED.
18-66
ARTICLE XVIII. FEES
Section 18.141 FEES.
Fees for appeals and applications for amendments to this ordinance shall be established as
follows and shall be payable prior to action by respective bodies. Fees are not refundable once the
required legal ad/notification has been completed.
Appeals $30.00
Amendments $50.00
* Includes: Conditional Use
Sections 18.142 -18.145
- ·- - - --· --· ---- ·-------· ------ -----· ----- ·---- -
Text Amendment
Rezoning
RESERVED.
18-67
ARTICLE XIX. LEGAL STATUS
Section 18.146 INTERPRETATION.
In the interpretation and application of the Zoning Ordinance ofRandolph County, Georgia,
the provisions shall be considered minimum requirements adopted for the promotion of the public
health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the citizens ofRandolph County. Where the provisions
of this ordinance require or impose more restrictive standards than are required by any other
ordinance or law, the provisions ofthis ordinance shall control. Where the provision of any other
ordinance or law require more restrictive standards than are required by this ordinance, the
provisions of such other ordinance or law shall control.
Section 18.147 SAVING CLAUSE.
If any section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance shall be held to be invalid or
unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, such holding shall not affect any other
section, clause, provision, or portion of this ordinance which is not in and of itself invalid or
unconstitutional
Section 18.148 Effective Date.
This ordinance shall take effect and shall be in force from and after the __ day of _ ~
Sections 18.149 - 18.150 RESERVED.
18-68
APPENDIX A- ZONING MAP ATTACHMENTS
·· .. _,....--
18-69
ORDINANCE NO. 2017- DQ ~
AN ORDINANCE TO AMEND THE ZONING ORDINANCE OF RANDOLPH
COUNTY, GEORGIA, TO DESIGNATE PERMISSIBLE USES OF SOLAR
ELECTRICAL SYSTEMS; TO REPEAL ALL ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT
THEREWITH; AND FOR OTHER PURPOSES.
WHEREAS, the Randolph County Board of Commissioners has adopted a Zoning
Ordinance; and
WHEREAS, the Randolph County Board of Commissioners desires to amend that
Zoning Ordinance to authorize the erection of solar panels in limited circumstances.
NOW, THEREFORE, BE ORDAINED by the Randolph County Board of
Commissioners and it is hereby ordained by authority of same:
Section 1. Section 18.22 of the Zoning Or:dinance of Randolph County entitled
"Definitions" is hereby amended by adding the following definitions with regard to solar energy
systems.
"Glare: The effects produced by light with an intensity sufficient to cause annoyance,
discomfort, or loss in visual performance and visibility."
Photovoltaic (PV) System: A solar energy system that produces electricity by the use of
semiconductor devices; called photovoltaic cells, that generate electricity whenever light
strikes them. Included in a PV system are the solar energy generation mechanisms (e.g.,
panels or other assemblies of solar electric cells), inverters (devices that convert Direct
Current electricity produced by the system to usable Alternating Current), batteries and
battery systems that store electrical energy from the PV system for future use, meters, and
electric transmission wires and conduits that facilitate connections with users and/or the
local power grid.
Solar Array: A number of photovoltaic modules or panels that generate solar electricity,
assembled or connected together to provide a single electrical output.
Solar Array, Tracking: A solar array that follows the path of the sun to optimize the
amount of solar radiation received by the device. A tracking solar array may be ground
mounted or building mounted.
Solar Access Easement: A recorded easement, the pmpose of which is to secure the right
to receive sunlight across reai property of another for continued access to sunlight
necessary to operate a solar energy system.
Solar Energy: Radiant energy received from the sun that can be collected in the form of
heat or light by a solar collector or solar energy system.
Solar Energy Facility: The area of land devoted to solar energy system installation. A
solar energy facility may include an interconnection with the local utility power grid for
distribution to more than one property or consumer in the electricity market as a
co=ercial venture. Includes the term "solar farm."
Solar Energy System: The components and subsystems required to convert solar energy
into electric or thermal energy suitable for use. The term applies, but is not limited to,
photovoltaic (solar electric) systems and thermal solar energy systems.
Solar Energy System, Building Mounted: A solar energy system, which may include solar
thermal panels, solar hot water system panels, and photovoltaic panels, which are mounted
to a building or structure, to provide energy primarily for on-site use. Building-mounted
solar panels may be flush-mounted (i.e., flush to the surface of a building roof or building
fac;ade in a manner that the panel cannot be angled or raised), or as one or more modules
fixed to frames which can be tilted or automatically adjusted at an optimal angle for sun
exposure. A mounted solar energy system is accessory to the building or structure.
Solar Energy System, Ground Mounted: A solar energy system that is directly installed on
(mounted to) the ground and is not attached or affixed to any structure.
Solar Energy System, Thermal: A solar energy system that directly heats water or other
liquid using sunlight, including the use of heated liquid for such purposes as space heating
and cooling, domestic hot water, and heating pool water.
Solar Farm: A solar energy facility, typically with multiple solar arrays, designed and used
for the purpose of generating electric energy via a photovoltaic system.
Section 2. Section 18.61 of the Zoning Ordinance of Randolph County, Georgia
entitled "Allowed Uses in Zoning Districts" is amended by adding the following:
Solar Ener!!Y Svstems A-1 R R-1 C-1 I-1 l'v:!HU-1 CORD PUD
Building Mounted y y y y y y y y
Ground Mounted y y N y y N N y
Solar Energy Facility or y y N N y N N N
Farm
Section 3. Article XIX of the Zoning Code of Randolph County is hereby moved to become
a new Article XX, also entitled Legal Status.
Section 4. A New Article XIX of the Zoning Code of Randolph County is hereby created, to
be entitled "Solar Energy Systems" and shall read as follows:
Section 18.146 Solar Energy System, Building Mounted
18.146.l Placement.
l. No solar energy system shall be mounted or affixed to any freestanding
wall or fence.
2. Panels and building mounts shall be installed per manufacturer's
specifications.
3. In residential zoning districts and in the C-1 district, a solar
4.
18. 146.2
energy system, for aesthetic reasons, shall not be located on the front slope
of a pitched roof of a structure unless no other location for the solar energy
equipment is feasible. Randolph County may require sun and shadow
diagrams specific to the installation to ensure compliance with this
provision.
Glare: All solar panel energy systems shall be placed such that concentrated
solar radiation or glare does not project onto nearby structures or roadways.
Height.
Building-mounted solar panels or systems shall not exceed four feet above the
height of any principal building on the site.
18. 146.3 Permits and Code Compliance.
A building permit shall be required for installation of all building-mounted solar
energy systems.
Section 18.147 Solar Energy System, Ground Mounted
18.147.l
1.
2.
Placement.
A ground-mounted solar energy system shall not be located within any
front yard set-back area required under this chapter.
A ground-mounted system shall not be located over a septic system, leach
field area or identified reserve area unless approved by the Health
Department.
If located in a floodplain or an area of known localized flooding, all panels,
electrical wiring, automatic transfer switches, inverters, etc. shall be located
above the base flood elevation.
4. Panels and ground mounts shall be installed per manufacturer's
specifications.
5. All ground-mounted solar energy systems shall be placed so that
concentrated solar radiation or glare does not project onto nearby structures
or roadways.
18.147.2 Maximum Area Coverage.
A solar energy system shall not exceed 50% of the footprint of the principal building
served. For residential properties located in agricultural districts, a ground-mounted solar energy
system shall not exceed 25% of the footprint of the principal building served.
18.147.3 Height.
The maximum height of a ground-mounted solar energy system shall not exceed the
maximum building height for accessory buildings in the zoning district in which it is located.
18.147.4 Permitting.
A building permit is required for any ground-mounted solar energy system and for the
installation of any thermal solar energy system.
Section 18.148
18.148.l
l.
2.
Solar Energy Facilities or Solar Farms
Mounting.
Solar panels or solar arrays shall be mounted onto a pole, rack or suitable
foundation, in accordance with manufacturer specifications, in order to
ensure the safe operation and stability of the system. The mounting
structure (fixed or tracking capable) shall be comprised of materials
approved by the manufacturer, which are able to fully s:ipport the system
components, in accordance with applicable building permit requirements.
Electrical components of the facility shall meet applicable electrical code
requirements, and all electrical wires and lines less than 1 OOkV that are
used in conjunction with the solar energy facility shall be installed
underground.
Multiple mounting structures shall be spaced apart at the distance
reco=ended by the manufacturer to ensure safety and maximum
efficiency.
18.148.2 Setbacks.
A solar energy facility and its appurtenant components and structures shall be set back a
minimum of 50 feet from all property lines and 100 feet from any residence.
18.148.3
1.
2.
18.148.4
Placement.
When located in a,,aricultural zoning districts, the solar energy facility shall
be located as much as possible to minimize impacts on prime agricultural
soils.
If located in a floodplain or an area of known localized flooding, all panels,
electrical wiring, automatic transfer switches, inverters, etc. shall be located
above the base flood elevation.
Components of the facility shall not be located over a septic system, leach
field area or identified reserve area unless approved by the Health
Department.
Screening.
The facility shall be fully screened from adjoining properties and adjacent roads using the
natural topography or by installation of an evergreen buffer capable of reaching a height of 6 feet
within three years of planting, with at least 75% opacity at the time of planting.
18.148.5
1.
2.
18.148.6
1.
2.
18.148.7
Height.
Freestanding solar panels or solar arrays shall not exceed 25 feet in height
as measured from the grade at the base of the structure to the highest point.
Mounted solar panels or solar arrays shall not exceed eight feet above the
apex of the structure on which it is mounted or the maximum height for
buildings in the zoning district in which it is located.
Security.
Unless 24-hour security guards or video surveillance is provided at the
installation, the solar energy facility shall be enclosed by a security fence no
less than 6 feet nor greater than 8 feet in height.
Access gates and equipment cabinets must be locked when not in use.
Noise.
Inverter noise shall not exceed 40dBA, measured at the property line.
··-
18.148.8
1.
2.
18.148.9
Glare and Lighting
The solar energy system components shall be designed with an
antireflective coating or at least shall not produce glare that would
constitute a nuisance to occupants of neighboring properties, aircraft, or
persons traveling adjacent or nearby roads.
Iflighting is required, it shall be activated by motion sensors, fully shielded
and downcast type where the light does not spill onto any adjacent property
or into the night sky.
Maintenance and Upkeep.
Systems shall be maintained in accordance with manufacturer's specifications. The
operator of the facility shall maintain the facility, including all buffer screening, in compliance
with the approved plans and shall keep the facility free from weeds, dust, trash and debris.
18.148.10 Site Plan Review and Development Permit.
A site plan reviewed and approved by the Planning Division shall be required prior to
issuance of a development permit. In addition to requirements for site plans generally, the site
plan submission shall include the following information: The proposed location and dimensions
of all solar panels, inverters, existing and proposed structures, screening, fencing, property lines,
parking, access driveways and turnout locations, ancillary equipment, transmission lines,
vegetation, the location of any residences on site and within 100 feet of the perimeter of the
facility, the location of any proposed solar access easements, and standard drawings of solar
energy system components.
18.148.11 Additional Submission Requirements.
In addition to requirements for information to be provided during the site plan review and
development permitting process, the facility shall not be approved for operation until the
following are submitted:
1. Copy of all lease agreements and solar access easements.
2. Where interconnection to an electric utility grid is proposed, the applicant
shall submit evidence that the electrical utility provider has been informed
of the customer's intent to install an interconnection with the local electric
utility grid. A copy of the approval from the local utility must also be
provided before operation of an interconnected facility will be authorized.
3. A decommissioning plan for the anticipated service life of the facility or in
the event that the facility is abandoned or has reached its life expectancy.
·. __ ,..
4.
Section 18.149
The County may require other studies, reports, certifications, and/or
approvals be submitted by the applicant to ensure compliance with this
section.
Decommissioning.
(a) The owner of a solar electrical system is required to notify Randolph County
immediately upon cessation or the discontinuation of the operation. The solar electrical system
shall be perceived to be discontinued or abandoned if no electricity is generated by such system
for a period of twelve continuous months.
(b) The solar electrical system owner shall then have twelve months in which to
dismantle and remove the system including all solar related equipment or apparatuses related
thereto included but not limited to buildings, cabling, electrical components, roads, foundations
and other facilities from the property. If the owner fails to dismantle and/or remove the solar
electrical system within the established time frames, the municipality may complete the
decommissioning at the owner's expense.
Section 5. Any and all ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith shall be
and the same are hereby repealed to the extent of such conflict.
Section 6. Effective Date.
This ordinance shall become effective immediately upon passage.
SO ORDAINED, this I '1-lih day of~h~e.=l:i~ru=• <A~<f"'-1..,_, -----~' 2017.
j
(SEAL)
RANDOLPH COUNTY BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS
ORDINANCE NO. 2018- 00 \
··.'1[Dp
'. a
\~ l
AN ORDINANCE OF THE RANDOLPH COUNTY BOARD OF
COMMISSIONERS ESTABLISIDNG RULES AND REGULATIONS GOVERNING
THE CONSTRUCTION OF CELL TOWERS WITHIN RANDOLPH COUNTY;
REPEALING ALL ORDINANCES IN CONFLICT HEREWITH; AND FOR OTHER
PURPOSES.
WHEREAS, the Commissioners of Randolph County desire to establish rules and
regulations governing the construction of cell towers within Randolph County
NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT ORDAINED by the Board of Commissioners of
Randolph County as follows:
Section 1. The ordinance attached hereto as Exhibit "A" is hereby adopted.
Section 2. All ordinances or parts of ordinances in conflict herewith are repealed.
. " SO ORDAINED, this Jl':: day of 'ftl:>r-u_a.x'-1
~
, 2018.
(SEAL)
First reading: __________ _
Second reading: _________ _
RANDOLPH COUNTY
BOARD OF COMMISSIONERS
By,; =:~gaco.J~
Chair, Steve JackSOil"-
Attest: LlWiM~o (\!). Ko lou S 6YJ
Clerk, Carlissa Co~per
EXHIBIT "A"
Section A.
The following definitions are added to the existing Section 18.22.
Deffaitions
Alternative tower structure: means clock towers, bell towers, church steeples, light/power poles,
electric transmission towers, manmade trees (without accessory buildings/structures), and similar
natural or manmade alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the
presence of antennas or towers.
Collation: The use of a wireless telecommunications facility by more than one wireless
telecommunications provider.
Height: when referring to a tower or other structure, means the distance measured from ground
level to the highest point on the tower structure or appurtenance.
Lattice tower: A support structure constructed of vertical metal struts and cross braces forming a
triangular or square structure which often tapers from the foundation to the top.
Monopole: A support structure constructed of a single, self-supporting hollow metal tube
securely anchored to a foundation.
Open Space: Land devoted to conservation or recreational purposes and/or land designated by a
municipality to remain undeveloped (may be specified on a zoning map).
Pre-existing towers and antennas: means structures as set forth in subsection 18-180 ( c ).
Scenic views: means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural
features, as identified in the county comprehensive plan.
Telecommunication: The technology which enables information to be exchanged through the
transmission of voice, video, or data signals by means of electrical or electromagnetic systems.
Wireless telecommunications antenna: The physical devise through which electromagnetic,
wireless telecommunications signals authorized by the Federal Communications Commission a
re transmitted or received. Antennas used by amateur radio operators are excluded from this
definition.
Wireless telecommunications equipment shelter: The structure in which the electronic receiving
and relay equipment for a wireless telecommunications facility is housed.
-~
Wireless telecommunications facility: A facility consisting of the equipment and structures
involved in receiving telecommunications or radio signals from a mobile radio communications
source and transmitting those signals to a central switching computer which connects the mobile
unit with the land-based telephone lines.
Wireless telecommunications tower: A structure intended to support equipment used to transmit
and/or receive telecommunications signals including monopoles, guyed and lattice construction
steel structures. This term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers,
common-carrier towers, cellular telecommunication towers, manmade trees (with accessory
buildings/structures) and other similar structures.
Visual quality: means the appropriate design, arrangement and location of tower structures in
relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences.
Section B.
A New Article XXII to be entitled, "Wireless Telecommunication Towers" is hereby created and
shall read as follows:
SECTION 18.179 INTENT
The intent of this article is to establish guidelines for the siting of all wireless, cellular,
television and radio telecommunications towers and antennas. The goals of this article are to:
I.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Encourage the location of towers in nonresidential areas;
Minimize the total number of towers within the community necessary to provide
adequate personal wireless services to residents of the county;
Encourage the joint use of new and existing tower sites among service providers;
Locate telecommunications towers and antennas in areas where adverse impacts
on the community are minimized:
Encourage design and construction of towers and antennas to minimize adverse
visual impacts; and
Enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver
such services to the community effectively and efficiently.
SECTION 18.180: APPLICATION OF ARTICLE
A. District height limitations. Except as set forth in subsection (c) of this section, the
requirements of this article shall govern the location of telecommunications towers that
exceed, and antennas that are installed at a height in excess of, 50 feet.
B. Governmental exemption. The provisions of this article shall not apply to governmental
facilities and structures.
C. Pre-existing towers .and antennas. Any tower or antenna for which a permit has been
properly issued prior to the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is
derived shall not be required to meet the provisions of this article, other than the
requirements of sections 18.181. Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in
this article as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing antennas."
D. Additional antennas. If an additional antenna is co-located upon a pre-existing tower
after adoption of 1;his article, then fencing, color and landscaping requires of Section
18.182 shall be met as part of the permitting process.
SECTION 18.183: ANNUAL REGISTRATION OF TELECOMMUNICATIONS
TOWERS
A. On or before May 1 of each calendar year, the owner of any telecommunications tower
shall register such tower with the County clerk on a form provided by the Clerk. The
initial annual registration shall identify such telecommunications tower by tax parcel
number physical street address, and/or GIS coordinates, and shall describe all structures
and equipment on site associated with such telecommunications tower. Annually
thereafter, each subsequent registration shall identify any transfer of ownership of such
tower, and/or any modifications to such tower which occurred during the preceding
calendar year.
B. For all telecommunications towers which were constructed more than ten years prior to
the submittal of the annual registration, at least once every three years the owner of such
tower shall submit certification to the clerk that such tower was inspected and that a
registered professional engineer has determined that no signs of defect, disrepair, or other
hazardous condition exist.
C. The annual registration fee for each telecommunications tower shall be $100.00 for the
first registration year and $50 .00 per tower per year thereafter.
D. The County clerk shall maintain an inventory of all towers or alternative tower structures,
active and inactive, which are present in the county. This inventory shall include
specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height,
design, tower type and general suitability for antenna co-location of each tower, and other
pertinent information as may be decided by the department.
SECTION 18.184: GENERAL PROVISIONS
The following requirements apply to all wireless telecommunications facilities regardless of the
zoning district in which they are to be located. These general standards are to be supplemented
with the specific regulations for each zoning district found in the following sections.
A. When the proposed wireless telecommunications facility is to include a new tower, a plot
plan at a scale of not less than one inch is equal to 100 feet shall be submitted. This plot
plan shall indicate all building uses within 300 feet of the proposed facility. Aerial
photos and/or renderings may augment the plot plan.
B. The location of the tower and equipment shelter shall comply with all natural resource
protection standards established in the Zoning Code, including those for floodplain,
wetlands, and steep slopes.
C. Security fencing eight feet in height shall surround the tower, equipment shelter and any
guy wires, either completely or individually as determined by the Board of
Commissioners.
D. The following buffer plantings may be located around the perimeter of the security fence
as deemed appropriate by the Board of Commissioners.
1) An evergreen screen shall be planted that consists of either a hedge, planted three feet
on center maximum, or a row of evergreen trees planted five feet on center maximum.
E. Existing vegetation (trees and shrubs) shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible.
F. No new, tower, except amateur radio towers, shall be permitted unless the applicant
demonstrates to the satisfaction of the department and board of commissions that no
existing tower or existing alternative tower structure can accommodate the applicant's
proposed antenna. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate
licensed professionals or qualified industry experts and shall consist of more than mere
conclusory statements that no existing tower is suitable. Evidence submitted to
demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the proposed antenna
shall consist of one or more of the following:
1) That no existing towers or suitable alternative tower structures are located within
the geographic antenna placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering
requirements.
2) That existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support
the applicant's antenna and related equipment
3) That the applicant's proposed antenna(s) would cause electromagnetic interference
with the antenna( s) on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing
towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna.
4) That the cost or contractual provisions required by the tower owner to share an
existing tower or structure or to adapt an existing tower or structure for sharing are
unreasonable. Costs exceeding new tower development are presumed to be unreasonable.
5) That the applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that
render existing towers and structures unsuitable.
G. Any application to locate an antenna on a building or structure that is listed on an historic
register, or is in a historic district shall be subject to review by the municipality's
Architectural Review Board, Building Commissioner, or Board of Commissioners if
there is no such review board or officer.
H. The tower shall be painted a non-contrasting gray or similar color minimizing its
visibility, unless otherwise required by the Federal Communications Commission (FCC)
or Federal Aviation Administration (FAA). Towers or antennas shall maintain either a
galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA and
FCC, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. At all tower sites,
the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures,
screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and
building environment.
I. No advertising is permitted anywhere on the facility, with the exception of identification
s1gnage.
J. All providers utilizing towers shall present a report to the County Clerk notifying them of
any tower facility locate in the municipality whose use will be discontinued and the date
this use will cease. If at any time the use of the facility is discontinued for 180 days, a
designated local official may declare the facility abandoned. (This excludes any
dormancy period between construction and the initial use of the facility.) The facility's
owner/operator will receive written notice from the County Clerk and will be instructed
to either reactivate the facility's use within 180 days, or dismantle and remove the
facility. If reactivation or dismantling does not occur, the municipality will remove or
will contract to have removed the facility and assess the owner/operator the costs.
K. No tower under 150 feet shall be artificially lighted except to assure safety or as required
by the FAA. Any tower between 150 and 200 feet in height shall follow safety marking
and obstruction lighting as prescribed by the FAA. Security lighting around the
equipment shelter is permitted. If lighting is required, the governing authority may
review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the
least disturbance to the surrounding views. In the event that a tower requires lighting by
virtue of its height, the County may require the construction of the tower at a· 1ower
height in order to avoid lighting requirements.
L. "No Trespassing" signs shall be posted around the facility with a telephone number of
who to contact in the event of an emergency.
M. Applicants will provide evidence of legal access to the tower site thereby maintaining this
access regardless of other developments that may take place on the site.
N. A Conditional Use Permit must be approved by the Board of Commissioners with a
subsequent Building Permit issued by the County Clerk for construction of new towers in
nonindustrial districts. A conditional use permit should comply with all requirements for
building permits set forth in this chapter. Collocation of antennas on a single tower,
antennas attached to existing structures/building, towers located in industrial districts, or
replacement towers to be constructed at the site of a current tower are permitted used and
will not be subject to the Conditional use permitting process.
0. Any decision to deny a request to place, construct or modify a wireless
telecommunications antenna and/or tower shall be in writing and supported by evidence
contained in a written record of the proceedings of the Board of Commissioners.
P. Underground equipment shelters are encouraged, especially in nonindustrial districts, and
may be requested by the Board of Commissioners.
Q. Upon the transfer of ownership of any tower, alternative tower structure, or lot upon
which such a structure has been erected, the tower permittee shall notify the department
of the transaction in writing within 30 days.
SECTION 18.185 NON RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Wireless telecommunications facilities proposed for the following zoning districts- industrial,
Commercial, and agricultural- are subject to the following conditions:
A. Sole use on a lot:
A wireless telecommunications facility is permitted as a sole use on a lot subject to the
following for the relevant zoning district as Set forth in Section 18. l 02.
1) Minimum lot size -
2)
3)
4)
Minimum yard requirements -
Tower: the minimum distance to any single-family or two-family residential use
or district lot line shall be 300 feet
Maximum height -
Tower: 200 feed (includes antenna)
Equipment shelter: (maximum building height for the district)
Maximum size of equipment shelter -
300 square feet for a single shelter, or, ifthere is more than one, 750 square feet
B. Combined with another use:
A wireless telecommunications facility is permitted on a property with an existing use
subject to the following conditions:
1) The existing use on the property may be any permitted use in the district or any
lawful nonconforming use, and need not be affiliated with the wireless
telecommunications provider. The wireless telecommunications facility will not
be considered an addition to the structure or value of a nonconforming use.
2)
3)
4)
5)
6)
7)
The wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully automated and unattended
on a daily basis, and shall be visited only for periodic and necessary maintenance
(except during construction or an,emergency).
Minimum lot area -
The minimum lot area shall be the area needed to accommodate the tower (and
guy wires, if used), the equipment shelter, security fencing and buffer planting.
Minimum yard requirements -
Tower: the minimum distance to any single-family or·two-family residential use
or district lot line shall be 300 feet.
Equipment shelter: shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the
primary lot.
Access - The service access to the equipment shelter shall, whenever feasible, be
provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use.
Maximum height -
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna)
Equipment shelter: (maximum building height for the district)
Maximum size of equipment shelter -
300 square feet for a single shelter, or, ifthere is more than one, 750 square feet
C. Combined with an existing structure:
Where possible an antenna for a wireless telecommunications facility shall be attached to
an existing structure or building subject to the following conditions:
1) Maximum height-
20 feet or 20% of the building height above the existing building or structure,
whichever is greater.
2) If the applicant proposes to locate the telecommunications equipment in a
separate shelter (not located on, or attached to, the building) the shelter shall
comply with the following:
a) The minimum setback requirements for the subject zoning district.
b) A buffer yard may be planted in accordance with section lD.
c) Vehicular access to the shelter shall not interfere with the parking or
vehicular circulation on the sire for the principle use.
d) The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square
feet, or, ifthere is more than one, 751 total square feet.
SECTION 18.186: RESIDENTIAL DISTRICTS
Wireless telecommunications facilities that include towers are not permitted in residential
districts with the exception of placement on any property with an institutional use (e.g., church,
park, library, municipal/gove=ent, hospital, school, utility). However, antennas attached to
existing buildings or structures are permitted, in applying for a permit in any residential district,
the applicant must present substantial evidence as to why it is not technically feasible to locate in
a more appropriate nonresidential zone. Once those efforts have been exhausted, a wireless
' __ _,
telecommunications facility may be located in a residential district subject to the following
conditions:
A. General:
The wireless telecommunications facility shall be fully automated and unattended on a
daily basis, and shall be visited only for periodic and necessary maintenance. This shall
apply to B, C, D, and E below.
B. Combined with a nonresidential use:
An antenna may be attached to a nonresidential building or a structure that is a permitted
use in the district; including, but not limited to, a church, a municipal or governmental
building or facility, agricultural building, and a building or structure owned by a utility.
The following conditions shall be met:
1)
2)
Maximum height, 20 feet above the existing building or structure
If the applicant proposes to locate the telecommunications equipment m a
separate shelter, the shelter shall comply with the following:
a) The shelter shall comply with the minimum setback requirements for the
subject zoning district.
b) The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square
feet, or if there is more than one, 750 total square feet.
c) A buffer yard shall be planted in accordance with section ID.
d) Vehicular access to the shelter shall not interfere with the parking or
vehicular circulation on the sire for the principal use.
C. Located on a nonresidential-use property:
A tower to support an antenna may be constructed on a property with a nonresidential use
that is a permitted use within the district, including but not limited to a church, hospital,
school, municipal or government building, facility or structure, agricultural use and a
utility use, subject to the following conditions:
1) The tower shall be set back from any property line abutting a single-family or
two-family residential lot by 300 feet.
2) Maximum height -
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna)
Equipment shelter: (maximum building height for the district according to Section
18.43)
3) The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square feet, or,
ifthere is more than one, 7 5 0 total square feet.
4) Vehicular access to the tower and equipment shelter shall, whenever feasible, be
provided along the circulation driveways of the existing use.
5) In order to locate a telecommunications facility on a property that is vacant or
with an agricultural use the tract shall be at least 2.5 acres.
D. Located on a residential building:
An antenna for a wireless teleco=unications facility may be attached to a mid-rise or
high-rise apartment building subject to the following conditions:
1) Maximum height, 20 feet above the existing building.
2) If the applicant proposes to locate the teleco=unications equipment in a
separate shelter (not located in, or attached to, the building), the shelter shall
comply with the following:
a) The shelter shall comply with the maximum setback requirements for the
subject zoning district.
b) The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square
feet, or, if there is more than one, 750 total square feet.
c) A buffer yard shall be planted in accordance with section lD.
d) Vehicular access to the shelter shall, if at all possible, use the existing
circulation system.
E. Located in open space:
A wireless teleco=unications facility is permitted on land that has been established as
permanent open space, or a park subject to the following conditions:
1) The open space shall be owned by the municipality, county or state government, a
homeowners association, charitable organization, or a private, non-profit
conservation organization.
2) Maximum height -
Tower: 200 feet (includes antenna)
Equipment shelter: (maximum building height for the district)
3) The maximum size of the equipment shelter shall not exceed 300 square feet, or,
if there is more than one, 7 50 total square feet.
4) The tower shall be set back from any single-family or two-family property line
300 feet.
SECTION 18.187: CRITERIA FOR A CONDITIONAL USE
A wireless teleco=unications facility which includes a tower may be permitted as a conditional
use in a multi-family residential, institutional or co=ercial district, or located on an
institutionally-used property in any residential district. In order to be considered for review, the
applicant must prove that a newly-constructed tower is necessary in that opportunities for
collocation on an existing tower is not feasible. The following steps must also be taken for the
application to be considered for review in this category:
A The applicant shall present a landscaping plan that indicates how the wireless
teleco=unications facility will be screened from adjoining uses.
·-
B. The applicant shall demonstrate that the telecommunications tower must be located
where it is proposed in order to service the applicant's service area. There shall be an
explanation of why a tower and this proposed site is technically necessary.
C. Where the telecommunications facility is located on a property with another principal
use, the applicant shall present documentation that the owner of the property has granted
an easement or entered into a lease for the proposed facility and that the vehicular access
is provided to the facility.
D. Any applicant requesting permission to install a new tower shall provide evidence of
written contact with all wireless providers who supply service within a quarter mile of the
proposed facility. The applicant shall inquire about potential collocation opportunities at
all technically feasible locations. The contacted providers shall be requested to respond
in writing to the inquiry within 30 days. The applicant's letter(s) as well as response(s)
shall be presented to the Board of Commissioners as a means of demonstrating the need
for a new tower.
E. The applicant shall comply with any other requirement of this article.
R.. EDGAR. CAMPBEL!.
fRANKLIN'T. COLEMAN, ID
FRANKLIN T. COLEMAN,N
J. Ht1Ff CROXTON, JR.
GEORGE P. DONALDSON, Ill
KEITH T. DOROUGH
RICHARD W. FIELDS
MIS1'Y G. HAsK!NS
JAMES E. REYNOLDS, JR.
HAYOENH.HOOI<S
SI'BVENL.PRUl'IT,Il
Lori Moore
Randolph County
P. 0.Box221
Cuthbert, GA 39840
Dear Lori:
PERRY & WALTERS, LLP
ATTORNEYSATL.AW
2I2 NORTH WEsTOVER. BOULEVARD
POSTOPFICE BOX 71209
ALBANY, GEORGIA31708-1209
i:-=il: pe~;:It=J:3@~rc:s.com
din:ct"~~<ilc:i=n@P=yw.ili=eom
wrira'.s- ext. #2.14
January 25, 2018
H. HOLCOMBE. PEltRY. JR. (t~tl.20Q2)
JESSi; W. WALTE!IS (191>-lOll.l)
JKME.SV.DAVIS,OFCOUNSS.
R. ttl.LY RAU1.ERSON,01•Cot.JNSS...
EDGAR .B. W!LKIN. JR,, or-CoUNSa
'TELEPHONE (22.9)439-4000
FACSIM!l.E (2Z9)4J6.ffI7
(229)432-0017
Accompanying this letter please find a proposed ordinance for the regulation of building and
location of cell towers and monopoles on the County right-of-way. Over the past year, many of the
cities that we represent have been approached by communication companies seeking to locate cell
towers on the right-of-way in the County.
As previously sta:ted, the Georgia General Assembly and the United States Congress have
attempted to restrict the regulation of these communication facilities by local governments. While
the ability to regulate these facilities is limited, should you have no ordinance at all, communication
companies would be free to place these facilities where ever they liked. Consequently, the County
should consider this ordinance as soon as practicable.
Thank you for your consideration of this important matter. I look forward to discussion of this
matter with you and members of the Commission in the coming weeks.
TC/In
Enclosure
cc Carlissa Cooper
._ __ -·