CODE OF ORDINANCES CITY OF CARROLLTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 1998 by Order of the Mayor and City Council 
Republished in 2009 
____________ 
Adopted: January 5, 1998 
Effective: January 5, 1998 
____________ 

> 
OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CARROLLTON, GEORGIA 
AT THE TIME OF THE 1998 CODIFICATION 
____________ 
Joe B. McGinnis 
Mayor 
____________ 
J. Carl Williamson 
George Ward 
Anne Sheppard 
Henry R. Dickerson 
City Council 
____________ 
Danny N. Mabry 
City Manager 
____________ 
William J. Wiggins 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jewel Mashburn 
City Clerk 
CURRENT OFFICIALS 
of the 
CITY OF 
CARROLLTON, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Wayne Garner 
Mayor 
____________ 
Gerald D. Byrd 
Mandy M. Maierhofer 
Mike Patterson 
Jim Watters 
City Council 
____________ 
Casey E. Coleman 
City Manager 
____________ 
Charles S. Conerly 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Jim Triplett 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
    This Code constitutes a complete recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
    Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1975 Code, as supplemented through January 2009, and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and city council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
    The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
    The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
    The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER CHT:1 RELATED LAWS RL:1 CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE CHTCT:1 RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE RLCT:1 CODE CD1:1 CODE APPENDIX CDA:1 
CDB:1 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE UDO1:1 CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES CCT:1 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE UDOCCT:1 STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE SLT:1 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE UDOSLT:1 CHARTER AND RELATED LAWS INDEX CHTi:1 CODE INDEX CDi:1 UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE INDEX UDOi:1  
Indexes 
    The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
    A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up-to-date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
    Keeping this publication up-to-date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
    This republication was under the direct supervision of Brenda Blair, Editor of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
    The publisher is most grateful to Ms. Libby R. Duke, Human Resource Director, and the city's department directors for their cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that their efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
    All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Carrollton, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; prechapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
(c) Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 2009. 
ADOPTING ORDINANCE 
An Ordinance Adopting and Enacting a New Code for the City of Carrollton, Georgia; Providing for the Repeal of Certain Ordinances Not Included Therein; Providing a Penalty for the Violation Thereof; Providing for the Manner of Amending Such Code; and Providing When Such Code and This Ordinance Shall Become Effective. 
Be It Ordained by the Mayor and City Council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia: 
    Section 1. The Code entitled "Code of Ordinances, City of Carrollton, Georgia," published by Municipal Code Corporation consisting of chapters 1 through 98, each inclusive, is adopted. 
    Section 2. All ordinances of a general and permanent nature enacted on or before August 4, 1997, and not included in the Code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein, are repealed. 
    Section 3. The repeal provided for in section 2 hereof shall not be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance that is repealed by this ordinance. 
    Section 4. Unless another penalty is expressly provided, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of the Code or any ordinance, rule or regulation adopted or issued in pursuance thereof shall be punished by imprisonment for not more than six months or a fine of not more than $1,000.00 or both. Each act of violation and each day upon which any such violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. The penalty provided by this section, unless another penalty is expressly provided, shall apply to the amendment of any Code section, whether or not such penalty is reenacted in the amendatory ordinance. In addition to the penalty prescribed above, the city may pursue other remedies such as abatement of nuisances, injunctive relief and revocation of licenses or permits. 
    Section 5. Additions or amendments to the Code when passed in the form as to indicate the intention of the city to make the same a part of the Code shall be deemed to be incorporated in the Code, so that reference to the Code includes the additions and amendments. 
    Section 6. Ordinances adopted after August 4, 1997, that amend or refer to ordinances that have been codified in the Code shall be construed as if they amend or refer to like provisions of the Code. 
    Section 7. This ordinance shall become effective January 5, 1998 
    Passed and adopted by the Mayor and Council this 5th day of January 1998. 
/s/   
      Joe B. McGinnis   ATTESTED: 
/s/ Jewell Mashburn 
City Clerk /s/ Henry R. Dickerson 
Councilmember January 5, 1998 
Date /s/ George C. Ward 
Councilmember /s/ Anne G. Sheppard 
Councilmember /s/ J. Carl Williamson 
Councilmember  
Certification of Adoption 
    I hereby certify that the foregoing is a true copy of the ordinance passed at the regular meeting of the mayor and city council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia, held on the 5th day of January, 1998. 
/s/   
      Jewell Mashburn   
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what legislation has been considered for codification in each supplement. Legislation that is of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Includes." Legislation that is not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omits." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Res. No. Date 
Adopted Include/ 
Omit Supp. No. 04-2011  6- 6-11 Include 2 07-2011  8- 1-11 Include 2 08-2011  8- 1-11 Include 2 09-2011  9-12-11 Include 2 12-2011  2- 6-12 Include 2 13-2011 12- 5-11 Include 2 03-2012  1-10-12 Include 2 05-2012  4- 9-12 Include 2 06-2012  6- 4-12 Include 2 07-2012  6- 4-12 Include 2 11-2012 11- 5-12 Include 2 12-2012 11- 5-12 Include 2 01-2013  1- 7-13 Include 2 02-2013  1- 7-13 Include 2 05-2013  9- 9-13 Include 2 08-2013 11- 6-13 Include 2 01-2014  2- 3-14 Include 2 12-2007 11- 5-07 Include 3 03-2014  3-28-14 Include 3 05-2014  5- 5-14 Include 3 06-2014  5- 5-14 Include 3 08-2014  5- 5-14 Include 3 07-2014  7- 7-14 Include 3 10-2014  7- 7-14 Include 3 09-2014  9- 8-14 Include 3 11-2014  9- 8-14 Include 3 13-2014 12- 1-14 Include 3 01-2015  4- 6-15 Include 4 03-2015  5- 4-15 Include 4 04-2015  5- 4-15 Include 4 05-2015  6- 1-15 Omit 4 06-2015  7-17-15 Include 4 07-2015 12-14-15 Include 4 01-2016  1- 4-16 Include 4 02-2016  1- 4-16 Include 4 04-2016  1- 4-16 Include 4 11-2016  2- 1-16 Include 5 12-2016  6- 6-16 Include 5 20-2016  8- 1-16 Include 5 21-2016 11- 7-16 Include 5 22-2016  9-12-16 Include 5 28-2016 12- 5-16 Include 5 01-2017  1- 9-17 Include 5 04-2017  2-17-17 Include 6 05-2017  5- 1-17 Include 6 06-2017  5- 1-17 Include 6 07-2017  6- 5-17 Include 6 13-2017 12- 4-17 Include 6 01-2018  2- 2-18 Include 7 02-2018  2- 2-18 Include 7 03-2018  2- 2-18 Include 7 05-2018  3- 5-18 Include 7 09-2018  6- 4-18 Include 7 12-2018  7-26-18 Include 7 16-2018 11- 5-18 Include 7 17-2018 11- 5-18 Include 7 19-2018 11- 5-18 Include 7 20-2018 11- 5-18 Include 7 01-2019-A  1- 7-19 Include 7 02-2019  1- 7-19 Include 7 03-2019  1- 7-19 Include 7 04-2019  1- 7-19 Include 7 05-2019  1- 7-19 Include 7 06-2019  2- 4-19 Included 7 07-2019  2- 4-19 Included 7 08-2019  2- 4-19 Included 7 09-2019  2- 4-19 Included 8  
PART I - CHARTER AND RELATED LEGISLATION 
Charter, Georgia Laws 1891, Page 474 
Finances. Georgia Laws 1929, Page 907 
Mayor's Court. Georgia Laws 1931, Page 707 
Executions and Fi. Fas. Georgia Laws 1943, Page 1352 
Elections; Payment of Taxes. Georgia Laws 1945, Page 872 
Airport. Georgia Laws 1951, Page 2718 
Corporate Limits. Georgia Laws 1952, Page 2714 
Recorder. Georgia Laws 1953, Page 2323 
Waterworks and Sewerage Administration. Georgia Laws 1953, Page 2951 
City Supervisor. Georgia Laws 1961, Page 2945 
Terms of Officers. Georgia Laws 1974, Page 2794 
Corporate Limits Extended. Georgia Laws 1974, Page 2795 
CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 

GEORGIA LAWS 1891, PAGE 474 

Section I. - Corporate limits. 
Editor's note- The corporate limits were completely redescribed by Ga. Laws 1952, P. 2714 to extend 1% miles in every direction from the center of the public square where the old courthouse stood and also all of the Lake Carroll Development and the property then composing the municipal airport. The corporate limits were further altered by Ga. Laws 1974, p. 2795. These limits have been altered further by subsequent action of the mayor and council. Consequently, the original description is not set out herein. An official city map is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Section II. - Composition of government; general corporate powers. 
    Be it further enacted, That the municipal government of the city of Carrollton shall consist of a mayor and four councilmen, who are hereby constituted a body corporate under the name and style of the mayor and city council of Carrollton, and by that name and style shall have perpetual succession; shall have a common seal and be capable in law and equity to purchase, have, hold, receive, enjoy, possess and retain to them, and their successors, for use of the city of Carrollton, any estate or estates, real or personal, of whatsoever kind or nature, within and without the jurisdictional limits of said city, for corporate purposes; and shall by the said name be capable of suing and being sued in any court of law or equity in this State, and shall succeed to all the rights and liabilities of the corporation of the city of Carrollton. 
Section III. - Qualifications of mayor and councilmen; terms of office. 
(a)  For the purpose of electing councilmen, the City of Carrollton shall be divided into four election wards consisting of the following territory within the City of Carrollton: 
Election Ward 1 
The area between a line which begins at the Northerly intersection of the center line of North Park Street with the City Limits extending Southerly to the intersection of the center line of Maple Street; thence Southwesterly on the center line of Maple Street to the intersection of the center line of South Street; thence Westerly along the center line of South Street to the center line of Matthews Avenue; thence Northerly along the center line of Matthews Avenue to the center line of Foster Street; thence Westerly along the center line of Foster Street to its intersection with the center line of South Street; thence Westerly along the center line of South Street to the center line of Brumbelow Road; thence Northerly along the center line of Brumbelow Road to its intersection with the center line of Lovvorn Road; thence Westerly along the center line of Lovvorn Road to the City Limits. 
Election Ward 2 
The area between the line which begins at the intersection of the center line of North Park Street with the City Limits extending Southerly to the intersection of the center line of Maple Street; thence Northeasterly along the center line of Maple Street to its intersection with the center line of Alabama Street; thence Easterly along the center line of Alabama Street across Adamson Square and continuing Easterly on the center line of Newnan Street to its intersection with the center line of Cedar Street; thence Easterly along the center line of Cedar Street to its intersection with the center line of Burns Road; thence Northerly along the center line of Burns Road to the intersection of the center line of Barnes Road; thence Southeasterly along the center line of Barnes Road to the City Limits. 
Election Ward 3 
The area between a line which begins at the intersection of the center line of Hays Mill Road with the Southerly City Limits of the City of Carrollton and extending Northerly along the center line of Hays Mill Road to the center line of Longview Street; thence Northeasterly along the center line of Longview Street to the center line of Maple Street; thence Northeasterly along the center line of Maple Street to the center line of Alabama Street; thence Easterly along the center line of Alabama Street and continuing across Adamson Square Easterly and along the center line of Newnan Street to the center line of Cedar Street; thence Easterly along the center line of Cedar Street to the center line of Burns Road; thence Northerly to the center line of Barnes Road; thence Southeasterly along the center line of Barnes Road to the City Limits. 
Election Ward 4 
The area between a line formed by the South boundary of Ward 1 and a line beginning at the intersection of the center line of Maple Street and the center line of Longview Street and thence continuing Southwesterly along the center line of Longview Street to the center line of Hays Mill Road; thence Southerly along the center line of Hay Mill Road to its intersection with the City Limits. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  Whenever the description of any election ward refers to a names city, it shall mean the geographical boundaries of that city as shown on the census maps for the United States decennial census of 1980 for the State of Georgia. 
(2)  Any part of the City of Carrollton which is not included in any election ward described in this section or any territory annexed into the City of Carrollton shall be included within that election ward contiguous to such part or territory which contains the least population according to the United States decennial census of 1980 for the State of Georgia. 
(c)  Those councilmen in office on April 1, 1985, shall serve out the remainder of the terms to which they were elected. At the city election in 1985, a councilman shall be elected from Election Ward 1 and a councilman shall be elected from Election Ward 2. At the city election in 1987, a councilman shall be elected from Election Ward 3 and a councilman shall be elected from Election Ward 4. A councilman must reside within the election ward from which he is elected and shall be elected by the electors residing within that election ward. The term of office of councilmen shall be for four years and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(d)  The mayor in office on April 1, 1985, shall serve out the remainder of the term to which he was elected. At the city election in 1987, a mayor shall be elected. The mayor must reside within the city and shall be elected by electors residing within the city. The term of office of the mayor shall be for four years and until his successor is elected and qualified. 
(e)  If any time during his term of office the mayor moves his residence from the City of Carrollton, the office shall be declared vacant. If at any time during his term of office a councilman moves his residence from the election ward from which he was elected, the office shall be declared vacant. 
(f)  This section shall superseded any provision of the charter of the City of Carrollton which is in conflict with this section, and such conflicting provision of the charter is repealed to the extent of such conflict. 
(Ga. Laws 1923, p. 517, § 1; Ga. Laws 1931, p. 705, § 1; Ga. Laws 1937, p. 1036, § 1; Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3542, § 1) 
Editor's note- Election to be at large without regard to ward, Ga. Laws 1945, p. 872, § 1; terms, § 2; new election dates, § VIA; terms of office staggered and in creased to four years, Ga. Laws 1974, p. 2794. 
State Law reference- Terms of office, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-541.1, 21.2-541.2. 
Section IV. - Vacancies in office. 
    In the event a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor or councilman for any cause whatsoever, the clerk of the City of Carrollton shall call a special election as provided by law to fill the balance of the unexpired term; provided, however, if a regular election for the vacant office is to be held within six months after such vacancy occurs, the office shall remain vacant until the person elected at such regular election takes office. 
(Ga. Laws 1985, p. 3542, § 1) 
Section V. - Management of elections. 
    Be it further enacted, That all elections held under the provisions of this charter shall be superintended and managed by a justice of the peace, or some other judicial officer, and two freeholders, or three freeholders, all of whom shall be citizens of said city, and each of said managers, before entering on his duties, shall take an oath before some justice of the peace, or other officer duly qualified to administer an oath, that he will faithfully and impartially conduct said election, and prevent all illegal voting, to the best of his skill and power; and said managers shall cause to be kept two lists of voters and two tally sheets of such election. 
Editor's note- Designation of managers and clerks, Ga. Laws 1923, p. 522, § 7. 
State Law reference- Poll officers, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-90 et seq. 
Section VI. - Time, place for elections. 
    All elections held in and for the City of Carrollton, Georgia shall be held at the city hall, or at such other place or places as the mayor and city council may by ordinance designate. At all such elections the polls shall be opened at seven o'clock a.m. and closed at seven o'clock p.m. 
(Ga. Laws 1923, p. 517, § 3; Ga. Laws 1957, p. 2276, § 1) 
State Law reference- Time for opening and closing times of polls, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-403. 
Section VIA. - When elections to be held; runoff elections. 
    Any other provision of this Act or any law to the contrary notwithstanding, beginning with the regular election for city officials in 1979, the regular elections for officials of the City of Carrollton shall be held on the first Tuesday in September of each odd-numbered year. No candidate shall be elected to any city office in any city election unless such candidate shall have received a majority of the votes cast to fill such office. In the event no candidate for the office receives a majority of the votes cast, a runoff election shall be held as provided for in Code Title 34A, the Georgia Municipal Election Code, as now or hereafter amended, or as otherwise provided by the general laws of the State of Georgia. Any person elected to the office of mayor or councilman shall take office on the first Monday following the first Saturday in October following the date of the city election. 
(Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3839, § 1) 
Editor's note- Ga. Laws 1978, p. 3839, § 1, amended the Charter by adding a new § VIA, which provides for new election dates and runoff elections. Ga. Laws 1974, p. 2794, § 1, had provided for election by plurality, and § III of the Charter had provided for elections to be held on the first Saturday in October. 
Section VII. - Disposition of voter list, tally-sheet, ballots. 
    Be it further enacted, That after the votes at an election shall have been counted by the managers, they shall certify two lists of voters and two tally-sheets and shall place one of said tally-sheets with the ballots in the ballotbox; and shall seal said ballot-box and deposit the same with the city marshal. The other list of voters and tally-sheet shall be filed by the managers with the treasurer, and said city marshal, after the expiration of sixty days, shall destroy the contents of said ballot-box without examining said ballots or allowing name to be done; provided, no notice of contest shall be filed or pending. 
State Law reference- Election returns, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-490. 
Section VIII. - Installation, oath of persons elected. 
    Be it further enacted, That on the succeeding Monday after the election, or as soon thereafter as practicable, the persons elected shall appear at the council chamber and take and subscribe the following oath before any judicial officer of this State, and shall forthwith enter upon the duties of his office, to-wit: "I, A. B., do solemnly swear that I will well and truly perform the duties of mayor, or councilman (as the case may be), of the city of Carrollton, to the best of my skill and ability, without favor or affection, so help me God." 
Section IX. - Qualifications of electors. 
    All persons qualified to vote for members of the Legislature, being registered on the voters' book of the County of Carroll who shall have paid all taxes legally imposed and demanded by authority of the city and have resided six months within the city, next prior to the election at which he or she proposes to vote, shall be entitled to registration, with the rights and privileges and under the restrictions provided by law. Persons not twenty-one years of age, being otherwise qualified, who will reach that age before an election for said city, may register a sufficient time before same to qualify for such election. 
(Ga. Laws 1923, p. 522, § 11) 
Editor's note- Registration of electors, Ga. Laws 1945, p. 872, § 6. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, qualifications of electors, Ga. Const. art. II, § I, ¶ II. 
Section X. - Registration of electors. 
    That immediately upon this Act going into effect; the clerk of the mayor and city council shall open and keep a book for the registration of voters as a permanent record in his office, open at all times when his office is open for the payment of taxes or other business, except as hereinafter provided. He shall keep in said book separate lists of white and colored voters, who are entitled to vote in said city, giving the age, place of residence, occupation and date of registration of each voter. While qualified voters may register at any time, when the clerk is in his office during office hours, yet the registration lists shall be closed as to regular election thirty days prior thereto and as to any primary or special election fifteen days prior to such primary or special election, and no person shall be permitted to vote in any such election unless his or her name appears on the registration record, having been properly registered thereon a sufficient time prior thereto as herein provided. Said registration shall be permanent and all names registered as herein prescribed shall remain upon said lists and such persons shall be qualified to vote in any election of said city so long as said voter shall not become disqualified or his name or her name stricken from the registration list as hereinafter provided. It shall be the duty of the clerk to check the voters' lists from time to time and upon finding the names of any voters who have died or have become disqualified by failure to pay taxes, by removal from the city, by being stricken from the voters' list by the county registrars on account of the failure to comply with the requirements of the State laws or Constitution, or other legal cause, he shall furnish the mayor and city council with a list of such names, and it shall be their duty to revise such registration lists and determine whether the names of such voters should be stricken from the lists, after the clerk has given five days' notice to said voter, if a resident of the city, said notice to be served personally by the marshal or policeman or by the clerk or by mailing the same to the last known address of the voter. At the time fixed by the notice the voter shall have the right to be heard by the mayor and city council before final action, if desired. 
(Ga. Laws 1923, p. 522, § 12) 
Editor's note- Registration of electors, Ga. Laws 1945, p. 872, § 6. 
State Law reference- Registration of voters, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210 et seq. 
Section XI. - Qualifications of mayor and councilmen. 
    Be it further enacted, That no person shall be eligible to the office of mayor of the city of Carrollton unless he be of the age of twenty-five years, a citizen of the United States of America, and shall have resided in the city one year immediately preceding his election, and no person shall be eligible to the office of councilman unless he shall have attained the age of twenty-one years, and shall have resided in the city one year immediately preceding his election, and shall have the other qualifications prescribed in the case of the mayor, and shall have paid all taxes due and demanded by said city. 
Editor's note- Qualifications of mayor and councilmen, Ga. Laws 1945, p. 872, § 4. 
Section XII. - Compensation of mayor, councilmen, clerk, treasurer. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and clerk and treasurer and councilmen shall have an adequate salary, to be fixed by annual ordinance; provided, that the salary of the councilmen shall not exceed six hundred dollars per annum, to be fixed by ordinance. 
(Ga. Laws 1964, p. 2515, § 1) 
State Law reference- Compensation and benefits for employees and members of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4. 
Section XIII. - General powers, duties of mayor. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor shall be the chief executive of the city of Carrollton; he shall see that all laws, ordinances, resolutions and rules of the city are faithfully executed and enforced, and that all officers of the city shall faithfully discharge the duties required of them; he shall have a general jurisdiction of the affairs of the city; he shall preside at all meetings of the mayor and city council of Carrollton; he shall have the right to vote in elections for officers, except as is hereinafter provided, and upon all other questions before said body, except upon questions where he is disqualified by reason of interest, relationship or otherwise. 
Editor's note- Position of city supervisor authorized, Ga. Laws 1961, p. 2945. 
Section XIV. - Mayor's court established. 
    Be it further enacted, That there shall be a mayor's court for the trial of all offenders against the law and ordinances of the city, to be held by the mayor, and in his absence or disqualification, by some councilman. Said court shall have the power to preserve order and compel the attendance of witnesses; to punish for contempt by imprisonment not exceeding two days or a fine not exceeding ten dollars, one or both. 
Editor's note- Recorder authorized in lieu of mayor, Ga. Laws 1953, p. 2323. 
State Law reference- Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq. 
Section XV. - Jurisdiction of court. 
    The mayor, or in his absence or disqualification some councilman, shall, as often as may be necessary, hold a police court, to be known as a mayor's court, for the trial of all offenders against the law and ordinances of the city of Carrollton. Said mayor's court shall have full power and authority, upon conviction, to sentence such offender to labor upon the streets or other public works for a period not to exceed sixty days, or to impose a fine not the exceed five hundred dollars ($500). Either or all of said penalties may be imposed, in the discretion of the court. 
    The mayor and council shall have the right, within their discretion to elect a recorded in the same way they now elect other officers of said city. The recorded when so elected and qualified shall preside over the trial of cases in the police court, under the restrictions, regulations, and power so imposed upon the mayor, or a member of the city council in like capacity. He shall be the presiding officer in said court, except when disqualified or absent, when the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem., or member of the City Council of Carrollton, may preside with full powers as the city recorder. The mayor and city council shall fix the salary of the city recorded, and shall have the power to define his duties under ordinances not in conflict with this Act. Said city recorder when elected and qualified, shall have all the power and authority conferred upon him, as city recorded, as now exercised by the Mayor, or Mayor and Council of Carrollton under and by virtue of the charter of the City of Carrollton and the several amendments thereto. 
(Ga. Laws 1977, p. 3946, § 1) 
Editor's note- Recorder in lieu of mayor, Ga. Laws 1953, p. 2323. 
Section XVI. - Mayor and councilmen to be ex officio justices of the peace. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and each of the councilmen shall be bound to keep the peace, and shall be ex officio justices of the peace, so as to enable them to issue warrants for violations of the criminal law of the State committed within the City of Carrollton, and shall have full power, on examination, to commit the offenders to jail, or to bail them, if the offence be bailable, to appear before the court having jurisdiction. 
Section XVII. - Bond of clerk and treasurer; duties generally. 
    Be it further enacted, That the clerk and treasurer of said city shall discharge all the duties imposed by this charter and the laws and ordinances of the city, and as may be required of them by the mayor and city council of Carrollton; and shall give bond, with good security, in such sum as may be fixed by the said mayor and city council of Carrollton, conditional for the faithful performance of their duties as clerk and treasurer of said city. 
Section XVIII. - Appointive officers. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have full power to appoint or elect such officers as may be deemed necessary or proper, except as hereinafter provided, and shall have power to regulate the time, mode and manner of electing or appointing such officers and agents; to fix their fees and salaries; to take their bonds; to prescribe their duties and oaths, and may, at discretion, suspend, remove or discharge them at any time, with or without cause. 
Editor's note- Supervisor to appoint personnel, Ga. Laws 1971, p. 2945, § 1(b). 
Section XIX. - Ad valorem tax authority. 
    The mayor and city council of the City of Carrollton shall in its discretion proceed to levy and collect such amount as it may deem necessary to school purposes by levy and collection of same as other taxes are collected, and provide that the rate of taxation under this Act shall not exceed two per centum per annum and the mayor and city council of Carrollton, through its collection officer, shall be required to pay the same over to the treasurer of the board of education of said city from time to time as necessary for the operation of said schools which shall then constitute a fund to be expended by said board in payment of all legitimate expenses in running, operation, and maintenance of said schools. 
(Ga. Laws 1895, p. 163, § 1; Ga. Laws 1915, p. 529, § 1; Ga. Laws 1917, p. 554, § 1; Ga. Laws 1950, p. 2889, § 1; Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2417, § 1; Ga. Laws 1967, p. 2738, § 1; Ga. Laws 1981, p. 4172, § 1) 
Editor's note- Additional tax for utility bond retirement, Ga. Laws 1904, p. 400; school tax, Ga. Laws 1929, p. 907; partial payment of tales, Ga. Laws 1945, p. 872, § 5; school tax, Ga. Laws 1945, p. 872, § 7. 
Section XX. - Licensing, regulating businesses. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have the power and authority to license, regulate and control all taverns, hotels, cafes, restaurants, boardinghouses, livery stables, hacks, drays, and other vehicles, auctioneers, vendue-masters, itinerant traders, theatrical performances, shows, circuses and exhibitions of all kinds, itinerant lightning-rod dealers, emigrant agents, clock and stove peddlers, peddlers of all kinds, itinerant dealers in jewelry and all other traveling or itinerant vendors of articles, goods, wares and merchandise of every nature whatsoever; every keeper of a billiard, pool or bagatelle table kept for public use; every keeper of a shooting gallery, ten pin alley; upon the keeper of any other table, stand or place for the performance of any game or play, whether played with sticks, balls, rings, or other contrivance; upon the keeper of flying horses, bicycle, velocipede or skating rinks, insurance agents, life and fire insurance companies, brokers, dealers in futures, loan agents and agents for any other business or calling whatever; keepers of slaughter houses, beef markets, green groceries, dealers in fish, oysters, vegetables, fruits, breads and other articles of food; upon every junk shop, pawnbroker, and upon all other establishments, business callings or avocations not heretofore mentioned, and which, under the laws and Constitution of the State of Georgia, are subject to license. 
State Law reference- Business taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 
Section XXI. - Road work or commutation tax. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and council of said town [city] shall have power to enact all ordinances necessary to compel persons liable to road duty under the laws of this State, and residing in said town, to work an equal number of days upon the streets of said town, as they are now required to work upon the public roads, or in lieu thereof to pay such commutation in money as may be prescribed by said council, and such persons shall not be liable to road duty outside said incorporation. 
Sections XXII-XXV. - Repealed by Ga. Laws 1951, p. 3211. 
Editor's note- The repealed sections dealt with tax assessments and were rendered obsolete by Ga. Laws 1951, p. 3211. Use of county rolls is now authorized by Ord. of June 5, 1972. 
Section XXVI. - Power over streets, sidewalks, squares; condemnation. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have free and complete control of the streets, alleys, sidewalks and squares of said city, and shall have the power and authority to open, lay out, widen, straighten or otherwise change all the streets, sidewalks, alleys and squares in said city of Carrollton. Whenever the said mayor and city council of Carrollton shall exercise the power herein delegated, and shall fail to agree with the owner or owners of the property taken or damaged, as to the amount of damages, the said mayor and city council of Carrollton shall choose one appraiser, and the owner of the land to be taken or damaged shall choose another appraiser, and the two thus chosen, if they fail to agree, shall select a third appraiser, and the three appraisers thus chosen, after being sworn to do justice between the parties, shall fix the damage to the owners of the property, caused by the opening or changing of such street, alley or square, and if the property owner, after five days' notice, shall fail to name an appraiser, the treasurer shall appoint one for him, and in every case where the two appraisers chosen shall, for the space of five days, fail to agree upon the third appraiser, the said treasurer shall appoint such appraiser; provided, the said appraisers, whether chosen by the parties or appointed by the treasurer, shall be citizens of said city. The award of the appraisers shall be in writing, and shall be filed within five days in the clerk's office of the Superior Court of Carroll county, and shall thereupon operate as a judgment, and execution may issue thereon. Either party may, within ten days after the filing of the award, enter an appeal to the Superior Court of Carroll county. All costs, including the fees of the appraisers, shall be paid by the city, and at any stage of the proceedings to condemn before or after the final award, the mayor and city council of Carrollton may, by paying to the property owner all expenses actually incurred by him, withdraw the proceedings and decline to take the property or to make the change in such street, alley, sidewalk or square. 
Editor's note- Public improvements generally, Ga. Laws 1919, p. 880; street improvements, Ga. Laws 1925, p. 950. 
Section XXVI(A). - Telecommunications. 
    The City shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications systems network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services or both with the systems or services of customers and other providers, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information-based organizations in the City of Carrollton, Georgia, to finance from time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any said systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the City. 
(Ord. of 12-4-00, § 1) 
Section XXVII. - Powers relative to grading and drainage; maintenance of sidewalks. 
    The Mayor and City Council of the City of Carrollton shall have full power and authority to establish and fix such a system of grading and drainage of the streets, alleys, lanes and squares of said city as they may deem proper, and shall have full power to compel owners and lessees of property to construct, repair, repave and keep in good condition the sidewalks pertaining to their property, but this provision shall not require property owners and lessees to repave the sidewalks pertaining to their property on account of the desire of the mayor and city council to change the grade while such sidewalks are still in good and serviceable condition. If any owner or lessee shall fail to comply with the requirements of the mayor and city council in this regard, the work shall be done under the direction of the mayor and city council and execution shall be issued for the cost and expense thereof against said property, or the owner or lessee thereof or either or all, and the same shall be collected as other executions issued by the clerk of said city. 
(Ga. Laws 1923, p. 517, § 2) 
Section XXVIII. - Jurisdiction over water and sewers; authority to require sewer connections. 
    The Mayor and City Council of the City of Carrollton shall have full power and authority to establish and maintain a system of water works and sanitary sewerage for said city, and they are hereby empowered with authority and it shall be their duty to designate what closets in said city shall be connected with the sewerage system and to require owners or lessees of property having such closets, open or otherwise, to connect the same with the sewerage system, and in case such owners or lessees of property, having such closets, shall fail to make and maintain such connections when ordered so to do by the mayor and city council, the same shall be done under the direction of the mayor and city council and at the expense of such owner or lessee, and execution shall issue against the property on which such closets are located or against the owner or lessee thereof, or against either or all and the same shall be collected as other executions issued by the clerk of said city. The mayor and city council of said city are hereby empowered to condemn or purchase such property either within or without said city, as may be necessary to carry into effect the provisions of this section and in case it shall become necessary to condemn any property under this section or for other public works, the proceedings shall be as in Section 26 of the within recited Act, and nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing the mayor and city council from condemning closets not connected with the sewerage system, as nuisances and abating them as such. 
(Ga. Laws 1923, p. 517, § 5) 
Editor's note- Waterworks and sewerage administration, Ga. Laws 1953, p. 2951. 
Section XXIX. - Fire protection generally. 
    Be it further enacted, That the said mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have power to fix and establish fire limits, and from time to time to enlarge, restrict or change the same; to provide a fire department and a system of fire alarms, within which fire limits as established it shall not be lawful for any person to build or cause to be built other than fire-proof buildings, except by special permission of said mayor and city council of Carrollton, which must be by majority; and in case of offence against ordinances passed in pursuance of this Act, the said mayor and city council of Carrollton, after five days' notice given, shall cause the said not fire-proof buildings to be removed at the expense of the owners or builders thereof, to be collected by execution as other execution issued by the city. And the said mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have the right to determine what are and what are not fireproof buildings. 
Section XXX. - Removal of fire hazards. 
    Be it further enacted, That the said mayor and city council of Carrollton, shall have power to remove any forge or smith shop when, in its opinion, it shall be necessary to insure safety against fire; they shall have the power to cause any stove or stove pipe, or other thing which shall endanger the city as to fire, to be removed or remedied at the expense of the owner as its prudence shall dictate. 
Section XXXI. - Collection of money due city. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have power and authority to enforce by execution the collection of any amount due or to become due to it for taxes, water rents, license fees, and assessments of every kind; for fines and forfeitures for paving streets and sidewalks, lanes and alleys, for laying sewers and drains, for cleaning and repairing privies, and for any other debt on demand due to the city, such execution to be issued by the clerk against the person, corporation or firm, by whom any such debt may be due or may become due; which execution may be levied by the marshal on the property of the owner against whom such execution shall issue and the same sold as provided by Code of 1882, sections 3656(a), 3656(b), 3656(c) and 3656 (d) for municipal sales for taxes. 
Editor's note- The provisions of the 1882 Code cited in Section XXXI above appear as O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359(a), (c) and (f). For act subsequent to charter in re executions and fi. fas., see Ga. Laws 1948, p. 1352. 
Section XXXII. - Third party claims on property levied upon. 
    Be it further enacted, That when any fi. fa. shall issue as provided in the preceding section, and shall be levied, and the property levied on shall be claimed by a third person, such claimant may interpose his claim thereto, as now provided by law, for claims under tax fi. fa. for State and county tax, such claim to be returned to and heard in Carroll County Superior Court. 
Editor's note- Executions and fi. fas., Ga. Laws 1943, p. 1352. 
Section XXXIII. - Misconduct by mayor or councilman. 
    Be it further enacted, That should the mayor or any councilman while in office be guilty of any wilful neglect, malpractice or abuse of power, he shall be subject to be indicted before the Superior Court of Carroll county, and on conviction shall be fined in a sum not exceeding five hundred dollars, and shall moreover, be removed from office. 
State Law reference- Abuse of governmental office, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-1 et seq. 
Section XXXIV. - Law enforcement duties of marshal. 
    Be it further enacted, That it shall be the duty of the marshal of said city to prosecute all offenders against the law of this State for crimes committed within the limits of the city of Carrollton. It shall, moreover, be his duty to arrest, or cause to be arrested, all disorderly persons, all persons committing or attempting to commit any crime, and to commit them to the guard house or other place of confinement to await trial. It shall further be his duty to execute all processes and orders of the city, and to discharge any other duties imposed on him by the laws, ordinances or rules and regulations of said city. 
Section XXXV. - Levy and sale on execution. 
    Be it further enacted, That it shall be the duty of the marshal to levy all executions in favor of the city, and after advertising for thirty days, he shall sell the property levied on, before the court-house door, in Carrollton, on a regular sheriff's sale day and between the legal hours of sheriff's sales. If the property is divisible, he shall offer it in parcels, and shall sell, at public outcry to the highest bidder, and execute titles to the purchaser, and shall have the same power to place the purchaser in possession as sheriffs of this State have. 
Editor's note- Executions and fi. fas., Ga. Laws 1943, p. 1352. 
State Law reference- Executions generally, O.C.G.A. § 9-13-1 et seq. 
Section XXXVI. - Clerk and treasurer; general duties; misconduct in office; suspension from office. 
    Be it further enacted, That the treasurer shall be the custodian of the funds of the city, and shall be the keeper of the records thereof. It shall be the duty of the clerk to be clerk of the mayor's court; shall issue all processes and shall discharge all duties that shall be required of him by the laws, ordinances, rules, regulations and resolutions of the mayor and city council of Carrollton. For any willful neglect of duty, or any abuse of the powers conferred on him, not amounting to a felony, the clerk or treasurer shall be subjected to be indicted before the Superior Court of Carroll county, and, on conviction, shall be fined in any sum not exceeding five hundred dollars, and may also be removed from office, in the discretion of the court. Pending any criminal charge against him, the clerk or treasurer may, in the discretion of the mayor and city council of Carrollton, be suspended from office, and in case of his suspension, the mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have power to appoint some person to discharge the duties of his office. 
Editor's note- Supervisor to act as clerk, Ga. Laws 1961, p. 2945, § 1(i); authority to replace mayor's court with recorder, Ga. Laws 1953, p. 2323. 
State Law reference- Abuse of governmental office, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-1 et seq. 
Section XXXVII. - Appointment, duties, quorum of board of health; abatement. 
    Be it further enacted, That the said mayor and city council of Carrollton shall, before the month of April in each year, appoint three fit and proper persons, who shall constitute the Board of Health of said city. It shall be the duty of said Board of Health, two of whom shall constitute a quorum, to meet monthly, or as often as may be necessary; to visit every part of the city, and to report to the mayor and city council of Carrollton all nuisances which are likely to endanger the health of the city, and the said mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have power, upon the report of said Board of Health, to cause any such nuisances to be abated and their recommendations carried out in a summary manner at the expense of the party whose act or negligence cause such nuisance, or of the owner of the premises, or both, as the mayor and city council of Carrollton may elect; and for the amount so expended the clerk shall forthwith issue an execution against the owner of the property on which the nuisance is located, or against the party whose act or negligence caused such nuisance, or against both, as said mayor and city council of Carrollton may elect, and such execution may be collected by levy and sale, as other executions issued by the clerk. All vacancies that may occur in said Board of Health may be filled by said mayor and city council of Carrollton, as soon thereafter as practicable. 
Section XXXVIIa. - Consideration of recommendations of board of health, officers of board. 
    It shall be the duty of the Mayor and City Council of the City of Carrollton to take definite action on all recommendations of the board of health at the next regular meeting after the filing of the same, and in case of emergency the mayor and city council shall convene at once and proceed to consider without delay the recommendations of the board of health. It shall further be the duty of the mayor and city council in appointing the board of health to designate one member as chairman and one as secretary of the said board in the order of their appointment. 
(Ga. Laws 1923, p. 517, § 4) 
Section XXXVIII. - Authority to protect against disease. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have power and authority to establish such quarantine regulations against persons who have been exposed to smallpox or yellow fever as it may deem proper, and establish a smallpox hospital or pest house, and, in case of smallpox or yellow fever within said city, to cause to be removed to said hospital or pest house all persons afflicted with such disease, except such persons as shall, at their own expense, provide suitable and sufficient guards to successfully quarantine the premises where said case or cases of smallpox or yellow fever may be located. 
Section XXXIX. - Miscellaneous powers of city. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have power either to lay off; vacate, close, open, alter, curb, pave and keep in good order, and repair roads, streets, alleys, sidewalks, cross-walks, drains and gutters for the use of the public or any of the citizens thereof, and to improve and light the same and have them kept free from obstruction, on or above them; to regulate the width of sidewalks on the streets, and to order the sidewalks, foot-ways, cross-walks, drains and gutters to be curbed and paved and put in good order, free and clean, by the owner and occupants thereof, or of the real property next adjacent thereto; to establish and regulate market; to prescribe the time of holding the same; to prevent injury and annoyance to the public or individuals from anything dangerous, offensive or unwholesome; to prevent hogs, cattle, horses, sheep, dogs and other animals and fowls of all kinds from going at large in said city; to protect places of divine worship in and about the premises where held; to abate, or cause to be abated, anything which, in the opinion of the majority of the whole council of said city, shall be a nuisance; to regulate the keeping of gunpowder and other combustibles; to provide, in or near said city, places for the burial of the dead and to regulate the interment therein; to provide for the drainage of lots by proper drains and ditches; to make regulations for guarding against danger or damage by fire; to protect the property and persons of the citizens of said city, and to preserve peace and good order therein, and for this purpose to appoint, when necessary, a police force to assist the marshal in the discharge of his duties; to prescribe the powers and define the duties of the officers appointed by the mayor and city council of Carrollton; to fix their term of service and compensation; to require and take from them bonds when deemed necessary, payable to the mayor and city council of Carrollton, with such securities and in such penalty as said mayor and city council of Carrollton may see fit, conditioned for the faithful discharge of their duties; to erect or authorize or prohibit the erection of gas works or electric light works in said city; to prevent injury to or pollution of the same, or to the water or healthfulness of said city; to regulate and provide for the weighing of hay and coal and other articles sold or for sale in said city, and to provide a revenue for said city and to appropriate the same to its expenses; to organize a changing or workgang to work upon the streets of said city and for sanitary purposes; shall have power to drain and keep clear of all obstructions Tallapoosa river and its tributaries within the city, and for the distance of one mile from the corporate limits in any direction, and, to this end, may pass necessary rules, regulations and ordinances, and to adopt rules and regulations for the government of its own body. 
Editor's note- Public improvements generally, Ga. Laws, 1919, p. 880; street improvements, Ga. Laws 1925, p. 950. 
Section XL. - Further broad powers. 
    Be it further enacted, That the mayor and city council of Carrollton shall have power and authority to establish police rules and regulations; to pass all laws and ordinances, not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia, which tend to promote the safety, health, good order, morality and general welfare of the inhabitants of said city. 
Section XLI. - Referendum on charter. 
    Be it further enacted, That before this new Act of incorporation shall go into effect it shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the Town of Carrollton, to vote upon, for or against ratification of same, it being the duty of the ordinary of Carroll county, to call election for such purpose, to be held at the courthouse in Carrollton, to be presided over by three freeholders, selected from the citizens of Carrollton, to be appointed and sworn by said ordinary. At this election all voters qualified to vote for members of the General Assembly, resident within said town six months, shall be qualified voters. Such election shall, by the ordinary, be provided to take place not earlier than forty days and not later than one hundred days after the approval of this Act. Notice of said election shall be published in the Carrollton papers twice before said election. In said election those who favor said new Act of incorporation shall have written on ballots "for new charter," and those opposed to said new Act of incorporation shall have written upon their ballots "against new charter." The polls for said election shall be opened from 10 A.M. to 6 P.M. If the majority of lawful votes cast at said election shall be against new charter, then the said new charter shall be of no effect. But if the majority of lawful votes be for new charter, then the ordinary of Carroll county, Georgia, shall make proclamation of the result. Thereupon the said new charter shall go into effect. The managers of said election shall count the ballots cast thereat, and they or a majority of them shall forthwith certify the result to the ordinary, and shall deliver to him the ballots and a list of the voters, and the ballots shall be numbered and a list of the voters and tally sheets shall be kept as in other elections. 
Editor's note- This charter was approved at referendum as required by Section XLI above. 
Section XLII. - Acts repealed. 
    Be it further enacted, That all laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Act are hereby repealed, except an Act approved ________, 189___, relating to an additional 25 percent of ad valorem tax for said Carrollton, Georgia, approved. 
Approved September 9, 1891. 
Editor's note- The blanks appearing in Section XLII above were not filled in the printed Georgia Laws and therefore have been left blank. 
FINANCES. - GEORGIA LAWS 1929, PAGE 907 

Section 1. - Charter declared amended. 
    Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid, that immediately from and after the passage of this Act the charter of the City of Carrollton is hereby amended as follows: 
(1)  The mayor. Be it enacted that the mayor of the City of Carrollton must approve all contracts and purchases to be made for and on behalf of the City of Carrollton, when and after same is authorized by the mayor and city council in a meeting assembled; and the distribution of any and all funds must be by voucher, countersigned by the mayor of the City of Carrollton, or in his absence, or his disqualification for any cause, by the mayor pro tem. 
(2)  There shall be a clerk of the mayor and city council of Carrollton, who must be elected annually by the mayor and city council of Carrollton at the first meeting night after the general election held in October each year. The clerk shall have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years before he shall be qualified to act as clerk, and to take and subscribe to an oath, and shall give a bond in some surety company licensed to do business in the State of Georgia, in the sum of fifteen thousand ($15,000.00) dollars, payable to the mayor and city council, conditioned to faithfully, fairly, and fully discharge all duties as clerk, and to account for all funds coming into his hands as clerk. 
Editor's note- Ga. Laws 1961, p. 2945 provides that the city supervisor will act as city clerk. 
(2a)  The further additional duties of the clerk shall be as follows: To keep a complete, itemized, and accurate statement of all funds received, and disbursed; to keep a complete itemized, daily cash-book, showing the receipts, the source thereof, and daily disbursements, together with each daily balance, and he must deposit all funds belonging to the City of Carrollton daily in such bank, or banks as may be designated by the mayor and city council of Carrollton; and he is hereby authorized to issue executions for the nonpayment of taxes or license that may be due the City of Carrollton. The clerk must keep a permanent record of all taxes, or special license(s) paid into the City of Carrollton, and must collect all taxes and license at the time so fixed by law, or as soon thereafter as possible. He shall keep his office open from eight o'clock a. m. until five o'clock p.m., and any and all records of the City of Carrollton shall be open for inspection to any resident or taxpayer in said City of Carrollton during said hours; and it shall be the duty of the clerk to furnish any information to any taxpayer of the City of Carrollton that he may desire relative to the affairs of said City of Carrollton during office hours. The clerk must make up and submit to the mayor and city council of Carrollton at its first meeting in each month a complete, itemized, detailed statement of the income and disbursements of the City of Carrollton, and when approved must be spread upon the minutes of the City of Carrollton. A summary of the financial condition of the City of Carrollton must be published quarterly, and more often if ordered by the mayor and city council of Carrollton. The clerk must devote his entire time to the affairs of the City of Carrollton, and shall be paid such salary as may be fixed by the Mayor and City Council of Carrollton. 
(Ga. Laws 1953, p. 2945, § 1) 
(3)-(5).  Repealed by Ga. Laws 1931, p. 707, § 1. 
Editor's note- The repealed subsections related to the collector of taxes and the recorder's coup 
Section 2. - School tax. 
    Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by authority of the same, that the last sentence in section two of the Act of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, approved August 7, 1912 (amending the Act of November 26, 1886, establishing a system of public schools for Carrollton, Georgia), which amendatory act is headed "Carrollton, City of, Public School system amended," being No. 398 of the printed acts of 1912, pages 712 and 713, beginning with the word "provided" and ending with the words "legal claims," be and the same is hereby repealed, and that the following words are hereby enacted and inserted in lieu thereof: "Provided that the rate of taxation under this Act shall not exceed sixty-five (65) one hundredths of one percentum per annum; and that when collected the collecting officer of said mayor and city council shall pay same over to the treasurer of the board of education of Carrollton, Georgia, which shall then constitute a fund to be expended by said board in the payment of all legitimate expenses in running said schools and other legal claims." 
Editor's note- Acts relating to the city school system have not been included in this compilation at the direction of the city. For subsequent amendment to the city charter pertaining to the limitation on school taxes, see Ga. Laws 1945, p. 372, § 7. 
MAYOR'S COURT. - GEORGIA LAWS 1931, PAGE 707 
Editor's note- Ga. Laws 1931, p. 707, relating to the mayor's court has been rendered obsolete by the enactment of Ga. Laws 1953, p. 2323, authorizing a recorder's court, and action of the council availing itself of that authority. Note, however, that the 1953 Act provides that the recorder will have the powers and jurisdiction of the mayor. Under Section 3 of the 1931 Act, the mayor has power to punish for violations of the law and ordinances of the city by labor upon the streets or other public works for a period not exceeding sixty days or by fine not to exceed one hundred dollars, either or both. 
EXECUTIONS AND FI. FAS. - GEORGIA LAWS 1943, PAGE 1352 

Section 1. - Authority to issue. 
    Be it enacted by the authority aforesaid that the Mayor and Council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia, shall have and are hereby empowered with full authority and power by and through its Mayor and City Clerk, when so authorized by the said Mayor and Council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia, to issue executions or fi fas for any licenses, fees, fines or forfeitures, paving assessment, taxes, or other indebtedness due said City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
Section 2. - Affidavits of illegality and claims against the property. 
    Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that should any fi fa or execution be issued by the City of Carrollton, Georgia, as herein provided, or as provided by the Charter of the City of Carrollton, for licenses, fees, taxes, fines or forfeitures, paving assessments, or other indebtedness, and/or in order to provide fully an adequate remedy at law for any person, firm or corporation that may desire to contest said execution or fi fa, said person, firm or corporation is hereby empowered to file an affidavit of illegality to said execution so issued by the authority of the City of Carrollton, which may be done under the same rules of law as now prevail in the Superior Courts of this State, and under the same rules that prevail in the State Courts governing the filing of affidavit of illegality. Any property levied upon, claimed by a person not a party to said execution is hereby permitted to interpose a claim to said property under the same rules of law applicable to the filing of claims now in force in this State. The rules, restrictions and regulations governing the filing of affidavit of illegality and claims as now prevail in the Superior Courts of this State shall govern all such cases so filed. Any or all such claims, or affidavit of illegality shall be returnable to the next term of the Superior Court of Carroll County, Georgia, then and there to be heard, tried and determined as the first term thereof. 
Section 3. - Clerk ex officio marshal. 
    Be it further enacted by the authority aforesaid that the City Clerk of Carrollton is hereby made marshal ex-officio of the City of Carrollton for the purpose of levying any fi fa or execution ordered issued by the Mayor and Council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia, on any property of any resident of said City of Carrollton and he is vested for the aforesaid purpose with all the powers of the marshal of the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
ELECTIONS; PAYMENT OF TAXES. - GEORGIA LAWS 1945, PAGE 872 

Section 1. - Charter amended. 
    Be it enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid that, from and after the passage of this Act, the charter granting corporate authority to the City of Carrollton, Georgia heretofore shall be amended, revised and changed as hereinafter provided and set forth. 
Section 2. - Election of mayor and councilmen at large. 
    That the Mayor and four councilmen shall be elected by the duly registered and qualified voters of said City from the qualified residents of said City at large without regard to place of residence, or with reference to any ward in said City. The purpose being that the Mayor and each Councilman shall be bona fide residents of said City and qualified for the office regardless of whatever part of said City each may so reside, and to restore the election of the Mayor and City Councilmen as provided in the Acts of 1891, granting charter to said City. That the candidate receiving the highest number of votes polled in any primary, nomination or election on the date as now prescribed or herein prescribed by law to be held shall be declared the nominee, or elected to the respective offices. 
Section 3. - When elections held; terms. 
    That the next general election shall be held on the first Saturday in October, 1945, and biennially thereafter; the Mayor and each councilman in said next regular primary who are elected shall be elected for a full term of two years. 
Editor's note- Terms of office have been staggered and extended to four years by Ga. Laws 1974, p. 2794. 
State Law reference- Terms of office, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-541.1, 21.2-541.2. 
Section 4. - Qualifications. 
    Be it further enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is-hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid that no person shall be eligible to the office of the Mayor of the City of Carrollton unless he shall have attained the age of thirty (30) years and is a citizen of the United States, a freeholder and shall have resided in said City of Carrollton two (2) years continuously immediately preceding his nomination or election. 
    No person shall be eligible to the office of councilman unless he shall have attained the age of twenty-five (25) years, a freeholder, and a citizen of the United States and shall have resided within said City of Carrollton twelve (12) months continuously immediately preceding his election or nomination. 
    Each of the aforesaid officers shall have paid all of his taxes due and demanded of him by the State and County, and the City of Carrollton, except for the year in which said election shall be held, and who shall have paid all legal assessments, license fees and business taxes required of him or her for either of the aforesaid offices. 
Section 5. - Partial prepayment of taxes; tax delinquencies. 
    Be it further enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid, that from and after the passage of this Act any taxpayer, person, firm or corporation having due, or becoming due, taxes payable to the City of Carrollton in any year may pay said taxes quarterly, or semi-annually, or any part of his annual taxes, using the amount of his taxes as assessed for the prior year as a basis. When any taxpayer so elects to make payment prior to due date of his city taxes due the City of Carrollton the Clerk of the City of Carrollton is hereby authorized to issue a written receipt to said taxpayer, setting forth the amount so paid and credit same on the tax account of said taxpayer for the year in which said payment shall be made; on said due date on which all taxes become annually due said City of Carrollton, the Clerk shall accept said receipt, or receipts, from the taxpayer upon presentation and return of said receipt heretofore issued to said taxpayer and credit said amount on said annual tax receipt, or deliver said annual tax receipt to said taxpayer, marking same paid in the event full payment had been made. The purpose being to enable the City of Carrollton to accept prepayment of taxes due, or to become due in order to permit the City of Carrollton to operate as nearly as possible on cash basis but it is in no wise intended to extend, or change the due date of taxes due said City which are due and payable annually on the 20th day of December of each year. Further, the granting of partial payment on the annual taxes of any such taxpayer is in no wise to restrict the Mayor and City Councilmen as to levy of assessment made for any year, it is only to enable the taxpayer to make prepayment and have an accounting on the payment of the final assessment when the rate has been duly fixed and the tax receipts properly issued, at which time the taxpayer shall have the right to have credited on his annual tax receipt such prepayment if any has been made. Be it further enacted that all taxes shall be declared to be due the said City on the 20th day of December of each year and shall bear interest at the rate of seven per centum (7%) per annum from said date if not paid. It shall be the duty of the Clerk to issue tax fi. fas. on all taxes not paid on said date and on the first day of January of the succeeding year to deliver all said tax fi. fas. which have been issued for taxes so due said City to the Marshal of said City for collection, including the cost of fi. fas. fifty cents (50¢) each. All of said tax fi. fas. so issued and delivered to the Marshal shall be delivered under written receipt from the Marshal, setting forth the name of each taxpayer, and the amount of taxes due thereon, and when said tax fi. fas. are so delivered the receipt for said fi. fas. so delivered shall be signed by the said Marshal and kept on file in the Clerk's office and there remain. When each of said tax fi. fas. are paid and delivered it shall be the duty of the Marshal to make a return to the Clerk's office of the amount so collected, at which time the Clerk should credit, mark, or cancel said name from the list of unpaid tax fi. fas. held in his office. Be if further enacted, that the Marshal, or any other officer to whom said tax fi. fas. have been delivered shall within seventy days thereof make a written report to the Mayor and City Councilmen on each of said fi. fas. in his hands, showing all collections on any and all fi. fas. that shall be turned over to him and he shall make weekly written reports thereafter to the Clerk of the Mayor and City Council of Carrollton which shall be kept on file in the Clerk's office. 
Section 6. - Registration of voters. 
    Be it further enacted by the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, and it is hereby enacted by the authority aforesaid that, from and after the passage of this Act, the Clerk of the Mayor and City Council of Carrollton shall open and keep a book for the registration of voters as a permanent record in his office as now required by law; yet, the registration list shall be closed prior to any general or special election or primary sixty days prior thereto and no person shall be permitted to vote on any such general, special or regular election or primary unless his or her name appears upon said registration record, having been properly registered thereon in sufficient time as herein provided. 
State Law reference- Registration of voters, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-210 et seq. 
Section 7. - School taxes. 
    Be it further enacted, that the Board of Education of the City of Carrollton shall determine as early as practical, after the beginning of each scholastic year, the amount of money that will be necessary to defray the expenses of running said public schools for the ensuing scholastic year, and shall lay the same before the Mayor and City Council of Carrollton. 
    The mayor and city council of the City of Carrollton shall in its discretion proceed to levy and collect such amount as it may deem necessary for school purposes by levy and collection of same as other taxes are collected, and provide(d) that the rate of taxation under this Act shall not exceed one and eighty one-hundredths (1.80) percentum per annum and the mayor and city council of Carrollton, through its collection officer, shall be required to pay the same over to the treasurer of the board of education of said city from time to time as necessary for the operation of said schools which shall then constitute a fund to be expended by said board in payment of all legitimate expenses in running, operation and maintenance of said school. 
(Ga. Laws 1945, p. 972, § 7; Ga. Laws 1951, p. 2618, § 1; Ga. Laws 1963, p. 2925, § 1; Ga. Laws 1967, p. 2736, § 1) 
AIRPORT. - GEORGIA LAWS 1951, PAGE 2718 
Editor's note- Ga. Laws 1968, p. 2769, provides for the West Georgia Airport Authority. Said act has not been set out in this compilation at the direction of the city. 

Section 1. - Powers. 
    The Act, approved September 9, 1891, as amended, (Ga. Laws 1891, pp. 474, 478), entitled "An Act to amend, revise and consolidate the several Acts granting corporate authority to the City of Carrollton; to confer additional power upon the mayor and city council of Carrollton; to extend the corporate limits of said city, and for other purposes", with the Acts amendatory thereof, be and the same is hereby amended by adding thereto the following: 
A.  The mayor and city council of Carrollton, shall after the passage of this Act be authorized to purchase property outside the city limits for the purpose of constructing and maintaining an airport; to accept, receive and disbursed grants of funds or other things of value from the United States, or other persons, firms or corporations, in aid of such project; to operate such airport for the benefit and use of the public and to pass such ordinances necessary to carry out this Act. 
CORPORATE LIMITS. - GEORGIA LAWS 1952, PAGE 2714 
Note- See note following Ga. Laws 1893, p. 474, § 1. 
RECORDER. - GEORGIA LAWS 1953, PAGE 2323 

Section 1. - Authorized. 
    The mayor and council shall have the right, within their discretion to elect a recorder in the same way they now elect other officers of said city. The recorder when so elected and qualified shall preside over the trial of cases in the police court, under the restrictions, regulations, and power so imposed upon the mayor, or a member of the city council in like capacity. He shall be the presiding officer in said court, except when disqualified or absent, when the Mayor, Mayor Pro Tem., or member of the City Council of Carrollton, may preside with full powers as the city recorder. The mayor and city council shall fix the salary of the city recorder, and shall have the power to define his duties under ordinance not in conflict with this Act. Said city recorder when elected and qualified shall have all the power and authority conferred upon him, as city recorder, as now exercised by the Mayor, or Mayor and Council of Carrollton under and by virtue of said charter of the City of Carrollton and the several amendments thereto. 
Editor's note- Judicial powers and authority of mayor, Ga. Laws 1931, p. 707. 
State Law reference- Appointment of municipal judge, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-2. 
WATERWORKS AND SEWERAGE ADMINISTRATION. - GEORGIA LAWS 1953, PAGE 2951 

Section 1. - Water and light commission act repealed. 
    That the Act approved August 9, 1904, creating a Water and Light Commission for the City of Carrollton (Ga. Laws 1904, p. 401), and all amendatory Acts thereto are hereby repealed. 
Editor's note- The act of 1904 repealed above is not set out in this compilation. 
Section 2. - Operation by city. 
    Be it further enacted that from and after the effective date of this Act the Mayor and City Council of Carrollton by and through such engineers, servants and employees as may in their discretion be necessary shall be chargeable with the full duties to operate, maintain, extend, enlarge and repair the water works system and the sewerage system of the City of Carrollton so as to provide the City of Carrollton with a complete and adequate water works system and sewerage system. 
Section 3. - Finances; use of proceeds. 
    Be it further enacted that all funds received from the water and sewerage systems shall be kept separate from the other funds of the City of Carrollton and made available to the Mayor and City Council of the City of Carrollton: First, to maintain, operate and repair the said systems; second, to meet payment of any and all legal revenue anticipation certificates, outstanding as of the effective date of this Act or to be legally incurred in the future, or other valid indebtedness of the said water and sewerage systems; third, to such extensions, improvements, or enlargement of the said systems as may in the discretion of the said mayor and city council be necessary; fourth, any surplus to be turned over to the general fund of the Mayor and City Council of Carrollton, to be used to meet general obligations of the City of Carrollton: Provided that no funds shall be paid into the general fund of the City of Carrollton under this last provision unless the same shall be unanimously approved by the mayor and city council at a regular meeting of the said mayor and city council. 
Section 4. - Effective date. 
    Be it further enacted that this Act shall become effective on October 5, 1953. 
CITY SUPERVISOR. - GEORGIA LAWS 1961, PAGE 2945 

Section 1. - Authorized; powers, duties; removal; compensation. 
    The Act entitled "An Act to amend an Act establishing a new charter for the City of Carrollton, Georgia", approved September 9, 1891, (Ga. L. 1891, pp. 474, 478) is hereby amended by adding thereto the following: 
    Be it enacted that from and after the effective date of this Act, the mayor and city council of Carrollton are authorized to create the office of "City Supervisor" who shall be the administrative head of the municipal government and who shall be responsible for the efficient administration of all departments. He shall be appointed without regard to his residence, political beliefs or affiliations. During the absence or disability of the city supervisor, the mayor and city council may designate some qualified person to execute the functions of the office. The powers and duties of the city supervisor shall be: 
(a)  To see that all laws and ordinances are enforced. 
(b)  To appoint and remove all subordinate officers and employees in all departments, all appointments to be upon merit and fitness alone. 
(c)  To exercise control over all departments and divisions created therein, or which may be hereafter created by the mayor and council. 
(d)  To attend all meetings of the mayor and council, with the right to take part in all discussions, but having no vote. 
(e)  To recommend to the mayor and council for adoption such measures as he may deem necessary and expedient. 
(f)  To prepare and submit to the mayor and council an annual budget and act as treasurer of the city. 
(g)  To keep the mayor and council fully advised as to the financial condition and needs of the city. 
(h)  To supervise the performance of all contracts made by any person, firm or corporation for work done for the city, and to make all purchases of material and supplies for the city, and to see that the same are received as contracted for. 
(i)  To act as and perform the duties of clerk of the City of Carrollton. 
(j)  To perform such other duties as may be prescribed herein, or required of him by ordinances or resolution of the mayor and council. 
    The city supervisor may be removed from his office or employment by a majority vote of the mayor and city council and his compensation shall be fixed by the mayor and city council. 
TERMS OF OFFICERS. - GEORGIA LAWS 1974, PAGE 2794 
Editor's note- Ga. Laws 1974, p. 2794 was subject to and approved at a referendum held June 11, 1974. 

Section 1. - Councilmen to run for posts. 
    The Act entitled "An Act to Amend An Act Establishing A New Charter for the City of Carrollton, Georgia" approved September 9, 1891 (Ga. Laws 1891, pp. 474, 478) is hereby amended as follows: 
    Beginning with the regular election for city officials of the City of Carrollton in 1975, all candidates for the office of Councilmen shall designate in their notice of candidacy whether or not they are offering for either Post 1, Post 2, Post 3 or Post 4 and the candidate for each separate post receiving the highest number of votes in said general election and all subsequent elections shall be elected as a councilman of the City of Carrollton. 
Section 2. - Staggering of terms of officers elected in 1975. 
    The two (2) councilmen receiving the smallest number of votes of the four (4) councilmen thus elected in the 1975 regular city election shall serve for a period of two (2) years or until their successor is elected and qualified. The mayor and two (2) councilmen elected in said 1975 regular election receiving the highest number of votes from those elected shall serve for a period of four (4) years or until such time as their successor is elected and qualified. 
Section 3. - Four year terms declared after 1975. 
    Following the regular city election in 1975, and all subsequent elections for mayor and councilmen of the City of Carrollton, those elected shall serve for a period of four (4) years or until such time as their successor is elected and qualified. 
State Law reference- Terms of office, O.C.G.A. §§ 21-2-541.1, 21.2-541.2. 
CORPORATE LIMITS EXTENDED. - GEORGIA LAWS 1974, PAGE 2795 
Note- See note following Ga. Laws 1893, p. 474, § 1. 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 
Year Page Section Disposition 1891 474 I-XLII I-XLII 1895 163 1 XIX 1904 400 XIX(note) 1915 529 1 XIX 1917 554 1 XIX 1919 880 XXVI(note) XXXIX(note) 1923 517 1 III 2 XXVII 3 VI 4 XXXVIIa 5 XXVIII 11 IX 522 12 X 1925 950 XXVI(note) XXXIX(note) 1929 907 XIX(note) 1931 705 1 III 1937 1036 1 III 1943 1852 XXXI(note) XXXII(note) XXXV(note) 1945 872 4 XI(note) 5 XIX(note) 6 IX(note) X(note) 7 XIX(note) 1950 2889 1 XIX 1951 2417 1 XIX 8211 XXII-XXV 1953 2823 XIV(note) XV(note) XXXVI(note) 1957 2276 1 VI 1961 2945 XIII(note) 1(i) XXXVI(note) 1964 2515 1 XII 1967 2738 1 XIX 1971 2945 1(b) XVIII(note) 1977 3946 1 XV 1978 3839 1 VIA 1981 4172 1 XIX 1985 3542 1 III, IV  
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code 12- 4-00 1       Added XXVI(A)  
PART II - RELATED LAWS 
ARTICLE I. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1977 Ga. Laws, page 1596 which amended Article VII, Section I, Paragraph IV of the state constitution to provide for a homestead exemption for residents of the city for not more than $2,000.00 from city ad valorem taxes. The constitutional amendment was continued in force and effect by 1987 Ga. Laws, page 5154. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and citations to state statutes has been used. Catchlines have been added by the editor. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
In the general election held on November 7, 1978, the subject constitutional amendment was approved by a majority of the registered voters in the city. The following resolution was adopted by the city council on November 27, 1978, for the administration of this exemption: 
"There is hereby granted an exemption from all city ad valorem taxes the sum of $2,000.00 on the residence actually occupied by the owner. The homestead exemption application and determination as fixed by the Tax Assessor's Office of Carroll County shall be determinative of the eligibility of said owner for this exemption." 
Code reference- Taxation, ch. 86. 

Sec. 1. - Authorization. 
    Any other provisions of this Constitution to the contrary notwithstanding, the governing authority of the City of Carrollton is hereby authorized to grant an exemption from all city ad valorem taxes in an amount to be fixed by the governing authority at not more than $2,000.00 on a homestead owned and occupied by a resident of the city as a residence and homestead, and only so long as actually occupied by the owner primarily as such. The value of the residence in excess of the amount so exempted shall remain subject to taxation. Any such resident shall not receive the benefits of such homestead exemption unless he or his agent provides the governing authority of the city, or a person designated by the governing authority, with an affidavit stating that he is a resident and that such property is his homestead and residence and containing such additional information as will enable the governing authority to make a determination as to whether such person is entitled to such exemption. The governing authority shall provide the necessary forms for such purpose. After any such person has filed the proper affidavit and has been allowed the exemption provided herein, it shall not be necessary that he make application and file said affidavit thereafter for any subsequent year, and the said exemption shall continue to be allowed to such person. It shall be the duty of such person to notify the governing authority in the event he becomes ineligible for any reason for the exemption provided in this paragraph. The homestead exemption provided for herein shall not be granted nor the amount fixed within the limits prescribed herein for any year until the governing authority of the city provides by ordinance for the granting of such exemption and the amount thereof. The governing authority of the city may provide by ordinance for the proper administration of this exemption. 
ARTICLE II. - HOMESTEAD EXEMPTION FOR THE AGED[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1992 Ga. Laws, page 5906 which grants an ad valorem tax exemption for residents 65 years of age or older in the amount of $15,000.00 for educational purposes. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and citations to state statutes has been used. Catchlines have been added by the editor. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference- Taxation, ch. 86. 

Sec. 1. - Definitions. 
    For purposes of this Act, the term: 
(1)  "Ad valorem taxes for educational purposes" means all ad valorem taxes for educational purposes levied by, for, or on behalf of the City of Carrollton, including but not limited to taxes to retire school bond indebtedness. 
(2)  "Homestead" means homestead as defined and qualified in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-40. 
(3)  "Income" means net income from all sources but shall not include income received as retirement, survivor, or disability benefits under the federal Social Security Act or under any other public or private retirement, disability, or pension system except such income which is in excess of the maximum amount authorized to be paid to an individual and that person's spouse under the federal Social Security Act. 
Sec. 2. - Authorized, limitation. 
    Each resident of the City of Carrollton who is 65 years of age or older is granted an exemption on that person's homestead from all City of Carrollton ad valorem taxes for educational purposes in the amount of $15,000.00 of the assessed value of that homestead, if that person's income, together with the income of the spouse of such person who resides within such homestead, does not exceed $18,000.00 for the immediately preceding taxable year. 
Sec. 3. - Application forms. 
    The tax commissioner of Carroll County or the designee thereof shall provide application forms for the exemption granted by this Act and shall require such information as may be necessary to determine the eligibility of the owner for the exemption. 
Sec. 4. - Renewal; notification of ineligibility. 
    The exemption shall be claimed and returned as provided in O.C.G.A. § 48-5-50.1. The exemption shall be automatically renewed from year to year as long as the owner occupies the residence as a homestead. It shall be the duty of any person granted the homestead exemption under this Act to notify the tax commissioner of Carroll County or the designee thereof in the event that person for any reason becomes ineligible for that exemption. 
Sec. 5. - State taxes. 
    The exemptions granted by this Act shall not apply to or affect any state taxes. 
Sec. 6. - Other exemptions. 
    The exemptions granted by this Act shall be in lieu of and not in addition to any other homestead exemption from City of Carrollton ad valorem taxes for educational purposes. 
Sec. 7. - Commencement date. 
    The exemptions granted by this Act shall apply to all taxable years beginning after December 31, 1992. 
ARTICLE III. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY VACANCIES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1974 Ga. Laws, page 2318 which provides for the method of filling vacancies in the membership of the Carroll City-County Hospital Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and citations to state statutes has been used. Catchlines have been added by the editor. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference- Hospital authority, § 2-166 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Filling. 
    Vacancies occurring in the membership of the Carroll City-County Hospital Authority for any cause, including the expiration of terms of office, shall be filled by the Board selecting a successor for the position of membership in which the vacancy occurs from a list of three persons which shall be submitted to the Board by the governing authorities of the City of Carrollton and Carroll County. 
ARTICLE IV. - REDEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1981 Ga. Laws, page 4535 which created and established the Carrollton Redevelopment Authority. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and citations to state statutes has been used. Catchlines have been added by the editor. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference- Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-156 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Creation of authority. 
    There is hereby created a public body, corporate and politic, in the County of Carroll to be known as the "Carrollton Redevelopment Authority." Said authority hereinafter shall be referred to as the "authority"; and said authority shall have the powers, rights, duties, and obligations set forth herein and as otherwise provided by law. 
Sec. 2. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings: 
(1)  "Advisory committee" shall mean the committee established in Section 7 of this Act as an advisory committee to the authority in matters relating to the revitalization and redevelopment of the Carrollton downtown area. 
(2)  "Authority" shall mean the Carrollton Redevelopment Authority created by this Act. 
(3)  "City" shall mean the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
(4)  "County" shall mean Carroll County, Georgia. 
(5)  "Member" shall mean a member of the authority established by this Act. 
(6)  "Project" shall mean any undertaking of the authority in connection with the redevelopment or revitalization of urban, central city, or downtown areas within the City of Carrollton. 
(7)  "Project areas" shall mean those urban, central city, or downtown areas within the City of Carrollton selected by the authority for redevelopment, revitalization, or improvement pursuant to the procedures set forth in this Act. 
Sec. 3. - Composition and organization of authority. 
(a)  The authority shall consist of nine members to be appointed by the mayor and city council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia. The members of said authority shall be residents of Carroll County. 
(b)  Vacancies in the membership of the authority shall be filled by the mayor and city council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia; provided, however, that a member of the authority whose term has expired shall continue to serve until his successor has been duly appointed and, in the event of a vacancy for any reason other than the expiration of the term, the remaining members of the authority shall continue to be vested with all of the powers, rights, duties, and obligations set forth herein or otherwise provided by law. 
(c)  After the initial appointments for the initial terms set forth in this Act, the appointment of a member shall be for a three-year term beginning January 1 of the year of his appointment. Initially, three members shall be appointed for a term ending December 31, 1981; three members shall be appointed for a term ending December 31, 1982; and three members shall be appointed for a term ending December 31, 1983. Any appointment to fill a vacancy shall be for the remainder of the term of the member vacating. 
(d)  Each member of the authority shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall have been a resident of the county for at least one year prior to his appointment. Any officer or employee of the county or city shall be eligible for appointment to the authority. If at any time during his term a member shall cease to be a resident of the county, he shall cease to be a member of the authority. No person may serve more than two consecutive full terms as a member of the authority. No action taken by the authority shall be void by reason of the disqualification of a member until the disqualification shall be brought to the attention of the other members of the authority in writing and one month has expired since the receipt of said notice and the action sought to be void was taken after said one-month period. 
(e)  The members of the authority shall not be entitled to compensation, pension, or other retirement benefits on account of service on the authority but shall be entitled to receive traveling expenses and other actual expenses incurred in the performance of their duties of office. 
(f)  The authority shall elect a chairman, a vice chairman, and a secretary-treasurer, each of whom shall serve for one year or until his successor is chosen. The authority shall adopt and promulgate rules governing its procedures and shall hold regular meetings not less than once each quarter. Special meetings may be held upon the call of the chairman or any three members of the authority. A majority of the membership shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of meeting and transacting business. Each member of the authority shall have one vote. 
(g)  Upon the effective date of this Act, the members of the authority shall organize and enter upon the performance of their duties. 
Sec. 4. - Purposes of authority. 
    It is hereby determined, declared, and established that the creation of the authority and the implementation of the corporate purposes set forth in this Act are in all respects for the benefit of the people of this state and that the authority is a public corporation; and it is further declared that the revitalization and redevelopment of the urban, central city, and downtown areas of the City of Carrollton (project areas) are proper public purposes and this law is adopted for the purpose of promoting and expanding for the public good and welfare the public facilities of said areas, including the construction of streets, roadways, parks, malls, transportation systems, vehicular parking facilities, and any and all other necessary and desirable appurtenances to the revitalization and modernization of said project areas; and it is further declared that the expenditure of public funds for such purposes by said authority is and shall be in the public interest. 
    It is further found, determined, and declared that all property of said authority is hereby declared and shall in all respects be considered to be public property; and title to such property shall be held by the authority only for the benefit of the public; and the use of such property pursuant to the terms of this Act shall be and is hereby declared to be for public and governmental purposes, that is, for the promotion of the general public welfare in matters of cultural development, education, pleasure, convenience, and recreation of the public at large, in an effort to better the general condition of society, which promotion is hereby declared to be a public beneficence for the good of humanity and for the general improvement and happiness of society. All the property, income, obligations, and interest on the obligations of the authority and the transfer thereof shall be and hereby are declared to be nontaxable for any and all purposes. 
Sec. 5. - Powers of the authority. 
    The authority shall have all of the powers necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purposes and provisions set forth in this Act, including, but not limited to, the power: 
(a)  To sue and be sued. 
(b)  To adopt and amend a corporate seal. 
(c)  To make and execute contracts and other instruments necessary to exercise the power of the authority. Such contracts may be made with the city, the county, the State of Georgia, or the United States of America, or may be made with one or more municipal corporations, or may be made with the county and a single municipal corporation or multiple municipal corporations. The county and all such municipalities are hereby authorized to enter into contracts with the authority. The authority may also contract with private legal entities or persons. 
(d)  To receive and administer gifts, grants, and devises of any property and to administer trusts. 
(e)  To acquire by purchase, gift, or construction any real or personal property desired to be acquired as a part of any project or for the purpose of improving, extending, adding to, reconstructing, renovating, or remodeling any project or part thereof already acquired, or for the purpose of demolition to make room for such project or any part thereof. 
(f)  To sell, lease, exchange, transfer, assign, pledge, mortgage, or dispose of, or grant options for any such purpose, any real or personal property or interest therein. 
(g)  To mortgage, convey, pledge, or assign any property, revenues, income, tolls, charges, or fees owned or received by the authority. 
(h)  To issue revenue obligations for the purpose of providing funds for carrying out the purpose of the authority. 
(i)  To appoint officers and retain agents, engineers, attorneys, fiscal agents, accountants, architects, and employees and to provide their compensation and duties. 
(j)  To acquire property through the exercise of the right of eminent domain for public purposes and to acquire by purchase, gift, or lease any property owned by the city or county which has been acquired through the exercise of the right of eminent domain by the city or county; provided, however, that said authority shall acquire such properties through the exercise of such power of eminent domain only in a manner prescribed by law for the exercise of such power by counties and municipalities in the state and only upon payment of just and fair compensation as required by the Constitution and laws of this state; provided, further, that the authority shall not acquire property through the exercise of the right of eminent domain unless the authority is granted prior written approval for such actions by the governing authorities of the city for property located in the city, or the county for property located in the county but not in the city, or by the Georgia Public Service Commission for property owned by a public utility. 
(k)  To construct, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, and equip projects located on land owned or leased by the authority, and to pay all or part of the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue bonds of the authority or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations or any other contribution, all of which the authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(l)  To issue revenue bonds for the purpose of paying all or part of the cost of any project, including the cost of extending, adding to, or improving such project, or for the purpose of refunding any such bonds of the authority theretofore issued. Such revenue bonds shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the "Revenue Bond Law," approved March 31, 1937 (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), as heretofore or hereafter amended. Such revenue bonds or obligations shall be authorized by resolution of the authority, which may be adopted at a regular or special meeting by a majority vote of the members of said authority. The authority, in determining the cost of any undertaking for which revenue bonds or obligations are to be issued, may include all costs relative to the issuance thereof and, without intending to limit such costs, may include architectural, engineering, inspection, fiscal agents, and legal expenses estimated to accrue from the date of any such bonds through the period of construction and for six months after such construction; and such bonds shall bear such date or dates, mature at such time or times, not exceeding 30 years from their respective dates, bear interest at such rate or rates and may be in such denominations and may carry such registration privileges and be subject to redemption and may contain such terms, covenants, assignments, and conditions as the resolution authorizing the issuance of such bonds may provide. All bonds and interest thereon so issued by said authority are hereby declared to be tax exempt for any and all purposes. As security for the payment of any revenue bonds so authorized, any property, real or personal, of an authority may be pledged, mortgaged, conveyed, assigned, hypothecated, or otherwise encumbered. Any such authority may execute any trust agreement or indenture containing any provisions not in conflict with law for the security of such bonds, which trust agreement or indenture may provide for foreclosure or forced sale of any property of the authority upon default on such bonds either in payment of principal or interest or upon default in the performance of any term or condition contained in such agreement or indenture. The State of Georgia, in behalf of the state, and each county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, and taxing district therein hereby waives any right it or such county, municipal corporation, political subdivision, or taxing district may have to prevent the forced sale or foreclosure of any property of the authority so mortgaged or encumbered and any such mortgage or encumbrance may be foreclosed in accordance with law and the terms thereof. 
(m)  To make or cause to be made studies and analyses of economic changes taking place in the downtown areas of Carrollton and Carroll County and of the impact of metropolitan growth upon those areas. 
(n)  To prepare a plan or plans for the development and redevelopment of such downtown areas (such plan or plans shall be coordinated with governmental planning boards and agencies but the authority shall have the ultimate responsibility for preparation of such plan or plans). 
(o)  To implement any general plan of development in the urban, central, or downtown areas which have been approved by the county and the municipality in which said development is located by: 
(1)  Coordinating development and redevelopment by public and private enterprise; 
(2)  Encouraging private development and redevelopment in a manner consistent with the plan; 
(3)  From time to time, proposing such revisions in the plan as appear to the authority to be appropriate and in the best interest of the city, consistent with the purposes of this Act; 
(4)  Constructing, acquiring, repairing, and operating any public development or project covered by the plan or coordinating any of the foregoing among other governmental agencies; 
(5)  In coordination with said planning boards or agencies, develop long-range plans designed to halt the deterioration of property values in the urban, central city, and downtown areas and encourage property owners to implement the plans to the fullest extent possible; 
(6)  To acquire in the best interest of the public, for public purposes only, on such terms and conditions and in such manner as it may deem proper, and to own, convey, and otherwise dispose of and to lease as lessor and lessee any land and any other property, real and personal, and any rights and interests therein which it may determine to be reasonably necessary in furtherance of its other powers under this Act, and to grant and acquire licenses, easements, and options with respect thereto; 
(7)  To improve land; to construct, reconstruct, equip, improve, maintain, and repair parking facilities, parks, plazas, malls, walkways, and other public facilities, and any necessary or desirable appurtenances thereto within project areas; 
(8)  To fix, charge, and collect fees, rents, and charges for the use of any project, any part thereof, and any facilities furnished thereby, and of any property under its control, and to pledge such revenue to the payment of revenue bonds issued by it. 
(p)  To have and exercise any and all of the usual powers of private and public corporations except such as are inconsistent with this Act, including the power to adopt and amend bylaws and regulations for the conduct and management of the authority. 
(q)  To accumulate its funds from year to year and to invest accumulated funds in any manner that public funds of the State of Georgia or any of its political subdivisions may be invested. 
(r)  To designate officers to sign and act for the authority generally or in any specific matter. 
(s)  To do any and all acts and things necessary or convenient to accomplish or to complement the purpose and powers of the authority as herein stated. 
Sec. 6. - Powers declared supplemental and additional. 
    The foregoing sections of this Act shall be deemed to be supplemental and in addition to powers conferred by other laws. 
Sec. 7. - Advisory committee. 
    The mayor and city council of Carrollton by resolution may establish an advisory committee to the authority. Said committee shall be composed of from ten to 20 citizens of Carroll County and said committee shall be charged with the responsibility to make recommendations to the authority in connection with the redevelopment of project areas. It shall be the responsibility of the city to advise the authority of the composition of the committee and to notify the authority of changes in membership from time to time. The terms of members of the committee shall be in the discretion of the mayor and city council. 
Sec. 8. - Public funds. 
    The City of Carrollton and the County of Carroll, either and both, are authorized and permitted to provide public funds to the authority for the purposes of the authority set forth in this Act; provided, however, that the debts of the authority shall not constitute debts of the state nor of any city, town, municipality, or county thereof. 
Sec. 9. - Liberal construction of Act. 
    This Act, being for the welfare of the state and its inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
ARTICLE V. - PAYROLL DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Printed herein is 1963 Ga. Laws, page 3242 which established the Carrollton Payroll Development Authority pursuant to an amendment to the state constitution as set forth in 1962 Ga. Laws, page 1135. The constitutional amendment was continued in force and effect pursuant to 1985 Ga. Laws, page 3987. Amendments to the act are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original act. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of headings and citations to state statutes has been used. Catchlines have been added by the editor. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 
Code reference- Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-156 et seq.; finance, § 2-221 et seq. 

Sec. 1. - Short title. 
    This Act may be cited as the Carrollton Payroll Development Authority. 
Sec. 2. - Created, membership, officers, compensation. 
    There is hereby created a body corporate and politic to be known as the Carrollton Payroll Development Authority, which shall be deemed to be an instrumentality of the State of Georgia and a public corporation, and by that name, style, and title said body may contract and be contracted with, sue and be sued, plead and be impleaded, and complain and defend in all courts of law and equity. The Authority shall consist of five (5) members who shall be the Mayor of the City of Carrollton, the President of the Carrollton Chamber of Commerce or its successor, and three (3) other appointed members who shall be residents of Carroll County within or without the corporate limits of the City of Carrollton. In making the nominations of members of the Authority not more than one (1) member shall be nominated from any one family, partnership, or other business organization. The members shall be selected in the following manner: Immediately after the effective date of this Act the Directors of the Carrollton Chamber of Commerce or its successor shall select and nominate persons for appointment and submit at least six (6) names to the City Council. From such list of nominees the Council of the City of Carrollton shall appoint three (3) members of the Authority. Appointments, except in case of vacancy, shall be for terms of three (3) years, except that the terms of the first three (3) members appointed may be staggered. In the event a vacancy occurs, the city shall fill such vacancy by appointment for the unexpired term. In making any appointment for a vacancy or after the expiration of a term, the city shall make appointments from not less than two (2) nominations for each member to be appointed, which nominations are to be made by the Carrollton Chamber of Commerce or its successor. The Authority shall elect a Chairman and a Treasurer. The Executive Director or other similarly designated paid executive officers of the Carrollton Chamber of Commerce shall serve as Secretary of the Authority without compensation. The members of the Authority shall be entitled to no compensation. 
Sec. 3. - Definitions. 
    As used in this Act, the following words and terms shall have the following meanings, unless a different meaning clearly appears from the context: 
(a)  The word "Authority" shall mean the "Carrollton Payroll Development Authority" created by this Act and by and under Article V, Section IX, of the Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
(b)  The word "project" shall be deemed to mean and include the acquisition of lands, properties and improvements for development, expansion and promotion of jobs and payrolls in industry, commerce, agriculture, and natural resources; the construction of buildings and plants or the acquisition of equipment for the purpose of selling, leasing or renting such structures and/or equipment to private persons, firms or corporations. 
(c)  The term "cost of project" shall embrace the cost of construction, the cost of all lands, properties, easements, rights and franchises acquired, the cost of machinery and equipment, financing charges, interest prior to and during construction and for one year after completion of construction, cost of engineering, architectural and legal expenses, and plans and specifications and other expenses necessary or incident to determining the feasibility or practicability of the project, administrative expenses, and other such expenses as may be necessary or incident to the financing herein authorized, the construction of any project and placing the same in operation; provided, however, that in no event shall entertainment or promotional expense be considered a part of the cost of any project. 
Editor's note- The section of the 1945 Constitution cited above was not carried forward into later state constitutions. 
Sec. 4. - Contracts. 
    The County of Carroll and the City of Carrollton are expressly authorized to enter into contracts with the Authority as a public corporation. 
Sec. 5. - Quorum, number of votes required for project approval. 
    Any three (3) members shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of the ordinary business of the Authority; however, any action with respect to any project of the Authority must be approved by not less than three (3) affirmative votes. 
Sec. 6. - Powers, duties. 
    The Authority shall have powers: 
(a)  To have a seal and alter the same at pleasure. 
(b)  To acquire, hold, and dispose of personal property, including the stock of other corporations, for its corporate purposes. 
(c)  To enter into contracts for periods of time, not in excess of fifty (50) years. 
(d)  To acquire in its own name by purchase, on such terms and conditions, and in such manner as it may deem proper, real property or liens or easements therein or franchises necessary or convenient for its corporate purposes, and to use the same, and to lease or make contracts with respect to the use of same or to dispose of same in any manner the Authority deems to its best advantage. If the Authority shall deem it expedient to construct any project or use any project already constructed on lands, the title to which shall then be in the County of Carroll or the City of Carrollton, the governing authorities of Carroll County or the City of Carrollton are authorized in their discretion to convey title to such lands, including any improvements thereon, to the Authority. 
(e)  To appoint and select officers, agents, and employees, including engineers, architects, builders, and attorneys, and to fix their compensation. 
(f)  To make contracts, and to execute all instruments necessary or convenient, including contracts for construction of projects and leases and rental and sales of projects, or contracts with respect to the use of projects, which it erects or acquires. 
(g)  To construct, erect, acquire, own, repair, remodel, maintain, extend, improve, sell, equip, expand, add to, operate and manage projects and pay the cost of any such project from the proceeds of revenue-anticipation certificates or bonds or any other income of the Authority, or from any contribution or loans by persons, firms, or corporations, all of which the Authority is hereby authorized to receive and accept and use. 
(h)  To borrow money for any of its corporate purposes and to execute notes, mortgages, deeds to secure debt, trust deeds and such other instruments as may be necessary or convenient to evidence and secure such borrowing. 
(i)  To exercise any powers granted by the laws of the State of Georgia to public or private corporations, performing similar functions, which is not in conflict with the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia. 
(j)  To do all things necessary or convenient to carry out the powers expressly conferred by this Act. 
(k)  To adopt, alter or repeal its own bylaws, rules and regulations governing the manner in which its business may be transacted and in which the power granted to it may be enjoyed, as the Authority may deem necessary or expedient in facilitating its business. 
(l)  To issue revenue-anticipation certificates for the purpose of paying all or any part of the cost of any project of the Authority. Such revenue-anticipation certificates shall be issued and validated under and in accordance with the applicable provisions of the Act of the General Assembly of 1937, (1937 Ga. Laws, page 761), and as subsequently amended, providing for the issuance of revenue-anticipation certificates. 
Sec. 7. - Acquisition of property. 
    The Authority is hereby specifically authorized to purchase or otherwise acquire land and to improve and develop same so as to make said land more desirable for industrial purposes. Such land acquisition and development may be undertaken by the Authority at any time whether or not there is at such time a prospective industry considering the purchase or lease of an industrial site in Carroll County. Such land and improvements may be held by the Authority for any length of time it seems desirable, but any sale, lease or other disposition of same when made, shall be subject to the provisions of Section 9 hereof. 
Sec. 8. - Use of moneys derived from Authority. 
    No moneys derived from the Authority from any source other than gifts and contributions from private individuals, firms or corporations shall at any time be used for entertainment or other promotional expenses. 
Sec. 9. - Projects to be self-liquidating. 
    All projects of the Authority shall be on a self-liquidating basis, and the Authority shall not make gifts, directly or indirectly to any person, firm, or corporation. 
Sec. 10. - Reversion of property. 
    Should said Authority for any reason be dissolved, title to all property of every kind and nature, real and personal, held by the Authority at the time of such dissolution shall revert to the City of Carrollton subject to any mortgages, liens, leases or other encumbrances outstanding against or in respect to said property at that time. 
Sec. 11. - Exemptions from state and local taxation. 
    All debentures, notes, bonds, and revenue-anticipation certificates issued by the Authority shall be exempt from State and local taxation. All lands and improvements and personal property, the title to which is vested in the Authority, shall be exempted from State and local taxation, except that the Authority shall have the power in its discretion to make an annual assessment against said property in lieu of State, county and city ad valorem taxes, such assessment to be based on the value of said property; provided, however, that such assessment shall in no instance exceed the amount of State, county and city ad valorem taxes, respectively, which would be due were such exemption not in effect. This assessment in lieu of taxes shall be paid to the political entity which would ordinarily receive the ad valorem taxes, were such exemption not in effect. 
Sec. 12. - Debts. 
    The Authority shall not be empowered or authorized in any manner to create a debt as against the State of Georgia, the County of Carroll, or the City of Carrollton. 
Sec. 13. - Annual audit. 
    The books and records of the Authority shall be audited at least annually, at the expense of the Authority, by a competent auditor. The Authority shall furnish copies of said audit to the City of Carrollton, and shall publish same one time in all the newspapers printed in Carroll County. 
Sec. 14. - Intent of Act. 
    This Act being for the purpose of developing and promoting the public good and the welfare of the County of Carroll and the City of Carrollton and their inhabitants, shall be liberally construed to effect the purposes hereof. 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE - GEORGIA LAWS 
This table shows the location of the Georgia Laws cited in the Related Laws. 
Year Page Section this 
Related Laws 1963 3242 Art. V 1974 2318 Art. III 1977 1596 Art. I 1981 4535 Art. IV 1992 5906 Art. II  
PART III - CODE OF ORDINANCES 
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
    The ordinances embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated as the "Code of Ordinances, City of Carrollton, Georgia," and may be so cited. 
(Code 1975, § 1-1) 
State Law reference- Codification requirements, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-19. 
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this Code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the mayor and council. 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" shall mean the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
    Code. The word "Code" means the Code of Ordinances, City of Carrollton, Georgia, as cited in section 1-1. 
    Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" shall mean the County of Carroll, Georgia. 
    Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or other officer of the city to do some act or perform some duty, it shall be construed to authorize such department head or officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to do the required act or perform the required duty unless the terms of the provision designate otherwise. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be implied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Interpretation. In the interpretation and application of any provision of this Code, it shall be held to be the minimum requirement adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, comfort, convenience and general welfare. Where any provision of this Code imposes greater restrictions upon the subject matter than any general provisions imposed by this Code, the provisions imposing the greater restriction or regulation shall be applicable. 
    Joint authority. Whenever a joint authority is given to three or more persons or officers, it shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of them. 
    Mayor and council; council; city council. The words "mayor and council," "council" or "city council" shall mean the Mayor and Council of the City of Carrollton. 
    Month. The word "month" shall mean a calendar month. 
    Number. The singular number shall include the plural and the plural number shall include the singular. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    O.C.G.A. "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
    Officials or officers. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments or other municipal agents by title only, such reference shall be read as though followed by the words "of the City of Carrollton, Georgia." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and" and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Owner. The word "owner" applied to real estate shall include any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, tenant in partnership, joint interest or other fee interest in the whole or a part of such real estate. 
    Person. The word "person" shall include firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, as well as natural persons. 
    Preceding, following. The words "preceding" and "following" shall mean next before and next after, respectively. 
    Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list compiled and published by the city which contains rates for utility and other public enterprises, fees, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the mayor and city council, an official copy of which is maintained in the office of the city clerk, where it is available for reference and review during normal business hours. 
    Signature or subscription. "Signature" or "subscription" shall include a mark when the person cannot write. 
    Shall, may. "Shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
    State. The words "the state" or "this state" shall mean the State of Georgia. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to include streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public ways in the city and shall include all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
    Tense. Words in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
    Week. The word "week" shall mean seven days. 
    Year. The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
(Code 1975, § 1-2) 
State Law reference- Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6. 
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of the several sections of this Code printed in boldface type are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections or to be any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section, and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code, are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1975, § 1-3) 
State Law reference- Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7. 
Sec. 1-4. - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect; provided that upon the repeal or invalidity of any ordinance levying taxes or establishing any fee or charge, the next earlier ordinance levying taxes or establishing the same fee or charge shall continue in effect. 
(b)  The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding for violation of such ordinance pending at the time of the repeal. 
(Code 1975, § 1-4) 
Sec. 1-5. - Provisions considered continuation of existing ordinances. 
    The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
Sec. 1-6. - Certain ordinances not affected by Code. 
    Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds for the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(3)  Any administrative ordinance of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salaries or providing for the retirement of officers or employees of the city. 
(5)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(6)  Any right or franchise granted by the city council to any person; and any regulations relating to franchises. 
(7)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, closing, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(8)  Any ordinance establishing and prescribing the street grades of any street in the city. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements or assessing taxes therefor. 
(10)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any plat or subdivision in the city or providing regulations for the same. 
(11)  Any ordinance annexing property in the city. 
(12)  Any ordinance regulating zoning in the city. 
(13)  Any ordinance regulating the erection, alteration, repair, demolition, moving or removal of buildings or other structures. 
(14)  Any ordinance prescribing traffic regulations for specific locations, prescribing through streets, parking limitations, parking prohibitions, one-way traffic or limitations on loads of vehicles or loading zones, not inconsistent with this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance fixing utility rates and charges. 
(16)  Any ordinance creating and establishing the West Georgia Regional Library. 
(17)  Any ordinance creating and establishing the West Georgia Regional Airport Authority. 
All such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length in this Code. 
Sec. 1-7. - Severability of parts of Code. 
    It is hereby declared to be the intention of the mayor and council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional, invalid or unenforceable by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality, invalidity or unenforceability shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 1-5) 
State Law reference- Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3. 
Sec. 1-8. - Amendments to Code; effect of new ordinances; amendatory language. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code of Ordinances which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code of Ordinances, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or subsection or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said Code by omission from reprinted pages. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed, or omitted in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code of Ordinances and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new code of ordinances by the mayor and council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code in the following language: "That section _____ of the Code of Ordinances, City of Carrollton, Georgia, is hereby amended to read as follows: ___________." The new provisions shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(c)  If a new section not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That the Code of Ordinances, City of Carrollton, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section, to be numbered _____, which said section reads as follows: ___________." The new section shall then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed must be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, with reference to the subject matter, as the case may be. 
(Code 1975, § 1-6) 
Sec. 1-9. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the mayor and city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages that have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier, meaning the person, agency or organization authorized to prepare the supplement, may make formal, nonsubstantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change existing section or other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____," inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code. 
(5)  Make other nonsubstantive changes necessary to preserve the original meaning of ordinance sections inserted into the Code, but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this Code or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Carrollton to be misrepresented thereby. 
(Code 1975, § 1-7) 
State Law reference- Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1. 
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty. 
(a)  In addition to any other penalties allowable under state law, any person violating or failing to comply with any provision of this Code or committing any act or omission to act declared to be an offense or unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, shall be punished by fine not exceeding $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months, or both such fine and imprisonment in the discretion of the court. 
(b)  There shall be imposed for every fine levied by the municipal court, for violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or ordinance of the city, a penalty equal to ten percent of the fine levied including costs. 
(c)  At the time of the posting of any bail or bond in any case involving a violation of a criminal or traffic law of this state or ordinance of the city an additional sum equal to ten percent of the original amount of bail or bond shall be posted and if the bail or bond is forfeited the ten percent shall be paid over as provided in subsection (d) of this section. 
(d)  All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be assessed and collected by the clerk or court officer charged with the duty of collecting monies arising from fines and forfeited bonds and paid over to the mayor and council of this city by the tenth of each month following the month in which the fines are collected. All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be deposited in a special fund designated as the county jail fund. 
(e)  All funds collected pursuant to this section shall be expended as provided in O.C.G.A. § 15-21-95. 
State Law reference- Additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; additional penalty assessments for jail construction and staffing, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-93; imposition of additional penalty for certain drug offenses, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-100; imposition of additional penalty for offense of driving under the influence of alcohol or drugs, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-112; display of drivers license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; payments to peace officers annuity and benefit fund from revenues collected from fines and fees, O.C.G.A. § 47-17-60 et seq. 
Sec. 1-12. - Liability for violations by corporations, other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Administration and enforcement of the soil erosion and sedimentation control regulations, § 50-121 et seq.; administration and enforcement of the zoning ordinance, app. B, art. XIII. 
State Law reference- Provisions applicable to municipal corporations only, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-1 et seq.; incorporation of municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-31-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; The Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties, municipal corporations and other governmental entities, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-2 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, <para>II; supplementary powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. art. IX, § II, ¶III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 2-1-2-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Elections, ch. 42. 

Sec. 2-26. - Time and place for regular meetings. 
(a)  The mayor and city council shall convene for business on the first Monday in each month, with such meetings being conducted at 6:00 p.m. 
(b)  The meetings of the mayor and city council, and all public meetings of boards and agencies of the city shall be at the council chamber at 115 West Center Street, Carrollton, Georgia, or such alternative place within the corporate limits of the city as the mayor and city council may from time to time designate. Provided, however, that if the mayor and city council designate a place other than the council chamber at 115 West Center Street, Carrollton, Georgia for a particular regular meeting, due notice of such alternative place shall be given in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(Code 1975, § 2-38; Res. of 7-15-91; Res. No. 04-10, 4-5-04; Res. No. 13-2014, 12-1-14; Res. No. 03-2015, 5-4-15; Res. No. 01-2016, 1-4-16) 
State Law reference- Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
Sec. 2-27. - Special meetings. 
(a)  Special meetings of the mayor and city council may be called at any time by the mayor or by any two councilmen. Notice of such special meeting shall be given to the city manager, whose duty it shall be to serve or cause to be served on the remaining members of the council notice of such special meeting at least six hours before it is due to convene. 
(b)  Due notice of such special meetings shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
(Code 1975, § 2-39) 
State Law reference- Due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d); excluded proceedings, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-3. 
Sec. 2-28. - Quorum. 
    Any three members of the city council, or any two members and the mayor, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. 
(Code 1975, § 2-40) 
Sec. 2-29. - Vote required. 
    A majority of the votes cast shall be necessary to an action by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-41) 
Sec. 2-30. - Presiding officer designated. 
(a)  The mayor shall be chairman of the city council when present. In the absence of the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall preside, and in the absence of the mayor and the mayor pro tem, any councilman chosen by the council may preside. 
(b)  At the first regularly scheduled meeting in each year, the mayor and city council shall elect by majority vote one councilman to serve as the mayor pro tem for a one-year term. 
(Code 1975, § 2-42; Res. No. 02-2016, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 2-31. - Duties of presiding officer; appeals from chair. 
    The chairman shall preserve order and decorum, appoint all committees of the city council unless otherwise directed by the council, and perform such other duties and exercise such other powers as are usual and customary and authorized or required by parliamentary law. 
(Code 1975, § 2-43) 
Sec. 2-32. - Order of business; agenda. 
    The order of business at all meetings of the mayor and city council shall be in accordance with an agenda to be approved at the beginning of the meeting. In the absence of an emergency or other exigent circumstances, at least five business days prior to any meeting of the mayor and city council, the city manager shall: 
(1)  Make available to the mayor and city council a proposed agenda and any supporting documentation for the meeting; and 
(2)  Cause to be posted at the meeting site the proposed agenda. 
    In addition to any items placed on the agenda by the city manager, the mayor or any two city councilmen may request that an item be placed on the agenda, in which event the city manager shall add the item to the agenda. 
(Code 1975, § 2-44; Res. No. 04-2016, 1-4-16) 
Sec. 2-33. - Rules of order. 
    In the absence of provisions to the contrary, meetings of the mayor and city council shall be generally governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1975, § 2-45) 
Sec. 2-34. - Salary. 
    The mayor and city councilmen shall be paid such salary as the mayor and city council shall fix at the beginning of their terms, to be paid at such times as it may fix, provided that it shall not be diminished or increased during their term of office. 
(Code 1975, § 2-46) 
Sec. 2-35. - Reimbursement of expenses. 
    In addition to their regular salaries, the mayor and city councilmembers shall be reimbursed for their reasonable expenses. 
(Code 1975, § 2-47) 
Sec. 2-36. - Mayor may vote. 
    The mayor shall have the right to vote on any question coming before the city council, whether in case of a tie vote or not, except upon questions where he is disqualified by reason of interest. 
(Code 1975, § 2-48) 
Sec. 2-37. - Minutes required. 
    Minutes of all meetings of the mayor and city council shall be kept accurately reflecting all business transacted. Such minutes show the members present and, on request of any member or the mayor, shall show how each member votes on matters coming before the council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-50) 
Sec. 2-38. - When ordinances to take effect. 
    Unless otherwise provided all ordinances passed by the mayor and city council shall take effect immediately after passage. 
(Code 1975, § 2-51) 
State Law reference- Authority to adopt municipal ordinances, resolutions or regulations, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-3. 
Sec. 2-39. - Members may supervise or investigate city matters. 
    The mayor and city council may name any member of the council to supervise or investigate any city function or matter of city business. 
(Code 1975, § 2-66) 
Secs. 2-40-2-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Regulations pertaining to municipal employees on such subjects as employment policy, employee benefits, retirement, workers' compensation, deferred compensation, holidays and leaves of absence, travel and employee appraisals, as well as the alcohol and controlled substance abuse program, are contained in the city's personnel policies and procedures manual which is compiled and published separately by the city. An official copy of such manual is on file in the office of the city clerk. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 2-61. - Bonds. 
    Some or all of the officers and employees of the city may be required to provide bonds in an amount and based upon such conditions as may be prescribed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-19) 
Secs. 2-62-2-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 

Sec. 2-81. - Office of supervisor created. 
    In accordance with 1961 Ga. Laws, page 2945, there is hereby created the office of supervisor of the City of Carrollton, who shall hold office at such time and at such compensation, and perform such duties as the mayor and city council may direct or prescribe. 
(Code 1975, § 2-63) 
Sec. 2-82. - Supervisor to be called manager. 
    The city supervisor shall have the title and be known as the city manager, and any reference in this Code or any ordinance or resolution of the city to the city manager shall be interpreted to mean the city supervisor authorized by 1961 Ga. Laws, page 2945. 
(Code 1975, § 2-64) 
Sec. 2-83. - Powers, duties. 
(a)  The city manager shall be general supervisor and in control of the affairs of the city, and shall have power to collect taxes, tax returns, licenses, make purchases for and on behalf of the city and for all departments; and all complaints shall be filed with him, and such investigations as necessary made by him, and reports of all his actions and doings shall be made to the mayor and city council; all under the immediate direction, supervision, control and approval of the mayor and city council. 
(b)  The city manager shall perform such other duties as directed by the mayor and city council from time to time. No contracts shall be made by the manager on behalf of the city without the consent and approval in writing of the mayor and city council. All actions of the city manager are to be subject to the approval of the mayor and city council. 
(c)  The city manager shall be ex-officio clerk of the city and shall perform any and all duties of the clerk at any time and all times as may be necessary or expedient. 
(Code 1975, § 2-65) 
Secs. 2-84-2-105. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - CITY CLERK AND TREASURER 

Sec. 2-106. - Offices combined; appointment, functions. 
    The offices of city clerk and treasurer are hereby combined. In view of the fact that the city manager is declared to be ex officio city clerk by 1961 Ga. Laws, page 2945, the council shall appoint a deputy clerk who shall have the title of city clerk and treasurer and whose functions as clerk shall be subject to the control and direction of the manager. 
(Code 1975, § 2-78) 
Sec. 2-107. - Duties of clerk. 
    The city clerk and treasurer shall have the following duties as city clerk to: 
(1)  Seal and attest documents. The clerk shall seal and attest all documents as shall require this formality. 
(2)  Keep minutes, preserve ordinances. The clerk shall keep the minutes of the city council and preserve all ordinances enacted in an ordinance book. 
(3)  Keep records. In addition to the record of ordinances and other records which the clerk is required to keep, he shall keep a register of all licenses and permits issued, and the payments thereon; a record showing all of the officers and regular employees of the city; and such other records as may be required by the city council. 
(4)  Have custody and use of seal. The clerk shall be the custodian of the city seal, and shall fix its impressions on documents whenever this is required. 
(5)  Have custody of documents. The clerk shall be the custodian of all documents belonging to the city which are not assigned to the custody of some other officer. 
(6)  Keep index. The clerk shall keep and maintain a proper index to all documents and records kept by him, so that ready access thereto may be had. 
(7)  Maintain Code. The clerk shall maintain this Code of Ordinances and shall insert or note all amendments hereto. 
(8)  Perform additional duties as required. In addition to the duties herein provided, the clerk shall perform such other duties and functions as may be required by the council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-79) 
Secs. 2-108-2-130. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - CITY ATTORNEY[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Courts, ch. 38. 

Sec. 2-131. - Appointment. 
    The city attorney shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. 
(Code 1975, § 2-92) 
Sec. 2-132. - Powers and duties. 
    The city attorney shall be head of the legal department of the city and supervise such assistants as may be appointed. The city attorney shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  Opinions. The city attorney shall give his legal opinion upon all questions of law arising out of any ordinances, suits, claims, or demands for or against the city, and shall give such opinion in writing unless otherwise so requested, which such opinions shall be filed and preserved among the records of the city clerk. 
(2)  Legal advisor. He shall act as legal advisor to all city officials, boards and commissions as far as their or its official duties are concerned, when requested to do so by such officials, boards and commissions. 
(3)  Ordinances. He shall report to the city council any defects that he may discover in any ordinance, and shall draw such ordinances as he may be requested by the city council. 
(4)  Contracts and litigation. He shall, when directed to do so by any city official, board or commission, draw all contracts between the city and other parties, prosecute and defend all suits or other matters in which the city shall be a party, take appeals in such cases as the interest of the city requires, and prosecute or defend the city's interest in all the courts of the state and of the United States, all subject, however, to the direction of the city council. 
(5)  Sign legal papers. He is authorized to sign the name of the city to bonds and papers of whatever kind necessary in legal proceedings for the prosecution of any suit in court when directed to do so by the city council. 
(6)  Deliver effects of office to successor. He shall transmit to his successor a docket of all cases pending wherein the city is a party, as well as all books, papers and documents in his possession belonging to the city. 
(Code 1975, § 2-93) 
Secs. 2-133-2-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - FINANCE OFFICER 

Sec. 2-151. - Duties of finance officer. 
    The finance officer shall be the custodian of all city funds not assigned to some other officer, and shall be the chief financial officer, subject to the supervision and control of the city manager. 
Secs. 2-152-2-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - AUTHORITIES, BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS[5] 
Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- A memorandum of agreement relating to the establishment and operating arrangements for the Main Street Carrollton Advisory Board is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference- Parks, recreation and cultural arts commission, § 70-26 et seq.; board of development appeals, app. B, art. XIV. 
Related laws references- Redevelopment authority, art. IV; payroll development authority, art. V. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Secs. 2-156-2-165. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - HOSPITAL AUTHORITY[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Related laws reference- Hospital authority vacancies, art. III. 
State Law reference- Creation of hospital authority in each county and municipality, O.C.G.A. § 31-7-72. 

Sec. 2-166. - Authority. 
    There shall be a hospital authority in accordance with joint resolutions heretofore adopted by the mayor and city council and the board of commissioners of Carroll County, Georgia. The title of such authority shall be "The Carroll City-County Hospital Authority." 
Secs. 2-167-2-175. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - STADIUM AUTHORITY[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Cross reference- Parks and recreation, ch. 70. 

Sec. 2-176. - Created. 
    There is hereby created and established an authority to be known as the Carrollton Stadium Authority referred to in this division as the stadium authority. 
(Code 1975, § 17-19) 
Sec. 2-177. - Composition; meetings. 
    The stadium authority shall consist of the board of directors of the Carrollton Booster Club, Inc., and their successors in office with the terms of members of such authority to correspond with the terms of office of the directors of such booster club. Such authority may adopt the bylaws of the booster club as their own and their meetings may be either joint or separate. 
(Code 1975, § 17-20) 
Sec. 2-178. - Officers; bylaws. 
    The stadium authority shall elect its own officers from within its membership and shall adopt bylaws for the conduct of its own affairs. 
(Code 1975, § 17-21) 
Sec. 2-179. - Compensation of members. 
    The service of the members of the stadium authority shall be a public service and the members shall receive no compensation; however, they may be reimbursed for expenses out of funds of the authority. 
(Code 1975, § 17-22) 
Sec. 2-180. - Reports, budgets. 
    The stadium authority shall furnish to the mayor and city council at least annually a statement of its financial condition and submit a budget for the approval of the mayor and city council prior to October 1 of each year. 
(Code 1975, § 17-23) 
Sec. 2-181. - General powers. 
    The powers of the stadium authority shall include, but not be limited to, the scheduling, leasing or contracting for the use of the stadium by the general public and such persons as the authority may deem advisable, including the fixing of rentals, the granting of concessions and the general operation of such stadium. 
(Code 1975, § 17-24) 
Sec. 2-182. - Facilities managed by authority. 
    The stadium authority shall be charged with the management and operation of the stadium to be constructed adjacent to the senior high school of the city and such other facilities as may be transferred to it by the mayor and city council, the school board or the Carrollton Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department. 
(Code 1975, § 17-25) 
Sec. 2-183. - Action by council on authority activities. 
(a)  Minutes of all meetings of the stadium authority shall be forwarded to the city clerk and by him to the mayor and city council, who shall consider the action of all previously unconsidered minutes at its regular council meeting. 
(b)  The mayor and city council may override any action by the stadium authority at the first meeting of the council after the adoption of the action by the authority. The failure to override the action of the authority by the council at the next regular meeting of the council after receipt of the minutes by the clerk shall ratify and affirm the action of the authority. 
(Code 1975, § 17-26) 
Secs. 2-184-2-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - PLANNING COMMISSION[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; historical preservation, ch. 62; subdivisions, app. A; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference- Coordinated and comprehensive planning by counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-70-1 et seq. 

Sec. 2-196. - Commission established. 
    The Carrollton Planning Commission, referred to throughout this division as the planning commission, is hereby created and established to be organized and empowered as provided in this division. 
(Code 1975, § 18-1) 
Sec. 2-197. - Appointment, terms, vacancies, removal, compensation. 
    The planning commission shall consist of nine members. Members shall be appointed by the mayor and city council. The terms of the members shall be for three years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and city council, who shall have the authority to remove any city-appointed member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1975, § 18-2) 
Sec. 2-198. - Commission organization, rules, staff and finances. 
    The planning commission shall elect its chairman from among its members. The term of the chairman shall be one year with eligibility for reelection. The planning commission may appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the municipality. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the planning commission shall be public records. The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within the amounts appropriated for the purpose by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 18-3) 
Secs. 2-199-2-220. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - FINANCE[9] 

Footnotes: 
--- (9) --- 
Related laws reference- Payroll Development Authority, art. V. 
State Law reference- Power of expenditure, Ga. Const. art. IX, § 4, ¶II; discretion of municipal governing body as to management and disposition of property, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-2; acquisition, sale and lease by municipality of real and personal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-1 et seq.; disposition of municipal property, O.C.G.A. § 36-37-6; grants of state funds to municipal corporations for repairs on facilities of historical value, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; multiyear lease, purchase or lease purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; requirement for governing authority to establish a fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3; appointment of budget officer, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-4; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6; accounting for public funds, O.C.G.A. § 45-8-1 et seq.; local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq 

Sec. 2-221. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year of the city shall be from July 1 in each year to June 30 the following year, inclusive. 
(Code 1975, § 2-2) 
State Law reference- Requirement for governing authority to establish a fiscal year, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-3. 
Sec. 2-222. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
    Sections 2-105 through 2-113 of the 1975 Code relating to the city's purchasing policies and procedures are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city council. 
State Law reference- Local political subdivision purchases, O.C.G.A. § 50-5-100 et seq. 
Chapter 6 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; business occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-26 et seq.; nuisances, § 50-26 et seq.; noise, § 50-76 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66; signs, ch. 74; taxation, ch. 86; zoning, app. B. 
State Law reference- Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
Editor's note- Amd. of Dec. 6, 2004 repealed chapter 6, sections 6-1-6-6, 6-26-6-37, 6-56-6-59, 6-81-6-90, 6-111, 6-112, 6-136, 6-156-6-169, 6-191-6-193, 6-216, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 6, sections 6-1-6-6, 6-26-6-38, 6-56-6-59, 6-81-6-91, 6-111, 6-112, 6-136, 6-156-6-169, 6-181, 6-191-6-193, 6-216. Former chapter 6 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. of Dec. 21, 1992, §§ 1(1-1-1-3, 2-1-2-11, 3-1-3-3, 4-1-4-8, 4-10, 4-11, 5-1, 5-2, 5-4-5-6, 6-1, 7-1-7-7, 7-9-7-15, 8-2-8-4, 9-1, 9-2, 10-1-10-3, 11-1, 11-2); Ord. of Oct. 18, 1993; Res. of Sept. 19, 1994; Ord. of Dec. 1, 1997; Ord. of Dec. 15, 1997; Ord. of Aug. 17, 1998; Res. of Feb. 1, 1999; Ord. of Nov. 6, 2000; Amd. of Aug. 6, 2001; Amd. of Aug. 5, 2002; Ord. of Oct. 7, 2002; Ord. of July 7, 2003; Res. 04-11, adopted May 3, 2004. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 6-1. - Findings and public purpose. 
(a)  Based on the experience of other counties and municipalities including, but not limited to, Atlanta and Fulton County, Georgia; which experiences are relevant to the problems faced by the city, and based on the evidence and testimony of the citizens and public safety officials who have appeared before us, we take note of the notorious and self-evident conditions attendant to the commercial exploitation of human sexuality. Moreover, it is the finding of the mayor and city council that public nudity (either partial or total) under certain circumstances, particularly circumstances related to the sale and consumption of alcoholic beverages begets criminal behavior and tends to create behavior identified with nudity, disorderly conduct, prostitution, drug trafficking and drug use. Among the undesirable community conditions identified with nudity and alcohol are depreciation of property values in the surrounding neighborhood, increased expenditure for and allocation of law enforcement personnel to preserve law and order and increased burdens on the judicial system. Therefore, the restriction of adult uses and adult entertainment in restaurants wherein alcohol is authorized to be consumed on the premises is in the public welfare and it is a matter of governmental interest and concern to minimize the occurrence of criminal behavior and undesirable community conditions normally associated with establishments which provide adult entertainment or adult uses. 
(b)  Pursuant to the vote of the citizens of the city authorizing the sale of distilled spirits by the drink for consumption on the premises in bona fide eating establishments and pursuant to the vote of the citizens of the city authorizing the sale of distilled spirits by the package and in accordance with a plan designed for the purposes, among others, of promoting the health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city: 
(1)  To establish reasonable standards for the regulation and control of the licensing and sale of alcoholic beverages; 
(2)  To protect and preserve schools, churches, and similar places of public assembly; and 
(3)  To preserve residential areas regarding, among other things, the character of the areas, their particular suitability for particular uses and the congestion in the surrounding roads and streets, with a general view of promoting desirable living conditions, and sustaining the stability of neighborhood and property values. 
(c)  Consistent with the previous actions of the mayor and city council limiting malt beverage and wine sales by the drink for consumption on the premises ancillary to the primary business of serving food prepared on the premises, it is also the finding, intent and policy of the mayor and city council that the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license for consumption on the premises under this chapter shall be strictly limited to bona fide eating establishments which shall be either restaurants, supper clubs, private clubs, or alcoholic beverage caterers or breweries as defined in this chapter and which meet all applicable requirements of the same. 
(d)  It is also the finding, intent and policy of the mayor and city council that the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall be strictly limited to the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
(e)  It is expressly not the intent of the mayor and city council to permit the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises in nightclubs, bars, pubs, dancehalls, pool halls, gamerooms or any other establishment not qualifying as a bona fide eating establishment either as a restaurant, supper club, private club, or alcoholic beverage caterer or brewery as defined in this chapter. 
(f)  It is further the stated directive of the mayor and city council that the authority to issue, renew and administer licenses for consumption on the premises and for the sale of distilled spirits by the package granted to the city manager shall be discharged in accordance with this finding. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-2. - Purposes. 
(a)  The purposes of this chapter shall include, without necessarily being limited to, the following: 
(1)  Compliance with and effectuation of the general state law; 
(2)  Prevention and control of the sale of alcoholic beverages by unfit persons; 
(3)  Insuring that any licenses issued for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises are issued only to a legitimate restaurant, supper club, private club, alcoholic beverage caterer, or brewery; 
(4)  Insuring that the issuance of any alcoholic beverage license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package is strictly limited to terms and conditions of this chapter; 
(5)  The protection of schools, homes, churches, parks, and other institutions; and 
(6)  Protection of the public health, safety, and welfare. 
(b)  To the maximum extent permissible under state and federal law, the business of selling alcoholic beverages shall under this chapter be considered to be a privilege to be accorded in conformity with the foregoing and other public policies of the city, rather than a right. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-3. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl, or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
    Alcoholic beverage means and includes all alcohol, malt beverages, distilled spirits, wine and fortified wines defined in this section. 
    Applicant means a person applying for any license authorized by this chapter. 
    Application means a form supplied by the city for the purpose of applying for any license authorized by this chapter. 
    Brewpub means a restaurant in which beer or malt beverages are manufactured or brewed, subject to the barrel production limitation prescribed in O.C.G.A. § 3-5-36 for retail consumption on the premises and solely in draft form. Brewpubs shall be licensed as restaurants as set forth in this chapter. 
    Brewery means a manufacturer or producer of malt beverages for wholesale off the premises but does not include a brewpub as that term is defined in this section. 
    Brown bag establishment means any restaurant, supper club or other establishment providing food or entertainment in the normal course of business, and in which the owners or their agents knowingly allow patrons to bring in and consume the patrons' own alcoholic beverages. 
    Chief of police means the chief of police of the city. 
    Church means any permanent place where persons regularly assemble for public religious worship. 
    City means the City of Carrollton, and when used in a geographical sense means the territorial limits of the city. 
    Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
    Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. "Fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to brandy. 
    Interest includes any pecuniary interest and any ownership interest, whether present or future, whole or partial, legal or beneficial, contingent or vested, direct or indirect, and any right, power, or authority of control. 
    Licensed premises includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served but also the entire building in which such room is located, except that when such a room is located in a hotel, motel, or similar facility or in a shopping center only such room and any adjoining storage, office, toilet, and other similar rooms shall constitute the "licensed premises." 
For golf course clubhouse facilities "licensed premises" includes not only the room wherein alcoholic beverages are sold or served, but also the entire building where the room is located and the entire boundary of the golf course except parking lots, alleyways, streets (private and public) and lakes. Golf course clubhouse facilities licensees are authorized to sell and serve malt beverages in the manufacturer's original containerized receptacle outside the room and building on the licensed premise as defined above. Patrons may consume the same on the licensed premises as defined above. 
    Licensee includes an individual licensee and in the case of a partnership or corporation includes both the partnership or corporation and the named licensee. 
    Majority stockholder means the person, if any, who owns more than 50 percent of the voting stock of a corporation; if no person owns more than 50 percent of the voting of a corporation, the majority stockholder is the person owning more of the voting stock than any other person; and if two or more persons each own the same amount of the voting stock of a corporation and each own more of the voting stock than any other person, then any one of such persons may act as the majority stockholder. 
    Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    Minor means any person under the age established as the minimum age for the purchase, possession, or consumption of alcoholic beverages as established by the General Assembly of Georgia from time to time. 
    Mixed drink means any distilled spirits served for consumption on the premises, whether or not diluted by water or any other substance. 
    Named licensee means the person acting as such for a partnership or corporation pursuant to section 6-27. 
    Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel, or other original consumer container. 
    Retail dealer means any person who sells unbroken packages, at retail, only to consumers and not for resale. 
    Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
    Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries, or grapes either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine. 
(b)  Unless a contrary intention is clearly apparent from the context, any term used in this chapter shall have the same meaning as when used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq. 
(c)  Words and terms not explicitly defined in this chapter or used in a comparable provision of the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-1 et seq., shall have the meaning given by common and ordinary use as defined in the latest edition of Webster's New Collegiate Dictionary. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Definitions, O.C.G.A. § 3-1-2. 
Sec. 6-4. - Penalty. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-11. Any such punishment, if imposed, shall be in addition to and not in lieu of any license suspension or revocation under this chapter. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-5. - Confidentiality of information. 
    For the purpose of protecting the individual business interests or the persons making returns as provided for in sections 6-84, 6-161 and 6-193, the city licensing authorities shall treat such returns as being of a strictly confidential nature and will not divulge such information unless called for by a court order and/or for city, county, state or federal tax purposes. Any clerks and/or city personnel found guilty of violating such confidence shall be subject to disciplinary action at the discretion of the city manager. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-6. - Regulation of open consumption in public; possession of open containers. 
(a)  Except as provided below and in section 6-167(e), no person shall consume alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk, or any other public property within the corporate limits of the city. However, a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises shall have the right to serve alcoholic beverages to patrons seated in an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of the premises. The licensee shall not have the right to serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is not seated at a table or in a chair provided by the licensee. In addition, alcoholic beverages shall only be transported into outdoor dining areas and/or opened in outdoor dining areas by a licensee's working employees as part of their work duties. 
(b)  No person shall consume alcoholic beverages in a vehicle on any public or private parking lot within the corporate limits of the city. 
(c)  Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facia evidence of consumption. 
(d)  No person shall possess an open container of any alcoholic beverage while operating a vehicle in this city or while a passenger in a vehicle in this city. 
(e)  For the purposes of this section, an open container shall be considered to be in the possession of the operator of the vehicle, if the container is not located in a locked glove compartment, or locked trunk, or other locked nonpassenger area of the vehicle, or in the possession of a passenger. 
(f)  As used in this section, open container means any container which is immediately capable of being consumed from or the seal of which has been broken. 
(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises may apply for a special event permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages by the drink on any property contiguous to the licensee's premises. Any such licensee shall make written application to the city manager or his designee for a special event permit on forms provided by the city. Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an application for a special event permit shall be cause for denial or revocation thereof. The city manager or his designee, in their discretion, shall have the right to deny or impose conditions on any such special event permit, giving consideration to the size, location, or duration of the event or any such other factors as deemed relevant by the city manager or his designee. All applications for a special event permit must be submitted to the city manager or his designee at least 30 days prior to the date of the event, unless waived by the city manager or his designee. The fee for such special event permit shall be $500.00, and no more than five special event permits shall be issued to any one licensee during any calendar year. 
(h)  Downtown amphitheater. Notwithstanding any other provision in this chapter to the contrary, a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises located within the central business district of the city (i.e., that portion of the city zoned C-1 and generally described as Adamson Square and surrounding areas) may apply for a special event permit to sell and serve alcoholic beverages by the drink for events open to the general public at the city's downtown amphitheater. The sale and service of alcoholic beverages pursuant to any such special event permit shall be strictly limited to those portions of the amphitheater and surrounding properties designated by the city manager or his designee. The sale and service of alcoholic beverages pursuant to any such special event permit shall be from a fixed location and shall be from a bar or countertop of at least the following dimensions: ten feet in length, three and one-half feet in height, and two feet in depth. Any such licensee shall make written application to the city manager or his designee for a special event permit on forms provided by the city. Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an application for a special event permit shall be cause for denial or revocation thereof. The city manager or his designee, in their discretion, shall have the right to deny or impose conditions on any such special event permit. All applications for a special event permit must be submitted to the city manager or his designee at least 30 days prior to the date of the event, unless waived by the city manager or his designee. The fee for such special event permit shall be $150.00. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 05-2010, 9-13-10; Res. No. 06-2012, 6-4-12; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
State Law reference- Consumption of alcoholic beverage or possession of open container of alcoholic beverage in passenger area, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253. 
Secs. 6-7-6-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - LICENSING[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Local alcoholic beverage licenses, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 

Sec. 6-26. - Required, classifications, fee, duration. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverages within the city except under a valid license issued under this chapter and in compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Classification, fee. Classes of licenses issued under this chapter, activities permitted and regulated thereunder, and the annual license fees, shall be as follows: 
(1)  Retail package licenses: 
a.  Package malt beverage license: retail sale of malt beverages in the original package, $500.00. 
b.  Package wine license: retail sale of wine in the original package, $500.00. 
c.  Package distilled spirit license: retail sale of distilled spirits in the original package, $5,000.00. 
(2)  Retail consumption on the premises licenses: 
a.  Pouring license restaurant as defined in section 6-157, retail sale of distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages by the drink, $5,000.00. 
b.  Limited pouring license restaurant as defined in section 6-157, retail sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink, $500.00. 
c.  Pouring license supper club as defined in section 6-158, retail sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages by the drink, $5,000.00. 
d.  Limited pouring license supper club as defined in section 6-158, retail sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink, $500.00. 
e.  Pouring license private club as defined in section 6-159, retail sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages by the drink, $5,000.00. 
f.  Limited pouring license private club as defined in section 6-159, retail sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink, $500.00. 
g.  Pouring license golf course clubhouse facility-Restaurant as defined in section 6-159.5, retail sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages by the drink, $5,000.00. 
h.  Limited pouring license golf course clubhouse facility-Restaurant as defined in section 6-159.5, retail sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink, $500.00. 
i.  Pouring license golf course clubhouse facility-Supper club as defined in section 6-159.6, retail sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages by the drink, $5,000.00. 
j.  Limited pouring license golf course clubhouse facility-Supper club as defined in section 6-159.6, retail sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink, $500.00. 
k.  Pouring license alcoholic beverage caterers as defined in section 6-159.7, retail sale of distilled spirits, wine and malt beverages by the drink, $5,000.00. 
l.  Limited pouring license alcoholic beverage caterers as defined in section 6-159.7, retail sale of wine and malt beverages by the drink, $500.00. 
(3)  Wholesale licenses: Resident wholesale dealer's license, wholesale of distilled spirits, wine, and malt beverages by a wholesale dealer having a place of business in the city, $5,000.00. 
(4)  Brewery license: $1,000.00. 
(c)  Exception for veterans organizations. Whether licensed as a restaurant as defined in section 6-157, a supper club as defined in section 6-158, or a private club as defined in section 6-159 (either general pouring or limited pouring), the annual license fee for any non-profit organization organized and existing principally for the purpose of supporting, serving, and representing veterans of the United States Armed Forces (e.g., the Veterans of Foreign Wars of the United States, the American Veterans, etc.) shall be one dollar. 
(d)  Duration. All licenses issued under this chapter shall be issued on a calendar-year basis; and all licenses shall expire at 12:00 midnight on December 31 of the year for which they are issued. When an application for a license under this chapter is filed during the calendar year, the license fee shall be prorated on a calendar quarter basis, and the applicant shall pay a license fee for the calendar quarter in which the application is filed and for any calendar quarters remaining in the calendar year. 
(e)  Application fees. Each application for a license under this chapter shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable application fee in the following amount: 
(1)  Package malt beverage license, $100.00. 
(2)  Package wine license, $100.00. 
(3)  Package distilled spirits license, $500.00. 
(4)  Pouring license restaurant, $500.00. 
(5)  Limited pouring license restaurant, $500.00. 
(6)  Pouring license private club, $500.00. 
(7)  Limited pouring license private club, $500.00. 
(8)  Pouring license supper club, $500.00. 
(9)  Limited pouring license supper club, $500.00. 
(10)  Pouring license golf course clubhouse facility-Restaurant, $500.00. 
(11)  Limited pouring license golf course clubhouse facility-Restaurant, $500.00. 
(12)  Pouring license golf course clubhouse facility-Supper club, $500.00. 
(13)  Limited pouring license golf course clubhouse facility-Supper club, $500.00. 
(14)  Pouring license alcoholic beverage caterers, $500.00. 
(15)  Limited pouring license alcoholic beverage caterers, $500.00. 
(16)  Resident wholesale dealer's license, $500.00. 
(17)  Brewery, $500.00. 
(f)  Payment of fees. Application fees shall be paid at the time the application is filed and shall not be refunded under any circumstances. An applicant may pay the annual license fee at the time that the application is filed; and in such event the annual license fee shall be refunded if the license applied for is not issued. If the annual license fee is not paid at the time of application, the annual license fee shall be paid prior to the issuance of the license by the city manager and no later than 14 days after notification of approval of the license by the city manager. 
(g)  Issuance restrictions. The following restrictions shall apply to persons seeking a license under this chapter: 
(1)  No person shall hold a license to operate as a retail consumption dealer or retail dealer who also has an interest in a license to operate as a wholesale dealer or as a brewery; and 
(2)  No person shall have an interest in more than one license for the package sale of distilled spirits issued by the city. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2005, 11-7-05; Res. 19-2008, 12-1-2008; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-27. - Procedure for issuance. 
(a)  A license issued to an individual under this article shall be issued in the name of the individual. A license issued to a partnership shall be issued in the name of the partnership and in the name of one of the partners who shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages (wholesaler or brewery) shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the majority stockholder or a principal officer of the corporation; and such majority stockholder or officer shall be the named licensee. A license issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be issued in the name of the corporation and in the name of the officer or employee of the corporation primarily responsible for the operation of the licensed premises; and such officer or employee shall be the named licensee. 
(b)  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall join as an applicant for the license and each partner must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided in section 6-28. 
(c)  In the case of a corporation having as its principal business the sale of alcoholic beverages (wholesaler or brewery), the majority stockholder and each principal officer of the corporation shall join as applicants for the license; and each such person must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided in section 6-28. 
(d)  In the case of a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, the officer or employee who is to be the named licensee shall be the applicant and must meet the qualifications of an individual licensee, as provided in section 6-28; provided, however, that the city manager may require the fingerprinting and investigation of officers and shareholders of the corporation if he deems it necessary in making his investigation. 
(e)  In the case of a partnership, each partner shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. In the case of a corporation, the corporation shall be responsible for the actions of the named licensee and the conduct of the licensed business. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Editor's note- Act No. 949 of the General Assembly of the State of Georgia, passed March 19, 1998, amended O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2, which is the state law from which §§ 6-27 and 6-28 derived. 
State Law reference- Residency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Sec. 6-28. - Qualifications. 
(a)  A licensee must be at least 21 years of age, of good moral character and a citizen of the United States. 
(b)  A licensee shall not have been convicted within the past ten years of any felony, any misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, any other misdemeanor or violation of a city ordinance within the past four years, or at any time of any criminal offense relating to alcoholic beverages, taxes or gambling. This subsection shall apply with respect to the laws of this state, other states, the United States, and other countries. A plea of nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond shall be considered a conviction for purposes of this subsection. The city manager may at his discretion waive the conviction of a misdemeanor for purposes of this subsection if the city manager determines that the misdemeanor does not have a bearing on the applicant's fitness for a license. 
(c)  A licensee shall not have been denied or had revoked, within the five years next preceding his application, any license to sell alcoholic beverages issued by any governmental entity. 
(d)  A licensee shall be the owner of the premises to be licensed or the holder of a lease thereon for substantially the same period to be covered by the license. 
(e)  Any person having two convictions for selling alcohol to a minor within a three-year period shall not be eligible for a license. 
(f)  No license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises shall be issued to any applicant who does not meet the requirements of a private club, restaurant, supper club, alcoholic beverage caterer, or brewery. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
State Law reference- Residency requirements, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2. 
Note- See editor's note, § 6-27. 
Sec. 6-29. - Application. 
(a)  Forms, contents. 
(1)  All applications for licenses shall be made upon application forms provided by the city manager. All applications shall contain a full and complete and sworn and notarized statement by each applicant of all material facts relevant to the requirements of this chapter. Each applicant and any corporate officers or shareholders otherwise required to be fingerprinted shall submit themselves to the police department where a complete set of fingerprints shall be taken. 
(2)  Each application shall include, in addition to all other application fees, a certified check or money order in the amount charged by the state bureau of investigation made payable to the state bureau of investigation to cover the cost of fingerprinting analysis and investigation. 
(b)  Each applicant authorizes the city and its agents to secure from any court, law enforcement agency, or other public agency his criminal and civil history and to use such information in determining whether the license applied for shall be issued. Each applicant further authorizes the city and its agents to use such information in any public hearing with respect to the license applied for, either before or after the issuance of the license. Each applicant waives any right which he would otherwise have to preclude the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information; and each applicant further waives any liability of the city or its agents from obtaining and using such information. 
(c)  Each application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A copy of the deed to the premises, if owned by the licensee; 
(2)  A copy of the lease agreement covering the premises to be licensed, if leased by the licensee; 
(3)  In the case of a partnership, a copy of the partnership agreement; 
(4)  In the case of a corporation, a copy of the articles of incorporation; and 
(5)  A current stamped certificate from a registered surveyor which shows a scale drawing of the premises and the location at which the applicant desires to operate an alcoholic beverage outlet and which shows, with linear foot measurements where appropriate, such location's compliance or noncompliance with the provisions of sections 6-38 and 6-57. 
(d)  When a license application is for premises not yet constructed or not yet completed, a license may be issued if the application includes the plans for the premises and a surveyor's stamped certificate clearly showing that the premises will, when completed, meet all applicable requirements of sections 6-38 and 6-57. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-30. - Investigation; hearing. 
(a)  A copy of each application for a license under this article shall be referred within two business days after filing to the police department. The police department shall make a thorough investigation concerning any applicants hereunder if individuals, and the officers and the designated agent or manager, if the applicant is a corporation, and shall submit the results of the investigation promptly to the city manager. 
(b)  No application for an original license shall be considered by the city manager until after a public hearing has been held thereon by the city manager, after notice as provided in subsections (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  The applicant for an original license shall at his own expense post on the premises to be licensed a notice. The notice shall be posted for at least 15 days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall be on a board or metal sign having a surface of not less than 12 square feet. The sign shall include the following: 
(1)  That an application for a license to sell alcoholic beverages on the premises has been filed with the city; 
(2)  The type of license applied for; 
(3)  The time and place of the public hearing to be held on such license application; 
(4)  The name of the proposed licensee; and 
(5)  The name and telephone number of the city staff member where additional information may be obtained. 
Such sign shall be placed at least three feet above the ground and facing the most traveled street. 
(d)  The applicant for an original license shall at his own expense publish in the official legal organ of the county at least 15 days prior to the hearing, a notice containing the same information as required in the posted notice under subsection (c) of this section. This notice shall be printed in letters no smaller than ten-point capital and lower case with at least a one-inch, two-column arrangement. 
(e)  Prior to the date of the hearing, the applicant shall furnish to the city manager a copy of the advertisement required by subsection (d) of this section and a sworn statement of the size of, location of, and information on the sign required by subsection (c) of this section. 
(f)  The city manager may require additional investigations, reports and information from city departments and other public agencies as may be deemed necessary to evaluate compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(g)  After a complete license application has been received; the police department and any other investigative reports submitted; public notification completed as required in subsections (c) and (d) of this section; the public hearing held as required in subsection (b) of this section; and the city manager has determined based on all the information received that the applicant meets all requirements and qualifications for the holding of the license, then the city manager may issue such license. 
(h)  Any applicant submitting a complete license application and completing all public notification and public hearing requirements of subsections (c), (d) and (e) of this section whose application is denied may appeal such decision to the mayor and city council. Such appeal must be in writing and made within 30 days of the date of denial. 
(i)  Any person making a false statement in any application for a license, or statement in connection with renewal thereof, shall be guilty of an offense and punished as provided by state law relating to false swearing; and, further, a license if previously granted or renewed, may be revoked for the violation. It shall be an offense for any person to give other than the true and correct legal name of the intended licensee; and a conviction for a violation thereof shall be punished as provided for in this chapter. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-31. - Renewals. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter applications for renewal of licenses shall be made and considered in the same manner as applications for original licenses. 
(b)  No fingerprints shall be required in the case of an application for renewals. 
(c)  No posting of premises and publication of notice by the applicant shall be required in the case of an application for renewal. 
(d)  An application for renewal may, if such is the case, be in the form of a sworn and notarized statement by the named licensee, on a form provided by the city manager, stating that there have been no changes in any of the information contained in the original application. If there have been any such changes, the application for renewal shall be in the same form as an original application. 
(e)  An application for renewal shall be filed during the month of October. If an existing licensee fails to file for renewal during the month of October then the licensee shall be required to make application as for an original license. Existing licensees whose renewal application is filed in October as required in subsection (e) of this section and approved by the city manager shall pay the appropriate licensing fee required by this chapter on or before December 31 of the year for which the existing license will expire. However, provided that the existing licensee notifies the city manager in writing of its intent to do so by December 31 of the year for which the existing license will expire, existing licensees whose licensing fee is $5,000.00 may elect to pay the licensing fee in four equal installments of $1,250.00 on or before March 31, June 30, September 30, and December 31 of the year for which the renewal license has been approved. If the existing licensee fails to pay any of the four installment payments within ten days after they become due, a penalty of five percent will be added. Moreover, if the existing licensee fails to pay any of the four installment payments within 45 days after they become due, the license shall be automatically revoked by operation of law as provided in Section 6-36(7) of this article. 
(f)  In making a determination regarding the renewal of a license, the city manager shall assess the extent to which the granting of the license or the continued holding of the license would contribute to the following problems: 
(1)  Littering in the area of the establishment; 
(2)  Loitering in the area of the establishment; 
(3)  The public consumption of alcoholic beverages in the area of the establishment; and 
(4)  The exposure of minors to the sale of alcoholic beverages because of the number of minors who frequent the establishment. 
(g)  At the discretion of the city manager a public hearing may be required for the renewal of a license if written objections are filed thereto with the city manager at least 15 days before the end of the renewal period. If any such objection is filed, a public hearing shall be held. Prior to such hearing, the city shall publish at public expense a notice in substantially the same form and manner required under subsection (d) of section 6-30. The applicant shall be given written notice of any objection which is filed and such notice shall be served within 48 hours of the filing of the objection by personal service by a city police officer or by registered or certified mail to the named licensee at the licensed premises. In the circumstances referred to in this subsection, the license under which renewal was applied for shall continue to be valid until the city manager acts on the application for renewal if the applicant deposits the amount of the annual license fee for the renewal with the city manager not later than five days after being notified of the filing of the objection. 
(h)  An applicant for renewal whose application is denied may appeal such decision to the mayor and city council. Such appeal must be in writing and made within 30 days of the date of denial. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 01-2008, 1-7-08) 
Sec. 6-32. - Transfer. 
(a)  Except as provided in this section, no license issued under this article shall be transferable to any other person or location. 
(b)  If a licensee seeks to move his place of business from the licensee's premises to another place within the city, application shall be made as for an original license. 
(c)  In the case of death of an owner of a license or financial interest therein, such license or interest therein may be transferred to the administrator, executor, or adult heir of the deceased unless the city manager determines that it would otherwise violate this chapter. If the transferee cannot meet all the requirements of this chapter, when the time comes to renew the license it shall not be renewed. 
(d)  Nothing in this section shall prohibit one or more partners in a partnership from retiring therefrom in favor of one or more of the other partners; provided such withdrawal shall not without application for an issuance of a new license introduce any new partner or result in any new person acquiring an interest in the licensed business. 
(e)  Where a license is issued to a corporation having as its principal business an activity other than the sale of alcoholic beverages, a change in the named licensee may be permitted by the city manager if the new named licensee meets the requirements of new license applicants. 
(f)  In the circumstances described in subsections (c), (d), and (e) of this section, the license may be revoked if the city manager determines that the change results in a failure to meet the requirements of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-33. - Change in business ownership. 
(a)  If any licensee withdraws from, sells, or otherwise transfers the licensee's interest in the licensed business, the licensee shall immediately notify the city manager and surrender the license. 
(b)  In the case of such a withdrawal, transfer, or sale, a new application shall be made as for an original license. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-34. - Temporary licenses. 
(a)  A temporary license may be issued by the city manager if in his judgment, the denial of a temporary license would create an undue hardship such as the closing of an existing business or a delay in the opening of a new business. 
(b)  A temporary license may be revoked, with or without cause, by the city manager at any time, and the grant or denial of a temporary license shall not affect or have any bearing upon the grant or denial of a permanent license. 
(c)  The city manager is authorized to issue a "temporary license" to a golf course clubhouse facilities otherwise meeting all applicable provisions of this article as defined herein for a period not to exceed 15 months subject to the following conditions: 
(1)  A permanent golf course clubhouse facility plan is approved by the city engineer, city planning administrator, and building official within 12 months of the issuance of a "temporary license" as provided for herein; 
(2)  The temporary golf course clubhouse facility is providing auxiliary support services as defined in section 6-159.5(1) and 6-159.6(1) to an 18-hole regulation golf course open for play at least 300 days per year, except as may be reduced by inclement weather and required repairs/maintenance; 
(3)  The building official has issued a building permit within six months of the plan approval referenced in subsection (1) above. Failure to obtain the building permit within the period prescribed above shall render the "temporary license" void; 
(4)  If at the end of the 15-month period provided for in section 6-34(c), the permanent golf course clubhouse facility is not complete, with complete being defined as the facility having been issued a certificate of occupancy by the city building official, the said "temporary license" may be extended by the city manager for an additional 15-month period if in the opinion of the city manager satisfactorily progress is being made toward completion of a permanent golf course clubhouse facility. At the conclusion of any such extension so granted the "temporary license" shall expire and be void. 
(5)  During any period wherein a "temporary license" has been issued to a golf course clubhouse facility and same has not been otherwise revoked or rendered void, the license shall be exempt from subsections (2), (3), (4), (6) and (7) of section 6-159.5 or subsections (2), (3), (4), (6), (7) and (8) of section 6-159.6 of this article, whichever is applicable. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-35. - Suspension, revocation. 
(a)  The violation of any of the provisions of this chapter shall be grounds for suspension or revocation of any retail or wholesale license issued hereunder. 
(b)  Notwithstanding final disposition of a case by any court of competent jurisdiction, a license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council for any violation of this and/or another chapter, for any violation of state or federal law, for any material misrepresentation or omission in the application for the license, or if the licensee or the licensed business ceases to meet the eligibility requirements for licensure. 
(c)  The city manager is authorized to suspend the sale of alcoholic beverages under any license for any emergency situation such that the city manager deems such suspension necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare. Such suspension may be made effective immediately and may remain in force until the city manager determines that the emergency is over or until the next meeting of the mayor and city council, at which time the suspension shall cease unless it is extended by the mayor and city council. 
(d)  Prior to suspending or revoking a license, except as noted in emergency situations in subsection (b) of this section, the mayor and city council shall give at least five days prior written notice to the licensee of the time, place, and purpose of the hearing at which such suspension or revocation will be considered. Service of such notice shall be perfected by personal service at the licensed premises on the named licensee or an employee of the licensee by a city police officer; or, if personal service may not be so effected, by tacking a copy of the notice to the door of the licensed premises and mailing the original to the named licensee at the licensed premises with a copy mailed to any other address of the named licensee contained in the most recent license application on file with the city. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-36. - Automatic revocation. 
    A license issued under this article shall be automatically revoked by operation of law if: 
(1)  The licensee's state alcoholic beverage license is revoked; 
(2)  Payment of the annual license fee is not received by the city within 14 days after notification that the issuance of a license has been approved by the city manager; 
(3)  Operation of the licensed activity is not commenced within six months after the license is issued unless extended by the city manager for good cause; 
(4)  Operation of the licensed activity is commenced and then discontinued for a period of 30 days unless extended by the city manager for good cause; 
(5)  The licensed business declares bankruptcy or receivership, is the subject or levy of legal process, or fails to properly account for, file, report and pay any excise tax levied under this chapter; 
(6)  The licensed business fails to properly account for, file, report and maintain any records or remit any license fee imposed or taxes required under this chapter; 
(7)  Payment of the annual renewal license fee is not received by the city within the time prescribed in section 6-31(e); 
(8)  The named licensee is convicted of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-37. - Wholesale licenses required. 
    Any wholesale dealer in alcoholic beverages who is licensed by the state and who has a place of business in the city shall procure a license under the same provisions applicable to retail licensees. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
State Law reference- Permit or license from governing authority required for wholesale or retail sales of alcoholic beverages, due process guidelines; fingerprints, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-2(a). 
Sec. 6-38. - License issuance-Retail dealer building and inventory requirements. 
    No retail dealer license for the sale of distilled spirits shall be issued to any applicant whose building where the business will be conducted (a) is not "free standing" (i.e., is part of a larger building or structure) and (b) does not include a showroom with a minimum of 5,000 square feet and an additional storage area of at least 500 square feet. For distilled spirits retail dealers desiring to sell malt beverages and wine in addition to distilled spirits, at least an additional 500 square feet of showroom, and at least an additional 500 square feet of storage area is required over and above the minimum square feet for the establishment set forth above. In addition to the minimum square footage, retail dealers for the sale of distilled spirits shall maintain a minimum inventory of at least $300,000.00 in distilled spirits available for sale. Retail dealers selling malt beverages and wine in addition to distilled spirits shall maintain a minimum $15,000.00 inventory in malt beverages and wine. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-39. - Maximum number of distilled spirits retail licenses permitted. 
(a)  Subject to subsections (b)-(e) below, the city will not accept any additional applications for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package, and no additional licenses for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package shall be issued. 
(b)  If at any time and for whatever reason, the number of active licenses for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package falls below three, then the city shall accept applications for and issue such additional licenses for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package so as to bring the total number of active licenses for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package to three. 
(c)  The provisions of subsection (b) notwithstanding, additional licenses may be issued once the population of the city exceeds 25,000. In this regard, one additional license shall be issued for each 5,000-person increase in population over 25,000. In determining population, the city shall utilize the most recent population figures published by the Atlanta Regional Commission. In the absence of such figures, the city shall utilize the U.S. Census of 2000 or any future decennial census. 
(d)  If the total number of permitted licenses has increased pursuant to subsection (c) above, and if at any time and for whatever reason thereafter, the number of active licenses for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package falls below the number then permitted, then the city shall accept applications for and issue such additional licenses for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package so as to bring the total number of active licenses for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package to the total number then permitted. 
(e)  The provisions of subsections (a)-(d) above and the provisions of section 6-32 notwithstanding, any person who (1) Has been issued a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package; or (2) Has submitted an application for a license for the retail sale of distilled spirits by the package (and who is subsequently issued such a license) as of March 1, 2006 may transfer such a license in conjunction with the sale of the license holder's business, provided that the transferee meets all of the requirements for new license applicants as set forth in this chapter. 
(Res. No. 06-2006, 3-6-06) 
Sec. 6-40. - Special alcoholic beverage event licenses. 
(a)  Special alcoholic beverage event licenses. Notwithstanding anything to the contrary in this article, private parties, organizations, or entities, nonprofit civic organizations, or governmental organizations may apply for a special alcoholic beverage event license from the city manager of the city or his designee to sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages at special events on any property within the city. 
(b)  Application for special alcoholic beverage event license . The city manager or his designee is authorized to issue a special alcoholic beverage event license for any application meeting all applicable subsections of this section. Any private parties, organizations, or entities, nonprofit civic organizations, or governmental organizations desiring to sell or offer for sale alcoholic beverages at special events on any property within the city shall make written application to the city manager or his designee for a special alcoholic beverage license on forms provided by the city. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to prescribe forms of application. Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an application for a special alcoholic beverage event license shall be the cause for denial or revocation thereof. All applications for a special alcoholic beverage event license must be submitted to the city manager or his designee at least 30 days prior to the date of the event, unless waived by the city manager or his designee. 
(c)  Duration of the special alcoholic beverage event license. If a special alcoholic beverage event license is granted by the city manager of his designee, it shall be good only for the specified event set forth in the application, not to exceed three days in duration. 
(d)  Fees. The fees for special alcoholic beverage event licenses shall be: 
(1)  For private parties, organizations, entities, $250.00 for one day, $350.00 for two days, and $500.00 for three days; 
(2)  For nonprofit civic organizations, $50.00 per day; 
(3)  For governmental organizations, no charge. 
    The fee shall be paid at the time of the application. Said fee shall be refunded if the license is denied or withdrawn, provided that any applicant who holds a valid retail consumption on the premises license which is current, in good standing, and not in a state of probation or suspension shall have an annual credit against such permit fee equal to the amount of alcoholic beverage fee paid to the city. However, this credit does not authorize a consumption on the premises licensee to receive more than the maximum number of permits per calendar year allowed by subsection (e). 
(e)  Limitation on licenses per calendar year. No more than five licenses for special alcoholic beverage events shall be issued for the same private party, organization, or entity, nonprofit civic organization, or governmental organization per calendar year. 
(f)  Alcoholic beverages to be provided by recipient of special alcoholic beverage event license. All alcoholic beverages sold or offered for sale at any special alcoholic beverage event must be sold or offered for sale by the entity granted the special alcoholic beverage event license. 
(g)  Prohibition on service of alcoholic beverages from the premises of a retail consumption on the premises licensee. Any licensee holding a city retail consumption on the premises license is strictly prohibited from serving alcoholic beverages purchased from a state wholesaler for sale on their licensed premises under the issuance of a special alcoholic beverage event license. 
(h)  Security. One security officer, who shall be a certified city police officer, shall be required at any special alcoholic beverage event. Based on his evaluation of the event, the city manager may, at his discretion, waive the security requirement or require additional security. The recipient of the special alcoholic beverage event license shall be responsible for contacting the city police department to schedule the required security and for payment of same. 
(i)  All provisions of city parks, recreation, and cultural arts rental agreement, rules and regulations applicable. The issuance of a special alcoholic beverage event license is in addition to all applicable provisions of the city parks, recreation, and cultural arts rental agreement and rules and regulations for the Carrollton Cultural Arts Center or the Old City Gym and does not relieve the recipient for compliance with same. 
(Res. No. 05-2013, 9-9-13) 
Secs. 6-41-6-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LOCATION AND ZONING 

Sec. 6-56. - Zoning restriction. 
(a)  No retail license shall be granted under this chapter unless the premises to be licensed are, at the time the application is approved by the city manager, located under the planning and zoning ordinance of the city in a C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2, H-S, or O-I zoning district subject to the specific limitations of the respective districts. 
(b)  No retail license for the sale of distilled spirits by the package shall be granted under this chapter unless the premises to be licensed are, at the time the application is approved by the city manager, located under the planning and zoning ordinance of the city in a C-2, M-1, and M-2 zoning district subject to the specific limitations of the respective districts. 
(c)  No license shall be granted under this chapter for a brewery unless the premises to be licensed are, at the time the application is approved by the city manager, located under the planning and zoning ordinance of the city in an M-1 or M-2 zoning district subject to the specific limitations of the respective districts. 
(d)  Limitations related to locations in residential zoning districts shall not apply to golf course clubhouse facilities otherwise meeting all applicable provisions of this article subject to the limitations of the respective districts. 
(e)  The number of the licenses already granted for similar businesses within the city limits and in the trading area of the place for which a license is sought shall be considered a factor in issuing licenses. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-57. - Proximity restrictions. 
(a)  No premises shall be licensed under this chapter whose location is within the following distances: 
(1)  Any wine or malt beverages, whether packaged or for consumption on the premises (including breweries), within 300 feet of any church building, school building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(2)  Any distilled spirits, whether packaged or for consumption on the premises, within 300 feet of any church building or within 600 feet of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus. 
(3)  Any wine, malt beverages, or distilled spirits, whether packaged or for consumption on the premises (including breweries), within 300 feet of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by the state, county, or the city. 
(4)  For distilled spirits package sales, the licensee's premises cannot be within 1,500 feet of any other business licensed to sell distilled spirits by the package. 
(b)  As used in this section, the terms "school building," "educational building," "school grounds," or "college campus" shall apply only to state, county, city or church school buildings at which are taught such subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of the state. 
(c)  No consumption on the premises license shall be issued for any place of business which is located within 200 feet of a private single-family or two-family dwelling; provided, however, that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to such a private dwelling which is located in a zoning district in which alcoholic beverage outlets are authorized. 
(d)  Unless otherwise provided by this chapter, all measurements to determine the distances referred to in this section shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground and shall be measured in the following manner: 
(1)  From the front door of the structure from which alcoholic beverages are sold or proposed to be sold; 
(2)  In a straight line to the nearest public sidewalk, street, road, or highway; 
(3)  Along such public sidewalk, walkway, street, road, or highway by the nearest route; and 
(4)  To the front door of the building or to the nearest portion of the grounds, whichever is applicable under this chapter. 
(e)  No license shall be revoked and no application for a license or renewal shall be denied by any reason of the method of measurement set out in this subsection, if such license or license application or renewal application is for premises for which a license was granted prior to the enactment of this chapter in reliance on other methods of measurement. 
(f)  None of the provisions of this section shall serve to prevent licensed establishments in operation prior to the existence of a "school building," "school grounds," or "college campus" within these distances, from continuing to operate under its license. 
(g)  Downtown area defined. The area and structures located within one block in each direction from the center of Adamson Square, which have their primary entrance for customers fronting on Rome Street, Bradley Street, Alabama Street or Newnan Streets, and extending from the center of the Square for a distance of one block in each direction. 
(h)  Exemption. The provision of subsections 6-57(a)(1), (2) and (3) shall not apply to structures within the "downtown area" as herein defined. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 04-2006, 2-6-06; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
State Law reference- Sales of alcoholic beverages near churches, schools or college campus, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21. 
Sec. 6-58. - Sale, service in public places. 
(a)  Prohibition. Except as provided in section 6-6(h), section 6-40, and subsection (b) of this section, it shall be unlawful for any person to sell or serve any alcoholic beverages in a street, alley, or parking lot commonly used by the public or in any other public place or on public property. Private parties and organizations may apply for a special alcoholic beverage event permit from the city manager of the city or his designee to serve (not sell) alcoholic beverages on any city-owned property. 
(b)  Special alcoholic beverage event permit. In order to be eligible to serve (not sell) alcoholic beverages on any city-owned property, a special alcoholic beverage event must: 
(1)  Be available to public or private groups of persons; 
(2)  Be for monetary consideration on a rental, fee, percentage, or similar basis, be used for special occasions, including, but not limited to, receptions, meetings, banquets, conventions, parties, catered events, or similar gatherings; 
(3)  Be open to or attended by invited or selected guests or paying patrons; and 
(4)  Strictly prohibit the presale, or sale on site of tickets, tokens, coupons, or other similar means of exchange for the purpose of redeeming alcoholic beverages under a special alcoholic beverage event permit. 
(c)  Application for special alcoholic beverage event permit. The city manager or his designee is authorized to issue a special alcoholic beverage event permit for any application meeting all applicable subsections of this section. Any private parties or organizations desiring to engage in the service (not sell) of alcoholic beverages on any city-owned property, shall make written application to the city manager or his designee for a special alcoholic beverage permit on forms provided by the city. The city manager or his designee shall have the authority to prescribe forms of application. Failure to furnish any requested data shall automatically serve to dismiss the application. Any untrue or misleading information contained in, or material statement omitted from, an application for a special alcoholic beverage event permit shall be the cause for denial or revocation thereof. All applications for a special alcoholic beverage event permit must be submitted to the city manager or his designee at least 30 days prior to the date of the event, unless waived by the city manager or his designee. 
(d)  Issuance of the special alcoholic beverage event permit. A special alcoholic beverage event permit may be applied for and conditionally approved by the city manager or his designee prior to the execution of a rental agreement/deposit for the event. However, final approval of the permit shall not be granted until a copy of the executed agreement is provided. If a special alcoholic beverage event permit is granted by the city manager of his designee, it shall be good only for the specified event set forth in the application, not to exceed three days in duration. 
(e)  Fees. The fees for special alcoholic beverage event permits shall be: 
(1)  For private parties, organizations, entities, $250.00 for one day, $350.00 for two days, and $500.00 for three days; 
(2)  For nonprofit civic organizations, $50.00 per day; 
(3)  For governmental organizations, no charge. 
    The fee shall be paid at the time of the application. Said fee shall be refunded if the permit is denied or withdrawn, provided that any applicant who holds a valid retail consumption on the premises license which is current, in good standing, and not in a state of probation or suspension shall have an annual credit against such permit fee equal to the amount of alcoholic beverage fee paid to the city. However, this credit does not authorize a consumption on the premises licensee to receive more than the maximum number of permits per calendar year allowed by subsection (f). 
(f)  Limitation on permits per calendar year. No more than five permits for a special alcoholic beverage event shall be issued for the same private party/organization or nonprofit civic organization. 
(g)  Alcoholic beverages to be provided by recipient of special alcoholic beverage event permit. All alcoholic beverages served on any city-owned property must be provided by the entity granted the special alcoholic beverage event permit. Nothing herein shall prohibit the alcoholic beverages from being provided to the permit recipient by sponsorship or donation. 
(h)  Prohibition on service of alcoholic beverages from the premises of a retail consumption on the premises licensee. Any licensee holding a city retail consumption on the premises license is strictly prohibited from serving alcoholic beverages purchased from a state wholesaler for sale on their licensed premises under the issuance of a special alcoholic beverage event permit. 
(i)  Security. Notwithstanding, the provisions of the rental agreement with the city parks, recreation, and cultural arts department, one security officer, who shall be a certified city police officer, shall be required at any special alcoholic beverage event. Based on his evaluation of the event, the city manager may, at his discretion, waive the security requirement or require additional security. The recipient of the special alcoholic beverage event permit shall be responsible for contacting the city police department to schedule the required security and for payment of same. 
(j)  All provisions of city parks, recreation, and cultural arts rental agreement, rules and regulations applicable. The issuance of a special alcoholic beverage event permit is in addition to all the provisions of the city parks, recreation, and cultural arts rental agreement and rules and regulations and does not relieve the recipient for compliance with same. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 04-2005, 5-2-05; Res. No. 07-2012, 6-4-12; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-59. - Sale near housing authority property. 
(a)  As used in this subsection, the term "housing authority property" means any property containing 300 housing units or fewer owned or operated by a housing authority created by O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 3, art. 1, the "Housing Authorities Law." 
(b)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Secs. 6-60-6-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - SALES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-81. - Responsibility of named licensee. 
    The named licensee shall be active in the operation of the licensed business and shall be personally present on the licensed premises sufficiently to assure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-82. - Rentals paid restricted. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section, it shall be unlawful for a licensee to enter into any agreement whereby the rental paid for licensed premises is based in whole or in part on the volume of sales of alcoholic beverages by the licensed business or whereby the lessor otherwise shares in the profits or receipts from the licensed business' sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  Subsection (a) of this section shall not apply where the primary business of a package licensee is an activity other than the package sale of alcoholic beverages, for example, a grocery store selling package malt beverages and wine. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-83. - Display of license. 
    Each license issued under this chapter shall at all times be kept plainly exposed to view upon the licensed premises. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-84. - Retention of records; filing reports. 
(a)  All consumption-on-the-premises licensees shall keep and preserve records of all alcoholic beverages purchased and sold by the licensee and shall keep and preserve records of all food and nonalcoholic beverages purchased and sold by them. Such records shall at all times be open for inspection by an authorized agent of the city. Such records shall be maintained for a period of at least three years, provided that the city manager may authorize the disposal of records prior to the expiration of three years if the maintenance of such records is no longer required by the city. 
(b)  All consumption on the premises licensees shall file with the city manager the following reports at the time and in the form prescribed by the city manager: 
(1)  Monthly on-premises consumption report. 
(2)  A certified copy of the licensee's monthly state sales tax report as filed with the state department of revenue for the period coinciding with the on-premises consumption report. 
(3)  Any other documents, reports, records, or books as shall be required by the city manager. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-85. - Knowledge of chapter provisions. 
    Every licensee under this chapter shall, prior to applying for a license, read and familiarize himself with the provisions of this chapter, and an application shall constitute a certification by the applicant that he has done so. Every licensee shall maintain a copy of this chapter on the licensed premises and shall instruct each employee engaged in the sale or handling of alcoholic beverages concerning the relevant provisions of the chapter. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-86. - Sales to underage persons prohibited. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this section: 
(1)  No person, directly or through another person, shall furnish, cause to be furnished, or permit any person in such person's employ to furnish any alcoholic beverage to any person under 21 years of age. 
(2)  No person under 21 years of age shall purchase, possess or consume any alcoholic beverage. 
(3)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent such person's age in any manner whatever for the purpose of obtaining unlawfully any alcoholic beverage. 
(4)  No person shall act as an agent to purchase or acquire any alcoholic beverage for or on behalf of a person under 21 years of age. 
(5)  No person under 21 years of age shall misrepresent his identity or use any false identification for the purpose of purchasing or obtaining any alcoholic beverage. 
(b)  The prohibitions contained in subsections (1), (2), and (4) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply to the following with respect to the sale, purchase, or possession of alcoholic beverages for consumption: 
(1)  For medical purposes pursuant to a prescription of a physician duly authorized to practice medicine in this state; 
(2)  At a religious ceremony; 
(3)  When the parent or guardian of the person under 21 years of age gives the alcoholic beverage to the person and when possession is in the home of the parent or guardian and such parent or guardian is present. 
(c)  The prohibition contained in subsection (1) of subsection (a) of this section shall not apply with respect to the sale of alcoholic beverages by a person when such person has been furnished with proper identification showing that the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold is 21 years of age or older. For purposes of this subsection, the term "proper identification" means any document issued by a governmental agency containing a description of the person, such person's photograph, or both, and giving such person's date of birth and includes, without being limited to, a passport, military identification, driver's license, or an identification card authorized under O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-100 through 40-5-105. "Proper identification" shall not include a birth certificate identification. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit employment of a person under 21 years of age in licensed premises if such employment is lawful under section 6-111. 
(e)  In any case where a reasonable or prudent person could reasonably be in doubt as to whether or not the person to whom an alcoholic beverage is to be sold or otherwise furnished is actually 21 years of age or older, it shall be the duty of the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage to request to see and be furnished with proper identification as provided in subsection (c) of this section in order to verify the age of such person; and the failure to make such request and verification in any case where the person to whom the alcoholic beverage is sold or otherwise furnished is less than 21 years of age may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether this person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (1) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(f)  In any case where a person selling or otherwise furnishing alcoholic beverages checks for a proper identification, such person shall carefully inspect such identification. If a reasonable and prudent person could determine that such identification has been altered and if such person sells or otherwise furnishes alcoholic beverages to the holder of such altered identification, then such may be considered by the trier of fact in determining whether the person selling or otherwise furnishing such alcoholic beverage did so in violation of subsection (1) of subsection (a) of this section. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
State Law reference- Furnishing to, purchase of, or possession by persons under 21 years of age of alcoholic beverages; use of false identification; proper identification for sale of alcoholic beverages; dispensing, serving, etc., of alcoholic beverages by persons under 21 years of age in the course of employment, seller's duty to request proper identification, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-23. 
Sec. 6-87. - Days sales prohibited. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on any day or any time when such sales are prohibited by state law, provided, however, that, except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, the package sales by retailers of malt beverages, wine, and distilled spirits shall be permitted on Sundays between the hours of 12:30 p.m. and 11:30 p.m. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages on Christmas Day. 
(c)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be allowed by those licensed to make such sales on any election day. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 08-2013, 11-6-13) 
State Law reference- Sale of alcoholic beverages on Sundays, election days, and Christmas Day, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20. 
Sec. 6-88. - Sales to intoxicated persons; gambling; disorderly conduct. 
(a)  No licensee shall permit the sale of alcoholic beverages to any person who is in a state of noticeable intoxication or allow persons who are noticeably intoxicated to congregate on licensed premises. 
(b)  No licensee shall permit any gambling, betting, illegal lottery, or other device for the hazarding of any money or other thing of value on the licensed premises, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to a properly licensed bingo game. 
(c)  No licensee shall permit on the licensed premises any disorderly conduct, breach of the peace, or noise or activity which is disturbing to the surrounding neighborhood. 
(d)  Adult entertainment. 
(1)  No holder of a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages issued pursuant to this article shall knowingly allow any performance or entertainment or act on the licensed premises which, when applied to contemporary community standards, the dominant theme taken as a whole appeals to the prurient interests or is licentious or obscene. 
(2)  It shall be prohibited to permit on the premises so licensed any contest or form of entertainment which consists of the wetting or soaking of the upper torso of a female or the pelvic area of a male or female. 
(3)  No retail licensee for on-premises consumption shall cause, suffer or permit any person to appear on its licensed premises in such manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the pubic area, anus, vulva or genitals, or any simulation thereof, nor shall cause, suffer or permit any person to appear on its licensed premises in any such manner or attire as to expose to view any portion of the breast below the top of the areola, or any simulation thereof. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
State Law reference- Sale of alcoholic beverages to intoxicated persons, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-22. 
Sec. 6-89. - Containers, storage, illumination. 
(a)  Except in the case of breweries and brewpubs, alcoholic beverages shall be delivered to and received at licensed premises only in the original container and only in a conveyance owned and operated by a licensed wholesale dealer (or a licensed common carrier acting for a wholesaler). Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, alcoholic beverages shall be sold at retail only on the licensed premises. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, a retail licensee shall store alcoholic beverages only on the licensed premises and at no other place. All stock shall be available at all times for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. Except in the case of breweries and brewpubs, any alcoholic beverages found in any retail licensee's stock which were not received from a wholesaler licensed to make deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(c)  The exterior of each building in which alcoholic beverages are sold for consumption on the premises shall contain sufficient lighting so that all sides of the building and all entrances thereto are clearly visible at all times. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-90. - Cleanliness of premises; inspections. 
    All licensed premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with all regulations governing the condition of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. All licensed premises shall be open at all times for inspection by authorized agents of the city. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-91. - Drive-through sales of alcoholic beverages prohibited. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to sell or offer for sale any alcoholic beverage within the city by means of drive-through sale. 
(b)  For purposes of this chapter, the term "drive-through sale" means the sale of alcoholic beverages by any means that allows the customer to remain in their motor vehicle. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Secs. 6-92-6-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SALES TO AND BY UNDERAGE PERSONS 

Sec. 6-111. - Prohibited employment, exceptions. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (d) of this section, no wholesale dealer or package licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall allow any employee under the age of 18 years to dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  This section shall not prohibit the employment of persons under the above ages on licensed premises where such persons do not dispense, sell, serve, take orders for, or handle alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  This section shall not prohibit persons 16 years of age or older from selling or handling alcoholic beverages in grocery stores or supermarkets. For purposes of this subsection, the terms grocery stores or supermarkets shall include convenience stores. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-24. 
Sec. 6-112. - Activity in grocery stores. 
    For the purposes of this article, the bagging or carrying out of wine or malt beverages in the original package in the course of employment by a grocery store, convenience store or similar establishment shall not constitute handling of alcoholic beverages. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Secs. 6-113-6-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RESERVED 

Secs. 6-121-6-135. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - BREAKING PACKAGE OR DRINKING ON PREMISES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Breaking of packages or drinking of contents on premises prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 3-3-26. 

Sec. 6-136. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to open or consume any alcoholic beverages on premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the package. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Secs. 6-137-6-155. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VII. - CONSUMPTION ON THE PREMISES 

Sec. 6-156. - Eligibility for license-Restricted. 
    Any type consumption on the premises license may be granted only to a restaurant, as defined under section 6-157; a supper club as defined under section 6-158; a private club, as defined under section 6-159; a golf course clubhouse facility as defined in sections 6-159.5 and 6-159.6; an alcoholic beverage caterer as defined in section 6-159.7; and a brewery as defined in section 6-159.8. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-157. - Same-Restaurant. 
    In order to be eligible for a pouring or limited pouring consumption on the premises license, a restaurant shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served to the public for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
(2)  Contain one or more public dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(3)  Have available to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment is open for business; 
(4)  Have a valid county health department food service permit and any other applicable local, state or federal permits, licenses, etc., required for food service establishments; 
(5)  Have at least 50 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other nonfood or nonalcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; 
(6)  Have a permanent seating capacity, at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least 24 persons. 
(7)  Provide live entertainment, including, but not limited to, bands, orchestras, singers, dancers, actors, performers, musicians or related live entertainment no more than two days in any week. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Mo. of 2-7-05) 
Sec. 6-158. - Same-Supper club. 
    In order to be eligible for a pouring or limited pouring consumption on the premises license, a supper club shall be defined as follows: 
(1)  Be used and held out to the public as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served to the public for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
(2)  Have adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its patrons; 
(3)  Have available to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment is open for business; 
(4)  Have a valid county health department food service permit and any other applicable local, state, or federal permits, licenses, etc., as required for food service establishments; 
(5)  Have at least 50 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, and for this purpose, if a supper club makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other nonfood or nonalcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; 
(6)  Have a permanent seating capacity, at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least 100 persons; 
(7)  Be arranged and maintained such that all seating is open and unobstructed to the view of other persons in the facility; 
(8)  Provide live entertainment including, but not limited to bands, orchestras, singers, dancers, actors, performers, musicians or related live entertainment more than two days in any week. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-159. - Same-Private clubs. 
(a)  In order to be eligible for a pouring or limited pouring consumption on the premises license, a private club must be a veterans organization, fraternal organization or other nonprofit organization all of which must be nationally chartered and maintaining a tax exempt status under either the United States Internal Revenue Code or the state income tax law and: 
(1)  The local chapter has been in existence at least one year prior to the filing of its application for a license; 
(2)  Have at least 75 regular dues-paying members; 
(3)  Be organized and operated exclusively for pleasure, recreation, and other nonprofitable purposes; 
(4)  Own, hire, or lease a building or space within a building for the reasonable use of its members, which building or space: 
a.  Has suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment; 
b.  Is staffed with a sufficient number of employees for cooking, preparing, and serving meals for its members and guests; and 
c.  Has no member, officer, agent, or employee directly or indirectly receiving in the form of salary or other compensation any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages beyond a fixed salary. 
(b)  For purposes of subsection (4)c. of subsection (a) of this section, the term "fixed salary" means the amount of compensation paid any member, officer, agent, or employee of a private club as may be fixed for him by its members at a prior annual meeting or by the governing body out of the general revenue of the club and shall not include any commission or any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  No alcoholic beverage license shall be granted to a private club organized or operated primarily for the selling or serving of alcoholic beverages. 
(d)  Private clubs licensed under the provisions of this section shall not be required to maintain the percentage sale of food/nonalcoholic beverages as compared to alcoholic beverages, however, any such organization shall be subject to all ordinance regulations dealing with general licensing and consumption on the premises. 
(e)  Records supporting the organizations nonprofit tax exempt status shall at all times be open for inspection by an authorized agent of the city. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-159.5. - Same-Golf course clubhouse facility-Restaurant. 
    In order to be eligible for a pouring or limited pouring license, a golf course clubhouse facility-restaurant must: 
(1)  Be a facility designed to provide auxiliary support services, including but not limited to food preparation and service, beverage service, retail sales and service, meeting rooms, cart rentals, locker rooms, administrative offices and related uses in support of an 18-hole regulation golf course open for play at least 300 days per year, except as may be reduced by inclement weather and required repairs/maintenance; 
(2)  Be used as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
(3)  Contain one or more dining rooms, with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(4)  Have available to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment is open for business; 
(5)  Have a valid county health department food service permit and any other applicable local, state or federal permits, licenses, etc. required for food service establishments; 
(6)  Have at least 50 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and nonalcoholic beverages consumed on the premises; and for this purpose, if a restaurant makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other non-food or non-alcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; 
(7)  Have a permanent seating capacity, at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least 50 persons; 
(8)  Provide live entertainment, including, but not limited to: bands, orchestras, singers, dancers, actors, performers, musicians or related live entertainment no more than two days in any week. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-159.6. - Same-Golf course clubhouse facility-Supper club. 
    In order to be eligible for a pouring or limited pouring license, a golf course clubhouse facility-supper club must: 
(1)  Be a facility designed to provide auxiliary support services, including but not limited to, food preparation and service, beverage service, retail sales and service, meeting rooms, cart rentals, locker rooms, administrative offices and related uses in support of an 18-hole regulation golf course open for play at least 300 days per year except as may be reduced by inclement weather and required repairs/maintenance; 
(2)  Be used as a place where meals prepared on the premises are regularly served for adequate pay each day the establishment is open for business; 
(3)  Contain one or more dining rooms with adequate and sanitary kitchen facilities and staff to prepare, cook, and serve suitable food for its guests; 
(4)  Have available to serve meals prepared on the premises during any time the establishment if open for business; 
(5)  Have a valid county health department food service permit and any other applicable local, state, or federal permits, licenses, etc. as required for food service establishments; 
(6)  Have at least 50 percent of its total sales comprised of the sale of food prepared on the premises and non-alcoholic beverages consumed on the premises, and for this purpose, if a supper club makes a minimum charge, cover charge, or admission charge, or any other non-food or non-alcoholic beverage charge, the amount so charged shall not be counted in computing total sales and shall not be counted as a food or beverage sale; 
(7)  Have a permanent seating capacity, at tables, not counting bar stools, of at least 100 persons; 
(8)  Be arranged and maintained such that all seating is open and unobstructed to the view of other persons in the facility; 
(9)  Provide live entertainment, including but not limited to: bands, orchestras, singers, dancers, actors, performers, musicians or related live entertainment more than two days in any week. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-159.7. - Same-Alcoholic beverage caterer. 
(a)  For the purpose of this section the following definitions shall apply: 
(1)  "Food caterer" means any person who, for consideration, prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
(2)  "Licensed alcoholic beverage caterer" means any person licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the state and who possesses a license by a local government in the state authorizing such person to sell or dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink off licensed premises and in connection with an authorized catered function. 
(3)  "Authorized catered function" means an event at a location not otherwise licensed for consumption of alcoholic beverages by the drink at which alcoholic beverages are furnished, for consideration, and sold, dispensed or provided free of charge to persons present at the event, by the drink, pursuant to a permit obtained under this section. 
(b)  Licenses may be obtained for the purpose of selling or dispensing alcoholic beverages by the drink on premises at which authorized catered functions are to be held. Such licenses shall be annual, and the procedures for securing such licenses and the terms thereof, including license fees, shall be as provided in Article II of this chapter. For purposes of licenses and application fees, "alcoholic beverage caterers" shall be treated as and subject to the same provisions relating to restaurants. 
(c)  Before a licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or dispense alcoholic beverages at any authorized catered function, such caterer shall obtain a permit. The application for permit shall include the name of the alcoholic beverage caterer, the caterer's license number, and the date, address and time of the event. No permit fee shall be charged for the alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by the city. For caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the city, a fee of $50.00 per event permit shall be charged. No permit shall be issued to any person under this section who does not hold an alcoholic beverage caterer's license from a local jurisdiction in the state. The permit shall be kept in the vehicle used to transport alcoholic beverage to the event at all times during which the permit is in effect. 
(d)  Caterers licensed by a jurisdiction other than the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported into the city for the event, and shall pay an excise tax to the city covering all such beverages at the rates provided by article VIII of this chapter. Failure to report and remit the tax within seven days of the conclusion of the event shall be grounds for denial of subsequent permits to the caterer for similar events. 
(e)  Caterers licensed by the city shall maintain a record of all alcoholic beverages transported for each event, by event, and shall make report and remittance of such taxes with their regular monthly reports to the city. 
(f)  No alcoholic beverages shall be transported, distributed, or sold to other than licensed locations in the city, except to authorized catered functions, unless otherwise authorized by this chapter or by state law. 
(g)  The hours and days of sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages under this section shall be the same as provided for sale by the drink. 
(h)  No licensed alcoholic beverage caterer shall employ any person under 21 years of age to dispense, serve, sell or handle alcoholic beverages at authorized catered functions. 
(i)  As a condition of permit issuance, alcoholic beverage caterers licensed by jurisdictions other than the city shall be provided a copy of the city's alcoholic beverages ordinances, and shall indicate, by signature, that they have received such ordinances and acknowledge the applicability of such ordinances to their operations. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-159.8. - Same-Brewery. 
(a)  Breweries must comply with all applicable city, state and federal license requirements. 
(b)  Breweries must pay all applicable state, city and county taxes. 
(c)  Breweries may offer free tastings of malt beverages produced or manufactured on-site and educational and promotional tours during normal business hours in accordance with state law. 
(Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-160. - Ratio of alcoholic, nonalcoholic sales. 
    Should the total sales from food and nonalcoholic beverages reported by any licensee for consumption on the premises not equal those from the sale of all alcoholic beverages for any two consecutive reporting periods, the license may be suspended or revoked by the mayor and city council after a hearing as provided for in section 6-35. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-161. - Statement of sales. 
    In addition to the reporting requirements detailed in section 6-84, the city manager may require that a licensee furnish a statement from a certified public accountant that reports the percentage of the licensee's total sales derived from the sale of food and nonalcoholic beverages sold on the premises compared to the sale of all alcoholic beverages sold on the premises in the licensee's most recent reporting period. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-162. - Illumination of premises, location of sale restricted. 
(a)  All restaurants and supper club areas, including all tables, booths, and other areas where customers are served and including all passageways for customers, shall be sufficiently well illuminated so that they may be viewed by those inside the premises. 
(b)  The sale of alcoholic beverages in any back room or side room which is not open to the general public is prohibited, except that this prohibition shall not apply with respect to: 
(1)  Private parties which have been scheduled in advance; 
(2)  Room service to hotel guests in their hotel rooms, provided a properly licensed restaurant or supper club is located on the premises; 
(3)  Private clubs. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-163. - Prohibited activities by employees. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any employee of a restaurant, supper club, or private club to engage in the following: 
(1)  Dance or sit with customers on the premises while on duty status, including "breaks;" 
(2)  Allow any customer to purchase food or drink, alcoholic or nonalcoholic, for an employee while on duty status, including "break periods;" 
(3)  For an employee to consume or simulate the consumption of any alcoholic beverage while on duty status at the premises of his or her employer, including "breaks;" 
(4)  Require, permit, suffer, encourage or induce any employee or person to solicit at the licensed premises for himself or for any person other than the patron and guest of the patron, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic; or money with which to purchase same; nor shall any licensee pay a commission or any other compensation to any person frequenting his establishment or to his agent or manager to solicit for himself, or for any other, the purchase by the patron of any drink, whether alcoholic or nonalcoholic. 
(b)  For purposes of this section the term "employee" shall also apply to performers, dancers, entertainers, musicians engaged in temporary work, as well as regular employees. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-164. - Purchase of stock limited. 
    Licensees under this article shall purchase distilled spirits in sizes of one liter or larger unless a particular brand is not packaged in these size containers in which case the licensee may purchase such brand in the nearest size to such containers. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-165. - Hours of sale. 
    Consumption on the premises licensees shall only engage in the sale and service of alcoholic beverages between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 1:30 a.m. Monday through Sunday, provided, however, that the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises shall also be permitted on Sundays from 12:30 p.m. until 12:00 midnight in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals or food in all of the combined retail outlets of the individual establishment where food is served and in any licensed establishment which derives at least 50 percent of its total annual gross income from the rental of rooms for overnight lodging. Consumption licensees may permit alcoholic beverages purchased and served prior to 1:30 a.m. to be consumed on the premises until 2:00 a.m. Monday through Sunday. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 09-2009, 12-2-09) 
Sec. 6-166. - Dancing on premises restricted. 
    Patron dancing shall be permitted at facilities licensed for consumption on the premises sales only where: 
(1)  Adequate space exists; 
(2)  All fire and safety regulations are met; 
(3)  Prior approval of the chief of police and the chief of fire department has been obtained. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-167. - Removal of beverages prohibited. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsections (d), (e) and (f) below, all alcoholic beverages sold by consumption on the premises licensees shall be consumed only on the licensed premises. It shall be unlawful for any person to remove from the licensed premises any alcoholic beverages sold for consumption on the premises. Each licensee shall be responsible for ensuring that no person so removes any alcoholic beverages from the premises in any type of container. 
(b)  Except for consumption on the premises licensees located within the central business district of the city (i.e., that portion of the city zoned C-1 and generally described as Adamson Square and surrounding areas), each consumption on the premises licensee shall post in a prominent place at each exit from the licensed premises a sign in substantially the following form: 
"It is a violation of City Ordinance to take any type alcoholic beverage from this outlet." 
Such sign shall be uniform letters not less than one inch in height. 
(c)  Except as provided in subsections (d), (e) and (f) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to drink or have in his possession an open container of any alcoholic beverage: 
(1)  On any public street, sidewalk, park or other public place within the city, or upon or within any motor vehicle on the streets, sidewalks, parks and public places of the city; or 
(2)  While on private property, open to public view, without the express permission of the owner, agent or person in lawful possession thereof. 
(d)  However, a licensee for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink or for the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the licensee's premises shall have the right to serve alcoholic beverages to patrons seated in an outdoor dining area as part of the operation of the premises. The licensee shall not have the right to serve alcoholic beverages to any person who is not seated at a table or in a chair provided by the licensee. In addition, alcoholic beverages shall only be transported into outdoor dining areas and/or opened in outdoor dining areas by a licensee's working employees as part of their work duties. 
(e)  Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages permitted in certain areas; number and size limited. Within the central business district of the city (i.e., that portion of the city zoned C-1 and generally described as Adamson Square and surrounding areas), the following regulations shall apply: 
(1)  Two drink on-street limit. Any establishment licensed to dispense alcoholic beverages by the drink for consumption on the premises is authorized to dispense alcoholic beverages in paper or plastic cups or containers other than a can, bottle, or glass, for removal from the premises; provided, however, that no establishment shall dispense to any person more than two such alcoholic beverages at a time for removal from the premises, and no person shall remove at one time more than two such alcoholic beverages from the licensed premises. 
(2)  Size limited to 16 ounces. No container in which an alcoholic beverage is dispensed and removed from the licensed premises shall exceed 16 fluid ounces in size. No person shall hold in possession on the streets and sidewalks, in parks and squares, or in other public places within the defined area any open alcoholic beverage container which exceeds 16 fluid ounces in size. 
(3)  Drinking from can, bottle, or glass prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or attempt to drink any alcoholic beverage from a can, bottle, or glass or to possess in an open can, bottle, or glass any alcoholic beverage on the streets, sidewalks, rights-of-way, and parking lots, whether public or private. 
(4)  Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages prohibited during certain hours. Outside consumption of alcoholic beverages in the central business district of the city is prohibited from the hours of 2:30 a.m. to 7:00 a.m. Monday through Saturday and from 2:30 a.m. to 12:30 p.m. on Sundays. 
(f)  For events for which special event permits have been obtained and that are open to the general public at the city's downtown amphitheater, attendees may have in their possession no more than seventy-two ounces of malt beverages and/or fifty ounces of wine not otherwise purchased pursuant to subsection (e) above. Any such malt beverages and/or wine may be consumed on the amphitheater premises only. No glass containers shall be allowed, and coolers shall be limited to no more than twenty-four inches along any dimension. Any such coolers must remain in possession of an adult at all times. All empty containers shall be removed and/or properly disposed of by the person consuming its contents. These provisions notwithstanding, a special event permitee may elect not to allow attendees to have in their possession malt beverages and/or wine not otherwise purchased pursuant to subsection (e) above. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 04-2011, 6-6-11; Res. No. 06-2012, 6-4-12; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16; Res. No. 20-2018, 11-5-18) 
State Law reference- Removal of partially consumed bottle of wine from premises. O.C.G.A. § 3-6-4; consumption of alcoholic beverage or possession of open container of alcoholic beverage in passenger area, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-253. 
Sec. 6-168. - Prohibited practices. 
(a)  No consumption on the premises licensee shall engage in any of the following practices: 
(1)  The sale of alcoholic beverages during any special period of the day at prices lower than those customarily charged during the remainder of the day; 
(2)  The giving away of any alcoholic beverages in conjunction with the sale of any other alcoholic beverages; 
(3)  The sale of two or more alcoholic beverages for a single price or the sale of all the alcoholic beverages a customer can or desires to drink; 
(4)  The sale or serving of two or more alcoholic beverages at substantially the same price customarily charged for one such alcoholic beverage; 
(5)  Requiring or encouraging the purchase of a second or subsequent alcoholic beverage at the same time another alcoholic beverage is purchased or before the first such beverage has been consumed; 
(6)  Sponsoring, conducting, or allowing contests or promotions which have as their primary purpose the increasing of the consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises. 
(b)  This section shall not apply with respect to private functions not open to the public with respect to which the licensee has agreed to the use of the licensee's establishment by a person for a set period of time for a valuable consideration. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-169. - Brown bag establishments prohibited; exception. 
    Brown bag establishments as defined in this chapter shall be prohibited within the city. However, any licensee for consumption of alcoholic beverages on the premises may allow customers to bring with them and consume on the licensed premises malt beverages and/or wine purchased from another location. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04; Res. No. 12-2016, Exh. A, 6-6-16) 
Sec. 6-170. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in sections 6-171 and 6-172 below, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Alcoholic beverage establishment means any business authorized for the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages by the drink or in broken packages for consumption on the licensed premises. 
    Security means any personnel privately employed for the task of monitoring and maintaining order and safety in any establishment or on any property. 
    Special event means any planned and approved event that is temporary and often at a rented or reserved location or facility (examples: fairs, carnivals, motorcycle rides, car shows, publicly advertised parties, weddings, wedding receptions, etc.) in which alcoholic beverages are to be dispensed to patrons participating in the event. 
(Res. No. 04-2010, 7-10-10) 
Sec. 6-171. - Maintenance of order at alcoholic beverage establishments and special events. 
    The owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment and the organizer and/or manager of any special event shall be responsible for monitoring their establishment or special event - as well the parking lots and other outside areas around the establishment or special event - and for prohibiting disruptive, disorderly, and/or dangerous behavior, and for prohibiting patrons and other persons associated with the establishment or special event from standing, sitting, mingling, or assembling outside the licensed premises or the location or facility in a manner which causes or contributes to altercations, fights, other violent incidents, and/or illegal acts. 
(Res. No. 04-2010, 7-10-10) 
Sec. 6-172. - Regulation of security at alcoholic beverage establishments and special events. 
    The owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment and the organizer and/or manager of any special event, who chooses to employ security at his or her establishment or special event during hours of operation, shall meet and adhere to all of the following requirements: 
(1)  If the owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment and the organizer and/or manager of any special event contracts with a private security business, any such private security business must be properly registered with and licensed by both the State of Georgia and the city and meet and adhere to all standards and requirements set forth in the Georgia Private Detective and Security Agencies Act, O.C.G.A. § 43-38-1, et seq. 
(2)  If the owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment and the organizer and/or manager of any special event provides in-house security, said owner, organizer, and/or manager assumes full liability and responsibility for the security personnel, as they will be considered employees of the establishment or special event. 
(3)  If the owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment and the organizer and/or manager of any special event has in-house security personnel armed with a firearm, either concealed or unconcealed, while on-duty at the establishment or special event, the owner, organizer, and/or manager is required to have the city police department complete a criminal background check on any such armed personnel. 
(4)  The owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment and the organizer and/or manager of any special event shall maintain copies of any and all licenses and permits issued on behalf of their security personnel and shall make them available for review upon the request of any city police officer. 
(5)  The owner and/or manager of any alcoholic beverage establishment and the organizer and/or manager of any special event shall keep and maintain a record and log - which record and log shall be available for review upon the request of any city police officer - documenting the name, date, and time that each security personnel worked at their establishment or special event. 
(6)  All security personnel working at an alcoholic beverage establishment or special event shall be uniform in appearance with one another and in a way that distinguishes them from other nonsecurity personnel or employees. Uniforms must meet the following requirements: 
a.  The uniform must clearly identify the employee as either "In-House Security" preceded by the establishment's or special event's name, or if outside security personnel are used, "Security" preceded by the private security company name. 
b.  The uniforms cannot resemble those worn by city police officers. 
c.  No black in color security shirts are permitted. Shirts must be either green, yellow, or white with either white or black lettering. 
(Res. No. 04-2010, 7-10-10) 
Secs. 6-173-6-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VIII. - EXCISE TAXES 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 6-181. - Taxes imposed. 
    In addition to the license fees required in this chapter and in addition to the excise taxes levied by the state, all licensees hereunder shall pay to the city the taxes imposed in this article. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Secs. 6-182-6-190. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - MIXED DRINKS 

Sec. 6-191. - Imposition. 
    There is imposed upon the sale of mixed drinks in the city a tax in the amount of three percent of the purchase price of the mixed drinks to the consumer. Each licensee shall be allowed a deduction of three percent of the amount of taxes collected as reimbursement for the collecting of such taxes, provided that such tax is not delinquent at the time of payment. A record of each sale will be made in writing and maintained for inspection by any authorized agent of the city. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
State Law reference- Tax authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-130. 
Sec. 6-192. - Collection. 
    Every consumption on the premises licensee shall collect the tax imposed by this article from purchasers of mixed drinks. The licensee shall furnish such information as may be required by the city manager to facilitate the collection of the tax. In all cases where the purchase is by deferred payment or credit, the licensee becomes liable for the collection and payment of the tax at the time of delivery of the mixed drink to the purchaser. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Sec. 6-193. - Payment to city. 
(a)  Each licensee under this chapter shall pay over the amount of taxes collected and coming due under this article in any calendar month to the city not later than the 20th day of the following calendar month. 
(b)  On or before the 20th day of each month, a return shall be filed with the city manager for the preceding month by each licensee liable for the payment of tax under this division. Returns shall be in such form as the city manager may specify and shall show the licensee's gross receipts from the sale of mixed drinks and the amount of taxes collected or coming due thereon. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
Secs. 6-194-6-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PACKAGE SALES 

Sec. 6-216. - Tax imposed. 
(a)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of malt beverages in the city, as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of six dollars on each container containing not more than 151/2 gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 151/2 gallons; 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of 12 ounces. 
(b)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of wine in the city at a rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(c)  There is imposed by the city an excise tax on the first sale or use of distilled spirits in the city at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional parts of a liter. 
(d)  The excise taxes provided for in this section shall be imposed upon and paid by the licensed wholesale dealer. Such taxes shall be paid on or before the 20th day of the month following the month in which the alcoholic beverages are sold or disposed of by the wholesaler within the city. 
(Amd. of 12-6-04) 
State Law reference- Levy of tax on sale of distilled spirits by the package authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80; imposition of excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; Levy of tax on wine authorized, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60. 
Chapter 10 - AMUSEMENTS AND ENTERTAINMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Cable communications, ch. 26; parks and recreation, ch. 70; rules and regulations for Lake Carroll, § 70-46 et seq.; parades, § 82-96; zoning, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 10-1-10-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; nuisances, § 50-26 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66; zoning, app. B. 

Sec. 10-26. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this article is to regulate certain types of businesses including, but not limited to, adult entertainment establishments, to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-27. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult business means either: 
(1)  Any business, other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult hotel or motel means a hotel or motel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities of specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult minimotion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than 50 persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult motion picture arcade means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    Adult video store means any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, video tapes or movies or their reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Encounter center or rap establishment means any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities, or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
    Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    Escort bureau, introduction services means any business, agency, or persons, who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnished or offer to furnish names of persons, or who introduce, furnish or arrange for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
    Good moral character means a person who has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
    Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 18 years. 
    Specified anatomical areas includes any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    Specified sexual activities means and includes any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory function in the context of a sexual relationship and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: analingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, saphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicts human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal, or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the infliction of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 10-28. - Erotic dance establishment regulations. 
(a)  No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the city manager or his designee showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 18 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 18 shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment may be open only between the hours of 8:00 a.m. and 2:00 a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from 8:00 a.m. through 2:55 a.m. on Sunday. No licensee shall permit his place of business to open on Christmas Day. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor, malt beverage, wine, any other alcoholic beverage, or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least 18 inches from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than four feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron, and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment licensed under this article shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-29. - Certain activities prohibited. 
    No person, firm, partnership, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-30. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, association, partnership or corporation to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments coming under this article without a permit so to do. No permit so issued shall condone or make legal any activity hereunder if such activity is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-31. - Operation of unlicensed premises unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult minimotion picture theater, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau or adult business or adult dancing establishments unless such business shall have a currently valid license or shall have made proper application for renewal within the time required therefor under this article, which license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-32. - Admission of minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a licensed premises. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-33. - Sales to minors unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give or to offer to sell, barter or give to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult business or adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-34. - Location. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment, business, or use shall be located within 1,000 feet, measured from the closest point of the real property on which the adult entertainment establishment is sought to be erected and operated in a straight line to the closest point of the real property of the following: 
(1)  Any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  A church, school, government owned or operated public facility, library, public park, or hospital; 
(3)  Any other adult entertainment establishment; 
(4)  An establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  If the adult entertainment establishment or the activity to which a measurement is required is a part of a tract of land occupied by other uses the measurements shall be from the closest point of the total tract of land and not the building in which the activities are located. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-35. - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than 18 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime that is a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, while employed as an adult entertainment establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime; and the terms "employed on the premises" and "work on any licensed premises" shall include as well work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than the licensed premises. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may work on a licensed premises, he shall file a notice with the city manager or his designee, of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city manager or his designee and shall receive approval of such employment from the city manager or his designee. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city manager or his designee requires, including a set of fingerprints, on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the licensed premises. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of such denial, apply to the city manager or his designee in writing for a hearing. The decision of the city manager or his designee after hearing may be appealed to the mayor and city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee of $50.00 shall accompany the notice of intended employment or a receipt of the city manager or his designee evidencing the payment of such fee at the time the notice is filed. 
(c)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this chapter, the ordinances of the city, laws and regulations of the state, or the rules and regulations of the city shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(d)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this section, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be licensed as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-36. - Application for permit. 
(a)  Any person, association, partnership or corporation desiring to obtain a permit to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on any adult entertainment establishment shall make application to the city manager or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council, shall be paid to the city manager or his designee to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this article. The city manager or his designee shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city manager or his designee at the time such application is submitted. 
(b)  The application for permit does not authorize the engaging in, operation of, conduct of or carrying on of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-37. - Application contents. 
    Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant; 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant; 
(3)  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each; 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 18 years of age; 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth; 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within the last six months; 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding; 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, had such license or permit for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation; 
(9)  All convictions, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions; 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the county clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply; 
(11)  The names and addresses of the owner and lessor of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of the lease or rental agreement; 
(12)  Such other identification and information as the police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified as required to be set forth in the application; 
(13)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, of any partners, or of any and all officers, of any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding, directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation; 
(14)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed; 
(15)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant; 
(16)  If the applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If the applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in this state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, last annual report, if any; 
(17)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the applicant if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The city manager or his designee shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms; 
(18)  Address of the premises to be licensed; 
(19)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and, if the applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copies of those documents giving such legal right; 
(20)  A plat by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated; 
(21)  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  The individual, if the applicant is an individual; 
b.  The manager or general partner, if a partnership; 
c.  The president of the corporation, if a corporation; 
d.  The chief administrative official, if any other organization or association. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-38. - Applicant to appear. 
    The applicant, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear at the city and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the aforementioned and described information. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-39. - Application; investigation. 
    The city shall have 30 days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city manager or his designee may grant the permit if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid; 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this article; 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders of the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of an offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the above-mentioned offenses, or convicted in any state of any offense which, if committed or attempted in this state, would have been punishable as one or more of the above-mentioned offenses, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude; 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment permit or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by this city or any other city located in or out of this state prior to the date of application; 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with all applicable laws, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age; 
(9)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not, within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this article to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities openly occur; 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a permit is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located too close to any church, school, library, governmental building or site or any other business restricted hereunder; 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or the United States; 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-40. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
(a)  No license provided by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes; 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(b)  Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall issue. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-41. - Application, license fees. 
    The application fee for all adult book stores, adult businesses or adult entertainment establishments in the city shall be $250.00, which is nonrefundable. The annual business license fee shall be $5,000.00. 
(Res. of 7-19-93) 
Sec. 10-42. - Permit-Refusal; appeal. 
    If the city, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, it shall notify the city manager or his designee of such opinion and, within 30 days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall, within ten days, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a permit may appeal such denial to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-43. - Same-Renewal. 
    Permits for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the permittees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment permits shall be established by resolution of the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-44. - Same-Nontransferable. 
    No adult entertainment establishment permit may be sold, transferred or assigned by a permittee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such permit, and such permit shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the permittee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such permit, and in such case the permit, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment permit issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a permit or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-45. - Change of location or name. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its permit until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the mayor and city council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the city manager or his designee and the zoning department. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations as contained in the city Code have been met. 
(b)  No permittee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his permit. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-46. - Appeal-Procedure. 
(a)  The permittee under this article shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit in writing a notice of appeal to the city manager or his designee. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the mayor and city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The city manager or his designee shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular mayor and city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for mayor and city council action. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-47. - Same-Determination of procedure. 
    When an appeal under this article is placed on the mayor and city council agenda, the mayor and city council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city manager or his designee to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law; 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The city manager or his designee shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-48. - Hearing. 
    Whenever the city manager or his designee has scheduled an appeal before the mayor and city council, at the time and date set therefor, the mayor and city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The mayor and city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the mayor and city council shall be final. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-49. - Powers of hearing officer. 
    The hearing officer appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this article may receive and rule on the admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-50. - Rules of evidence inapplicable. 
    The mayor and city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this article. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-51. - Hearing officer-Report. 
(a)  The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the mayor and city council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendations. All such reports shall be filed with the city manager or his designee and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city manager or his designee, with additional copies furnished to the chief of police. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular mayor and city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-52. - Same-Action by council. 
    The mayor and city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the mayor and city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing or for the taking of additional evidence on specific points; in either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this article; 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-53. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article shall be and the same is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action or actions, proceeding or proceedings for the abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such court as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted hereunder. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-54. - Cleaning of licensed premises. 
    Each premises licensed under this article shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the licensed premises. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the licensed premises to meet this requirement, and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire licensed premises. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-55. - Self-inspection of licensed premises. 
    The licensee of premises licensed under this article or his designated representative shall make sanitary inspections of the licensed premises at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the city manager or his designee. Each licensed premises shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-56. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
    A premises licensed under this article or any part thereof may be sealed by order of the city manager or his designee on his finding of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the city manager or his designee shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the licensed premises, a notice of the violation and order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the city manager or his designee may physically seal that portion of the licensed premises causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the city manager or his designee. The city manager or his designee shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "Unclean" or "Unsafe" as the case may be. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-57. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
    A premises licensed under this article or any part thereof may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Sec. 10-58. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. In addition to such fine or imprisonment, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued hereunder. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(1)) 
Chapter 14 - ANIMALS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 05-2006, adopted Feb. 6, 2006, repealed chapter 14, sections 14-1-14-15, in its entirety and replaced it with a new chapter 14, sections 14-1, 14-2, 14-26, 14-51-14-64. Former chapter 14 pertained to similar material and derived from Ord. of Sept. 18, 2000. 
Cross reference- Nuisances, § 50-26 et seq.; noise, § 50-76 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Georgia Animal Protection Act, O.C.G.A. § 4-11-1 et seq.; cruelty to animals, O.C.G.A. § 16-12-4; control of rabies, O.C.G.A. § 31-19-1 et seq.; authority to exercise animal control, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III(a)(3); Dangerous Dog Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20; Mercedes Law (vicious dogs), O.C.G.A. § 4-8-40 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - BIRDS 

Sec. 14-1. - City-designated bird sanctuary. 
    The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary and signs to that effect shall be posted at all entrances to the city. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-2. - Injuring, molesting birds prohibited; exception. 
    It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner, any bird or to rob bird nests; provided however, if starlings or sparrows or similar birds are found to be congregating in such numbers in a particular locality that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property in the opinion of the proper health authorities, then in such event said health authorities shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society or as many of said clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given at least three days' actual notice of the time and place of said meeting to the representatives of said clubs. If, as a result of said meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then said birds shall be destroyed in such numbers and in such manner as deemed advisable by said health authorities under the supervision of the chief of police. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Secs. 14-3-14-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - DOGS 

Sec. 14-26. - Provisions incorporated by reference. 
    The state dangerous dog control law as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 4-8-20 et seq. is by this reference incorporated in this section and made a part of this Code in as full and complete a manner and with like effect as though set out in full in this section. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Secs. 14-27-14-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ANIMAL CONTROL 

Sec. 14-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Abandoned animal. An animal shall be considered abandoned under the following conditions: 
(1)  Any animal placed upon public property or within a public building and left unattended or uncared for; 
(2)  Any animal placed upon private property of another without the express permission of the owner, custodian, or tenant and left unattended or uncared for; or 
(3)  Any animal left on the property of the owner or custodian of such animal for more than 36 hours unattended and without food and water. 
    Animal. Any type of domestic or exotic animal or fowl including, but not limited to, dogs and cats. 
    Animal control department (hereinafter "department"). The department responsible for administering and enforcing the provisions of this chapter. 
    Animal establishment. Any pet shop, kennel, grooming shop, auction, performing animal exhibition, or other facility engaged in the handling of animals, excluding licensed veterinarians and veterinary clinics and hospitals. 
    Animal nuisance. An animal shall be considered a nuisance if it: 
(1)  Damages, soils, defiles, or defecates on private property (other than the property of the owner of the animal), or public property and recreational areas; 
(2)  Causes unsanitary, dangerous, or offensive conditions; 
(3)  Causes a disturbance by excessive barking or other noisemaking; 
(4)  Molests, attacks, or interferes with persons on public or private property, unless the animal is a guard dog actively performing its duties while confined to the property of the owner or responsible person; 
(5)  Chases vehicles; 
(6)  Attacks other animals; or 
(7)  Runs uncontrolled. 
    Animal shelter. Any facility operated by any governmental entity, humane society, or other organization for the purpose of impounding or caring for animals held under the authority of this chapter or state law. 
    At large. An animal is considered at large when it is not under control as provided herein. 
    Auctions. Any place or facility where animals are regularly bought, sold, or traded, except for those facilities otherwise defined in this chapter. Individual sales of animals by owners are not auctions as defined in this chapter. 
    Cruelty. Any act, omission, or neglect whereby unjustifiable pain, suffering, maiming, or death may be caused or permitted to any animal as defined in this section. 
    Humane manner. Care of an animal including, but not limited to, adequate heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome fresh food, and access to fresh, clean, wholesome water at all times, consistent with the normal requirements and feeding habits of the animal's size, species, and breed. 
    Kennel. Any premises where any person engages in the business of boarding, breeding, buying, letting for hire, training for a fee, or selling animals. 
    Owner. Any person who has title to or the right to possession of an animal, including, but not limited to, the caretaker or custodian of any animal or person harboring or having control of an animal. An animal is deemed in a person's possession if it is fed or sheltered for three consecutive days or more. 
    Pet shop. Any person engaged in the business of buying or selling two or more species of live animals with the intent that they be kept as pets. 
    Spayed or neutered. Incapable of sexual reproduction. 
    Under control. Any animal shall be considered under control if it is confined to the premises of its owner, or is secured by a leash, chain, or lead of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from its owner when away from the premises of the owner. 
    Veterinary clinic or hospital. A clinic or hospital operated by a licensed veterinarian. 
    Vicious or dangerous animal. Any animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of one or more documented, provoked or unprovoked attacks or threats of attack of such severity as to cause property damage, physical injury, or significant mental trauma to the victim. Animal attacks on persons or other animals shall be documented by reporting such attacks to the county animal control office. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-52. - Purpose; scope. 
(a)  It is the intent of this chapter to make animal owners responsible and accountable for the actions, behavior and conditions of their animals. 
(b)  Nothing in this chapter shall be interpreted or applied so as to create any power or duty in conflict with the preemptive effect of any federal or state law. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-53. - Control of animals; compliance with zoning; confinement. 
(a)  An animal owners' premises shall be maintained in such a manner as not to constitute either a private nuisance to adjoining property owners or a nuisance to the public generally. Pens or enclosures in which animals are confined or maintained shall at all times be kept and maintained in a proper, clean, and sanitary condition so they are kept free from offensive odors which would disturb any person residing within a reasonable distance of the premises. The animals themselves shall be restrained in such a fashion that they shall not disturb such persons by making noise. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to have, control, or possess any pasture or enclosure for livestock or fowl in any fashion not authorized by the zoning ordinance of the city. Pens, stables or other structures used for housing livestock or fowl shall be located at least 100 feet from any residence or place of business. However - as set forth in Section 2.04.02(C) of the Unified Development Ordinance - persons may have, control, or possess up to six female chickens (i.e., hens) on properties zoned E-R, R-20, R-15, or R-10. Any such hens must be enclosed in a pen, coop, or other such structure, and any such pen, coop, or other such structure shall be located at least 25 feet from the nearest property line. 
(c)  (1)  Generally. 
a.  Generally an animal owner shall restrain his animal in such a way as to prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person, without the permission of that person. An animal may leave the property of the animal owner when accompanied by the animal owner, but the animal owner must have control over the animal and must prevent the animal from having access to the property of another person without the permission of that person, or from attacking, threatening, or harassing other persons. 
b.  An owner of a dog, cat, or any animal shall restrain said animal in such a manner, whether by leash, fence, pen, etc., which will insure that said animal is contained within the boundaries of the property owned or leased by owner of the animal. In all residentially zoned districts (including subdivisions and mobile home parks and/or subdivisions) dogs, cats, or any other animal shall be actively restrained as provided for herein in order to prevent their leaving the property of their owner, unless said animal is under the direct supervision and control of the owner of the animal or his designee. 
c.  An animal owner shall restrain his animal in such a manner as to prevent the animal from attacking, threatening, or harassing any person on the public right-of-way of the roads, streets, highways, and sidewalks in the city. 
(2)  Vicious or dangerous animals. Any owner of a vicious animal shall confine it within a building or secure enclosure and not release it unless it is securely muzzled and under restraint. Any vicious animal not secured as provided herein is hereby declared a nuisance and may be impounded pursuant of the provisions of this chapter and/or confined by the department for a period of 30 days. If an action is brought in any court of competent jurisdiction concerning the attack or attempt to attack by such animal, the period of confinement may be extended until the entry of a final order of disposition in such action. Further, in any prosecution of an owner or a responsible person of any vicious animal for any violation of this chapter, the court may, upon conviction entered against the owner or responsible person, order that the animal be humanely destroyed. 
(3)  Hunting dogs. Hunting dogs in the custody of persons hunting in accordance with state game and fish department laws, rules, and regulations are exempt from the mandates of this section. The owners of such dogs shall be civilly liable for any damage occasioned by the actions of their dogs. 
(4)  Animals in heat. Any owner or custodian shall confine any dog or cat in heat. 
(d)  It shall be unlawful for any person owning or having control of any chickens, ducks, horses, cows, goats, pigs, dogs, cats, or any other type of animal, livestock, or other fowl within the city to permit them to run at large or to be a menace or nuisance to that person's neighbors or the public in general. In regard to poultry and/or fowl as referenced herein, same shall be confined in an enclosure, housing, or pen of some sort to the extent possible. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06; Res. No. 07-2011, 8-1-11) 
Sec. 14-54. - Impoundment. 
    Any animal at large or otherwise in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be impounded in the animal shelter in a humane manner, for a period of not less than three days, in accordance with the following provisions: 
(1)  If within that time an animal so impounded has not been reclaimed by its owner in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, the animal shall become the absolute property of the department, which may convey ownership of the animal to any responsible person on any conditions that the department may prescribe or the department may humanely destroy the animal. 
(2)  An animal control officer may follow an animal that has been seen by that officer running at large onto private property to capture and impound the animal. No injunction, action, or claim for damages may be brought against the department or its officers, agents, or employees with respect to actions herein contemplated. 
(3)  The department shall make a reasonable effort to notify the owner of any animal impounded in the animal shelter that the animal has been impounded, the manner by which the animal may be reclaimed, and that the animal shall become the property of the department as provided herein. 
(4)  Following the impoundment of an animal found at large which has on it, its owner's address and prior to its destruction, the department shall use reasonable care to give the owner five days notice of the proposed destruction. 
(5)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the department may refuse to release any animal impounded in the animal shelter for rabies, contagious disease quarantine, or for use as evidence in a criminal prosecution for any time period as the department may determine. 
(6)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the department reasonably believes that destruction of the animal is necessary to prevent disease, injury, or overcrowding in the animal shelter, or to prevent the presence or threatened presence of contagious disease, the likelihood of danger or injury to humans or animals, or any other condition. 
(7)  Notwithstanding any provision of this chapter to the contrary, the department may humanely destroy any animal impounded in the animal shelter when the animal control department reasonably believes the animal has sustained an injury or disease which will likely result in maiming, prolonged and/or severe suffering or death. 
(8)  The department may set all appropriate fees pertaining to the care and impoundment of animals. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-55. - Rabies. 
(a)  Any person who knows that an animal, domestic or wild, is rabid or suspects an animal of having rabies, or knows that an animal has been bitten by a rabid animal, shall promptly report the information, to the extent known, to the state department of human resources and the department. 
(b)  It shall be the duty of the owner, the health department, physicians, hospitals, or any other person or agency gaining information that any domestic animal has been bitten or is probably infected with rabies, to impound the animal in the facility of a competent veterinarian within this county, where the animal shall be held for observation for any period of time as may be reasonably necessary to determine whether or not the animal is infected with rabies. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-56. - Adoption. 
    The department may convey ownership (permit adoption) of any animal which has become the property of the department to a responsible person subject to conditions prescribed by the department, including, but not limited to, the following: 
(1)  Payment of an adoption fee to be set by the department and any vaccination, licensing, or veterinary costs; 
(2)  Evidence that the animal has been, or will be, examined by a veterinarian and vaccinations against rabies and other disease administered; and 
(3)  Evidence that the animal has been, or will be, neutered or spayed. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-57. - Cruelty to animals. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, either by act or omission to: 
(1)  Overdrive, overload, overwork, torture, beat, mutilate, kill needlessly, carry, or confine in a vehicle in an inhumane manner, or otherwise mistreat, any animal; 
(2)  Fail to provide any animal with proper food and veterinary care; 
(3)  Fail to provide any animal with access to shelter to protect it from all types of weather, 24 hours daily; 
(4)  Fail to provide any animal access to good and wholesome fresh water at all times; 
(5)  Intentionally poison any animal; 
(6)  Allow or promote any fight between animals, or to allow or permit any fight in or upon any premises in that person's possession or under that person's control; 
(7)  Allow an animal to be kept in unsanitary conditions; or 
(8)  To knowingly or willingly permit or aid in the release of any animal on any property with the intention of abandoning the animal. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-58. - Vaccination. 
(a)  All animal owners within the city shall have their animals over three months of age, including both dogs and cats, inoculated for the prevention of rabies. 
(b)  The department may adopt any other rabies control regulations as it deems necessary for the protection of public health and safety. 
(c)  All regulations of the state department of human resources presently existing or as adopted in the future pertaining to rabies control and vaccination are incorporated herein by reference as though fully set forth in this chapter. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-59. - Animal establishments; prohibited conduct; inspection; standards for kennels and pet shops. 
(a)  Prohibited conduct. Any animal establishment shall not sell, trade, or give away any animal over three months of age unless the animal has been vaccinated as required by this chapter. 
(b)  Inspection. The animal control department shall be permitted to inspect any animal establishment and all animals and the premises where the animals are kept at any reasonable time during normal business hours to ensure compliance with all provisions of this chapter. 
(c)  Standard for animal establishments and pet shops. 
(1)  All animal establishments shall, in addition to the other requirements of this chapter, comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial or revocation of a permit. Standards for animal establishments are as follows: 
a.  Enclosures must be provided which shall allow adequate protection against weather extremes. Floors of buildings, runs, and walls shall be of an impervious material to permit proper cleaning and disinfection; 
b.  Building temperatures shall be maintained at a comfortable level to ensure adequate ventilation; 
c.  Each animal shall have sufficient space to stand up, lie down, and turn around without touching the sides or top of cages; 
d.  Cages are to be of a material and construction that permit cleaning and sanitizing; 
e.  Cage floors shall be of concrete, unless radiantly heated, and shall have a resting board or some type of bedding; 
f.  Runs shall provide an adequate exercise area and protection from the weather. Runs shall have an impervious surface; 
g.  All animal quarters and runs are to be kept clean, dry, and in a sanitary condition; 
h.  The food shall be free from contamination, and shall be wholesome, palatable, and of sufficient quantity and nutritive value to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal; and, 
i.  All animals shall have fresh water available at all times. 
(2)  All pet shops, including pet shops operated in conjunction with another holding facility, shall (in addition to the other requirements of this chapter) comply with the minimum standards of this section. Failure to meet these standards shall be grounds for denial of a permit or revocation of a permit. Standards for pet shops are as follows: 
a.  Hot water at a minimum temperature of 160 degrees shall be available for washing and disinfection. Cold water shall be easily accessible in all parts of the shop. Fresh water for consumption shall be available to all species of animals at all times. Containers are to be cleaned and disinfected each day. 
b.  The room temperature of the shop shall be maintained at a level that is healthy for every species of animal kept in the shop. 
c.  All cages and enclosures are to be of a nonporous material for easy cleaning and disinfecting. Each cage must be of sufficient size that the animal will have room to stand, turn, and stretch out to the animal's full length. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-60. - Interference with duties of department; right of entry onto property and into vehicles; equipment. 
(a)  No person shall interfere with, hinder, or molest the department or any other officer in the performance of its duty or seek to release any animal in the custody of the department, except as herein provided. 
(b)  The animal control officers, sheriff's deputies, and other enforcement officers of the county are hereby authorized to enter upon any premises or parcel of land for the purpose of seizing and impounding any animal found therein or thereon to be in violation of this chapter, including but not limited to an animal that has bitten a person within ten days. 
(c)  The department may use any force necessary to remove any animal locked in a closed vehicle between the dates of May 1 and September 13. The operator of the vehicle will be charged with cruelty to animals as defined in this chapter. No injunction or claim for damages may be placed against the department or its officers for this action. 
(d)  The animal department is authorized to employ any equipment it deems necessary to enforce the provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, humane wire box traps, and the department may, subject to conditions it may determine, lend such traps or other equipment to private persons for the purpose of preventing nuisances resulting from animals at large. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-61. - Dead animals. 
    Any dead animal shall be properly disposed of by its owner, either by proper burial or by taking said animals(s) to any place authorized by law to dispose of same within 24 hours after the discovery of the animal by its owner. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-62. - Enforcement; jurisdiction; summons. 
    Pursuant to an intergovernmental agreement between the city and the county relative to animal control and other matters, the city police department, the animal control officers of the county and the country sheriff's office have dual enforcement authority relative to enforcement of this chapter within the territorial limits of the city. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-63. - Records. 
    It shall be the duty of the department to keep, or cause to be kept, accurate and detailed records of the impoundment and disposition of all animals coming into its custody. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Sec. 14-64. - Penalties for violations. 
    Any person convicted of a violation of this chapter shall be punished as authorized by the City Codes of the city which may include a fine of not less than $25.00, nor more than $1,000.00 and/or serve a jail sentence not in excess of 60 days and/or perform public service work not to exceed 100 hours as directed by the court which may include performance of public service at the animal shelter facility of the county, or any combination thereof. 
    If such violation is continued, each day's violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Res. No. 05-2006, 2-6-06) 
Chapter 18 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-196 et seq.; cable communications, ch. 26; environment, ch. 50; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 50-101 et seq.; fire protection and prevention, ch. 54; floods, ch. 58; historical preservation, ch. 62; signs, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; excavations, § 82-66 et seq.; utilities, ch. 94; subdivisions, app. A. 
State Law reference- Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III(a)(12); statewide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 18-1. - Self-inspection of sewer lines by plumbers and utility contractors. 
    The mayor and city council pursuant to section 3 of Act No. 1046 enacted by the general assembly of the state during the 1996 session of the legislature and signed by the governor on April 25, 1996, do hereby exempt the city from the provision of the act codified as O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), pertaining to self-inspection of sewer lines by plumbers and utility contractors. 
(Res. of 6-3-96) 
Secs. 18-2-18-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Fire protection and prevention, ch. 54. 
State Law reference- Authority of city or county to provide codes, including building, housing, plumbing and electrical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III(a)(12); statewide application of minimum standard codes, codes requiring adoption by municipality or county, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26. 

Sec. 18-26. - Adoption of technical codes. 
(a)  The following technical building and construction codes, including appendices where noted, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-20 are adopted by reference as the official codes of the city and may be amended for later editions as required by the Georgia Uniform Codes Act, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25: 
(1)  Standard Building Code, including appendix F; 
(2)  Standard Gas Code, including appendices A, B, C; 
(3)  Standard Mechanical Code, including appendix A; 
(4)  Standard Plumbing Code, including appendices C, E, F, and J, section 903 (903.1); 
(5)  National Electrical Code; 
(6)  Standard Fire Prevention Code; 
(7)  Council of American Building Officials Model Energy Code; 
(8)  Council of American Building Officials One and Two Family Dwelling Code, including appendices A, B, C, G, K, with the exception of part VII, chapters 25 through 32, and part VIII, chapters 33 through 43 of such code; 
(9)  Standard Housing Code; 
(10)  Standard Amusement Code; 
(11)  Standard Existing Building Code; 
(12)  Standard Swimming Pool Code; and 
(13)  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code. 
(b)  The fees required for permits and enforcement shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(c)  Such codes shall be administered and enforced under the administrative responsibility of the city manager. 
(Code 1975, §§ 5-1-5-115, 11-1-11-3; Res. of 9-16-91; Ord. of 10-21-96; Amd. of 1-7-02) 
Secs. 18-27-18-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FLOW-RATE RESTRICTIONS ON PLUMBING FIXTURES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Solid waste, ch. 78. 
State Law reference- Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-3. 

Sec. 18-46. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
    Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
    Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 18-47. - Enforcement. 
(a)  This article shall be enforced by the office of the building official. Citations for violations may be issued by the building official of the city. 
(b)  Any person, corporation, partnership or other entity violating this article shall be tried before the municipal court of the city. Upon conviction, a violation of this article may be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
Sec. 18-48. - Prohibited fixtures. 
    On or after July 1, 1991, no construction may be initiated within the city for any building of any type which: 
(1)  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve, or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1.6 gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this subsection shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
(2)  Employs a showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2.5 gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of 1.0 gallons of water per flush; 
(4)  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.0 gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2.5 gallons of water per minute. 
Sec. 18-49. - When effective. 
    The requirements of section 18-48 shall apply to any construction initiated after July 1, 1991, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
Sec. 18-50. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this article when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles in schools, institutions, etc., not residential. 
(b)  The owner, or his agent, of a building undergoing new construction or repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsections (a)(2), (3) or (4) of this section shall apply for such exemption at the office of the building official. A fee as established by the city council from time to time shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
Secs. 18-51-18-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - STREET NUMBERS 

Sec. 18-61. - Display of street numbers required. 
    Every house, mobile home, apartment, business or other building having a street number assigned to it under the system of numbering in the City of Carrollton shall display such number in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this section. Mobile home parks and apartment complexes shall also be required to have each individual pad, lot number or apartment displayed in a readily visible manner and in compliance with the requirements of this article. Said lot, pad or apartment numbers shall be in sequence unless directional signs are provided for number not in sequence. 
(Ord. of 12-15-97) 
Sec. 18-62. - Method of display. 
    Assigned street numbers may be affixed to the house, apartment, business or other building itself, provided that such house, apartment, business or other building is not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge or edge of the travel way of the street in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, and the number is readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. Street numbers may also be placed on mail boxes or signs located on the premises in front of the house, apartment, business or other building, provided such signs are of a durable type and are located not more than 50 feet from the curbline, pavement edge or edge of the travel way of the street in front of the property, and provided that the numbers on such sign shall be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction. 
    If the house, apartment, business or other building to be numbered is more than 50 feet from the curb, pavement edge or edge of the travel way of the street in front of the property, or if for any reason a street number affixed to the building would not be readily visible from the street by persons traveling along the street in each direction, the street number shall not be displayed on the building, but must be displayed on a sign or mailbox complying with the requirements of this section. 
(Ord. of 12-15-97) 
Sec. 18-63. - Size, condition of numbers. 
    Street numbers affixed to buildings or signs shall be a minimum of four inches in height. Those affixed to mail boxes in the manner specified in this article shall be a minimum of two inches in height. All such signs shall be of a color contrasting to the background so as to be clearly visible. Street numbers and signs to which they are affixed shall be maintained at all times in good condition. 
(Ord. of 12-15-97) 
Sec. 18-64. - Duty of owner; violations. 
    The obligation of complying with the provisions of this section shall be upon the owner of the property. The property owner shall have 90 days from the effective date of this article to comply with the provisions of same. If the provisions of this section shall be found to have been violated, notice shall be given to the owner of the property, or his agent, specifying the manner in which this section is being violated, and giving the owner 30 days to bring the property into compliance. Each day a violation of this section continues after the expiration date of said 30-day period shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punishable as provided by this article. 
(Ord. of 12-15-97) 
Sec. 18-65. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    The responsibility for making the inspections provided for in this section, and for the enforcement of the provisions hereof, shall rest upon the building official and the agents and employees of such department are hereby authorized and empowered to make cases and issue summonses for violations. However, all law enforcement agencies providing services in the City of Carrollton are authorized to write warnings to the property owner in violation of this section. Any such warnings issued shall be forwarded to the building official for appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 12-15-97) 
Sec. 18-66. - Penalties. 
    Violators determined to be in violation of this Ordinance shall be subject to a fine of not less than $100.00 per violation and any other penalties which may be imposed by law by the Municipal Court Judge of the City of Carrollton. 
(Ord. of 12-15-97) 
Sec. 18-67. - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this article shall be January 1, 1998. 
(Ord. of 12-15-97) 
Chapter 22 - BUSINESSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq.; cable communications, ch. 26; signs, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; taxation, ch. 86; vehicles for hire, ch. 98; zoning, app. B. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 22-1-22-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BUSINESS OCCUPATION TAXES AND REGULATORY FEES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; taxation, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- Business and occupation taxes, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq. 

Sec. 22-26. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Administrative fee means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    Dominant line means the type of business activity, within a multiple line business, from which the business derives its largest amount of gross receipts. 
    Gross receipts. 
(1)  Gross receipts means the total revenue of the business or practitioner for the period, including without limitation the following: 
a.  Total income without deduction for the cost of goods or expenses incurred; 
b.  Gain from trading in stocks, bonds, capital assets or instruments of indebtedness; 
c.  Proceeds from commissions on the sale of property, goods or services; 
d.  Proceeds from fees for services rendered; and 
e.  Proceeds from rent, interest, royalty or dividend income. 
(2)  Gross receipts shall not include the following: 
a.  Sales, use or excise tax. 
b.  Sales returns, allowances and discounts. 
c.  Interorganizational sales or transfers between or among the units of a parent-subsidiary controlled group of corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(1), or between or among the units of a brother-sister controlled group or corporations as defined by 26 U.S.C. § 1563(a)(2). 
d.  Payments made to a subcontractor or an independent agent. 
e.  Governmental and foundation grants, charitable contributions or the interest income derived from such funds received by a nonprofit organization which employees salaried practitioners otherwise covered by this article, if such funds constitute 80 percent or more of the organization's receipts. 
f.  Proceeds from sales to customers outside the state. 
    Location or office shall include any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction worksite which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which has a location or office. 
    Occupation tax means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations, sole practitioners or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. The term "occupation tax" as used in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes and is not to be considered as a regulatory fee. 
    Person includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit or any other form of business organization, but specifically excludes charitable nonprofit organizations which qualify as such under the Internal Revenue Code of the United States of America. 
    Practitioner of profession or occupation means one who by state law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation. Practitioners of professions and occupations shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business, if the business pays an occupation tax. 
    Regulatory fees means payments, whether designated as license fees, permit fees or by another name, which are required by a local government as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession or business. The amount of a regulatory fee shall approximate the reasonable cost of the actual regulatory activity performed by the city. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. Development impact fees as defined by O.C.G.A. § 36-71-2(8) or other costs or conditions of zoning or land development are not regulatory fees. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-37) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
State Law reference- Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5. 
Sec. 22-27. - Required for business dealings in the city; display of registration. 
    For the year 1996 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in any business, trade, profession or occupation in the city, whether with a location in the city or in the case of an out-of-state business with no location in the state exerting substantial efforts within the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation. The tax and any applicable registration shall be displayed in a conspicuous place in the place of business, if the taxpayer has a permanent business location in the city. It the taxpayer has no permanent business location in the city, such business tax registration shall be shown to the city clerk or designated representatives. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-36) 
State Law reference- Authority to levy occupation tax, O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-6, 48-13-7. 
Sec. 22-28. - Tax levied, restrictions. 
(a)  An occupation tax shall be levied upon those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices in the city and/or upon the applicable out-of-state businesses with no location or office in the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 based upon gross receipts of the business or practitioner in combination with the profitability ratio for the type of business, profession or occupation as measured by nationwide averages derived from statistics, classifications or other information published by the U.S. Office of Management and Budget, the U.S. Internal Revenue Service or successor agencies of the United States. 
(b)  The tax rate determined by profitability ratios in combination with gross receipts for each business, trade, profession or occupation shall be as follows and will be developed and updated from time to time by the city clerk: 
Profitability Ratio/ 
Tax Class Tax Rate per $1,000.00 
of Gross Receipts 1 0.9500 2 0.9501 3 0.9502 4 0.9503 5 0.9504 6 0.9505 7 1.0000  
(c)  Payment; exemptions. 
(1)  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
(2)  No occupation tax will be required upon more than 100 percent of a business' gross receipts. 
(3)  No occupation tax will be required on receipts on which such tax has been levied in other localities or states. 
(4)  An occupation tax shall be required from real estate brokers, agents, or companies whose offices are located outside the city and who sell property inside the city in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 48-13-17, as amended. 
(5)  An occupation tax shall not be levied in any other manner except as described in this section. 
(6)  Occupation taxes are limited to the gross receipts earned in the state. 
(7)  Out-of-state businesses with no location in this state shall be assessed occupation taxes based on the gross receipts of the business as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7 (see the definition gross receipts in section 22-26) which are reasonably attributed to sales or services in the state. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-39; Ord. of 2-19-96(1); Res. No. 13-2017, 12-4-17) 
Sec. 22-29. - Administrative and regulatory fee structure; tax structure. 
(a)  A nonprorated, nonrefundable administrative fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be required on all business and occupation tax accounts for the initial start-up, renewal or reopening of those accounts. 
(b)  A regulatory fee will be imposed as provided under O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9 on those applicable businesses. A regulatory fee may not include an administrative fee. 
(c)  The regulatory fee schedule for persons in occupations and professions is as follows: 
Profit Ratios Tax Class  0.84-  2.84 1  3.15-  3.98 2  4.03-  4.80 3  5.00-  5.89 4  6.10-  6.77 5  7.14-  9.09 6 10.13-217.51 7  
Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes 
Ranked According to Nationwide Averages of Profitability Ratios 
SIC Profit 
Ratio Tax 
Class 55 0.84 1 45 1.26 1 54 1.80 1 50 1.82 1 51 1.82 1 47 2.29 1 99 2.30 1 52 2.45 1 15 2.50 1 57 2.55 1 37 2.71 1 42 2.74 1 86 2.75 1 59 2.77 1 41 2.84 1 53 3.15 2 17 3.28 2 75 3.29 2 22 3.39 2 80 3.41 2 58 3.47 2 83 3.68 2 12 3.68 2 11 3.68 2 24 3.75 2 70 3.75 2 16 3.76 2 56 3.83 2 33 3.90 2 25 3.98 2 63 4.03 3  8 4.12 3  7 4.12 3  9 4.12 3 31 4.14 3 78 4.18 3 30 4.27 3 23 4.47 3 20 4.64 3 73 4.75 3 40 4.75 3 76 4.80 3 82 5.00 4 34 5.18 4 72 5.29 4 01 5.43 4 02 5.43 4 39 5.44 4 89 5.89 4 84 6.10 5 32 6.12 5 27 6.28 5 14 6.31 5 26 6.39 5 36 6.44 5 81 6.49 5 29 6.56 5 87 6.77 5 62 7.14 6 49 7.17 6 79 7.21 6 38 7.90 6 35 8.04 6 64 8.31 6 48 8.51 6 65 9.09 6 28 10.13 7 10 10.77 7 13 11.67 7 21 13.48 7 61 31.60 7 46 39.38 7 60 41.00 7 67 217.51 7  
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-38, app. A) 
Sec. 22-30. - Paying tax of business with no location in the state. 
    Registration and assessment of an occupation tax is hereby imposed on those businesses and practitioners of professions with no location or office in the state if the business largest dollar volume of business in the state is in the city, and the business or practitioner: 
(1)  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the jurisdiction of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
(2)  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-40) 
Sec. 22-31. - Dominant line of business to be identified on business registration. 
    The business registration of each business operated in the city shall identify the dominant line of business that the business conducts. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-41) 
Sec. 22-32. - Separate places of business. 
    Where a person conducts business at more than one fixed location, each location or place shall be considered a separate business for the purpose of occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-42) 
Sec. 22-33. - Professionals as classified in state law. 
    Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c)(1) through (18) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
(1)  The occupation tax based on gross receipts combined with profitability ratios as set forth in section 22-28. 
(2)  A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per practitioner who is licensed to provide the service, such tax to be paid for the practitioner's city office or location, provided, however, that a practitioner paying according to this subsection shall not be required to provide information to the local government relating to the gross receipts of the business or practitioner. The per-practitioner fee applies to each person in the business who qualifies as a practitioner under the state's regulatory guidelines and framework. 
This election is to be made on an annual basis and must be done by November 1 of each year. Should this election not be made by November 1, the occupation tax officer will apply the per-practitioner rate set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-43) 
Sec. 22-34. - Practitioners exclusively practicing for a government. 
    Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, instrumentalities of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state shall not be required to obtain a license or pay an occupation tax for that practice. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-44) 
Sec. 22-35. - Purpose and scope of tax. 
    The occupation tax levied in this article is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any such profession, trade or calling. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-5 to 48-13-26. All other applicable businesses and occupations are taxed by the local government pursuant to the pertinent general and/or local law and ordinance. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-45) 
Sec. 22-36. - When tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such occupation tax shall be for the calendar year 1996 and succeeding calendar years thereafter unless otherwise specifically provided. The registration and occupation tax shall be payable January 1 of each year and shall, if not paid by March 15 of each year, be subject to a ten percent penalty for delinquency, in addition to a 1.5 percent penalty for each succeeding month thereafter. The tax required for any member of the State Bar of Georgia for the initial year of practice shall be due 75 days from the beginning of practice. On any new profession, trade or calling begun in the city in 1996 or succeeding years thereafter, the registration and tax shall be delinquent if not obtained immediately upon beginning business and a ten percent penalty imposed. The tax registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the city clerk, and if any person whose duty it is to obtain a registration shall, after the registration or occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kinds of professions, trades or callings subject to this article without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall, upon conviction by the municipal court judge, be punished as provided in section 1-11. The punishment provisions of this section shall not apply to any profession whose practice is regulated by the Supreme Court of Georgia. 
(b)  In addition to the remedies set forth in subsection (a) of this section, the city clerk may proceed to collect in the same manner as provided by law for tax executions. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-46; Ord. of 11-17-97) 
Sec. 22-37. - Allocation of gross receipts of business with multiple intrastate or interstate locations. 
    For those businesses that have multiple locations inside and outside of the city where the gross receipts can be allocated to each location, the gross receipts used to determine the occupation tax assessed will be those gross receipts attributed to each city location. Where the dollar amount of gross receipts attributed locally cannot be determined in those businesses with multiple locations, the total gross receipts will be divided by the total number of locations in the city and elsewhere and allotted to those locations. Upon request, the business or practitioner with a location or office situated in more than one jurisdiction shall provide to the city the following: 
(1)  Financial information necessary to allocate the gross receipts of the business or practitioner; and 
(2)  Information relating to the allocation of the business' or practitioner's gross receipts by other local governments. 
Where the business has locations outside of the city and taxation is levied for a criteria other than gross receipts in the other local governments, the city shall not assess more than the allotted share of gross receipts for the local operation. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-47) 
Sec. 22-38. - Exemption on grounds that business is operated for charitable purpose. 
    No business on which a business registration or occupation tax is levied by the article shall be exempt from such registration or tax on the grounds that such business is operated for a charitable purpose, unless 100 percent of the entire proceeds from the business are devoted to such purpose. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-48) 
Sec. 22-39. - State registration evidence required, display. 
(a)  Each person who is licensed by the secretary of state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before the city registration may be issued. 
(b)  Each person who is licensed by the state shall post the state license in a conspicuous place in the licensee's place of business and shall keep the license there at all times while the license remains valid. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-49) 
Sec. 22-40. - Evidence of qualification required, if applicable. 
    Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of a city business registration, show evidence that such requirements have been met. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-50) 
Sec. 22-41. - Liability of officers and agents; registration required; failure to obtain. 
    All persons subject to the occupation tax levy pursuant to this article shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for such business as described in this article, and in default thereof the officer or agent soliciting for or representing such persons shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons who fail to obtain a registration. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall likewise obtain the registration provided for in this section before commencing the business, and any person transacting, or offering to transact in the city, any of the kinds of businesses, trades, professions or occupations without first having so obtained such registration shall be subject to penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-51) 
Sec. 22-42. - When registration and tax due and payable; effect of transacting business when tax delinquent. 
(a)  Each such registration shall be for the calendar year in which the registration was obtained unless otherwise specifically provided. There is hereby imposed a penalty upon each business which fails to apply for and obtain an appropriate business registration and pay all tax and fees as provided in this article by March 15 of each year hereafter. Every person commencing business in the city after January 1 of each year shall obtain the registration required before commencing such business. Any person transacting or offering to transact in the city any business, trade, profession or occupation without first having obtained such registration shall be subject to the penalties set out in this article. Such penalties shall be in addition to all other penalties, civil and criminal, provided in this article; and may be collected by the remedies provided for in the article for collection of the occupation tax, and shall have the same lien and priority as the occupation tax to which the penalty is applied. 
(b)  The registration provided for in this section shall be issued by the city clerk, and if any person whose duty is to obtain a registration shall, after the occupation tax becomes delinquent, transact or offer to transact, in the city, any of the kinds of businesses, trades, professions or occupations without having first obtained such registration, such offender shall be subject to the penalties provided thereof. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-52) 
Sec. 22-43. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction before the municipal court judge, be punished as provided in section 1-11, at the discretion of the municipal court judge. The penalties provided herein shall not apply to any profession whose practice is regulated by the Supreme Court of Georgia. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-53; Ord. of 11-17-97) 
Sec. 22-44. - City clerk; subpoena and arrest powers. 
    The city clerk or his designated representatives shall have full subpoena powers in conjunction with any violation or other enforcement/administrative purposes pertaining to this article for 1996 and succeeding years. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-54) 
Sec. 22-45. - Businesses not covered by this article. 
    The following businesses are not covered by the provisions of this article but may be assessed an occupation tax or other type of tax pursuant to the provisions of other general laws of the state or by local law: 
(1)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission. 
(2)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. tit. 46, ch. 3. 
(3)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness. 
(4)  Cooperative marketing associations governed by O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105. 
(5)  Insurance companies governed by O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8 et seq. 
(6)  Motor common carriers governed by O.C.G.A. § 46-7-15. 
(7)  Those businesses governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; businesses that purchase carload lots of guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal and hulls. 
(8)  Agricultural products and livestock raised in the state governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356. 
(9)  Depository financial institutions governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(10)  Facilities operated by a charitable trust governed by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-55. 
(11)  Nonprofit organizations and state and local authorities. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-55) 
Sec. 22-46. - Exclusion by statute. 
    An occupation tax shall not apply to the gross receipts of any part of a business where such levy is prohibited or exempted by laws of the state or of the United States. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-56) 
Sec. 22-47. - Filing of returns showing gross receipts for preceding year; determination of estimated and final taxes. 
(a)  All occupation taxes levied under this article are levied on the amount of business to be transacted during the current calendar year. However, for the convenience of both the city and the taxpayer, each business subject to the occupation tax levied in section 22-38 shall, on or before the dates hereinafter set forth, file with the city clerk the return hereinafter specifically provided for, showing the gross receipts of that business during the preceding calendar year. This return shall be used as the basis for making estimated payments on the occupation tax for the current calendar year. The actual and final amount of tax levied for business transacted in the current calendar year shall be paid in accordance with a final return to be made after the end of the year, in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. 
(b)  The owner, proprietor, manager or secretary officer of the business subject to the occupation tax of the current calendar year shall, at the end of the preceding year, and on or before November 1 of the current calendar year, file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by the clerk, a signed return setting forth the amount of gross receipts of such business for the entire preceding calendar year. This return will be used to determine the final tax for the calendar year just completed and as an estimate of the gross receipts and occupation tax for the current year. 
(c)  Where a business subject to the occupation tax for the calendar year has been conducted for only a part of the preceding year, the amount of gross receipts for such part shall be reported in the return. The return shall also show a figure putting the receipts for such part of a year on an annual basis with the part-year receipts bearing the same ratio to the whole-year gross receipts as the part year bears to the whole year. The figure shall be used as the estimate of the gross receipts of the business for the current calendar year in establishing the business tax liability. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-57) 
Sec. 22-48. - Filing of returns showing actual gross receipts; procedure where taxes overpaid or underpaid. 
(a)  On or before November 1 of each year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for said occupation tax levied for the year shall file with the city clerk, on a form furnished by the city clerk, a signed return setting forth the actual amount of the gross receipts of such business during the preceding calendar year. 
(b)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of the tax provided for in this article, is less than the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by the business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 22-47, the difference in the amount shall be due and payable by the taxpayer to the city on December 31 of the current year and delinquent if not paid on or before such date. 
(c)  If the amount of the occupation tax for the preceding year based on the return provided for in this section and on the rate of such tax provided for in this article exceeds the amount of occupation tax theretofore paid by such business based on the estimate filed pursuant to section 22-47, the difference in such amount shall be refundable by the city to the taxpayer; or, if such business continues to be conducted in the city during the current year, such difference in amount may be credited by the city on the amount of occupation tax to be paid to the city by such business for the current year. This election is to be taken by the city or taxpayer. 
(Ord. of 13-4-95, § 19-58) 
Sec. 22-49. - When tax due and payable. 
    The amount of occupation tax shall be payable to the city, at the office of the city clerk, on January 1 of each year and is delinquent if not paid on or before March 15 of each year. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-59) 
Sec. 22-50. - Payment of tax by newly established businesses. 
    In the case of a business subject to occupation tax for a calendar year, which was not conducted for any period of time in the corporate limits of the city in the preceding year, the owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of the business liable for occupation tax shall estimate the gross volume of revenue from commencing date to the end of the calendar year, and that estimate shall be the basis for the initial occupation tax subject to adjustment of the actual and final amount as per section 22-47. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-60) 
Sec. 22-51. - More than one place or line of business. 
    Where a business is operated at more than one place or where the business includes more than one line, such business shall be required to obtain the necessary registration for each location and line and pay an occupation tax in accordance with the prevailing taxing method and tax rate for each location and line. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-61) 
Sec. 22-52. - Returns confidential. 
    Except in the case of judicial proceedings or other proceedings necessary to collect the occupation tax hereby levied, it shall be unlawful for any officer, employee, agent or clerk of the city, or any other person, to divulge or make known in any manner the amount of gross receipts or any particulars set forth or disclosed in any occupation tax return required under this article. All contents of such return shall be confidential and open only to the officials, employees, agents or clerks of the city using such returns for the purpose of this occupation tax levy and the collection of the tax. Independent auditors or bookkeepers employed by the city shall be classed as "employees." Nothing in this section shall be construed to prohibit the publication by city officials of statistics, so classified as to prevent the identification of particular reports or returns and items thereof; or in the inspection of the records by duly qualified employees of the tax departments of the state, the United States and other local governments. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-62) 
Sec. 22-53. - Inspections of books and records. 
    In any case the city clerk, through his officers, agents, employees or representatives, may inspect the books of the business for which the returns are made. The city clerk shall have the right to inspect the books or records for the business of which the return was made in the city, and upon demand of the city clerk such books or records shall be submitted for inspection by a representative of the city within 30 days. Failure of submission of such books or records within 30 days shall be grounds for revocation of the tax registration currently existing to do business in the city. Adequate records shall be kept in the city for examination by the city clerk at that officer's discretion. If, after examination of the books or records, it is determined that a deficiency occurs as a result of underreporting, a penalty of 125 percent of the prime interest rate times the amount deficient will be assessed for the period delinquent. For purposes of this section, the prime interest rate shall be that which is published by The Wall Street Journal on the first business day of the year in which the underreporting is identified. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-63) 
Sec. 22-54. - Revocation of registration. 
    Upon the failure of any business to pay the occupation tax or any part thereof before it becomes delinquent, or upon failure to make any of such returns within the time required in this article, or upon failure to make a true return, or upon failure to amend a return to set forth the truth, or upon failure to permit inspection of its books as provided in this article, any business tax registration granted by the city under this article permitting the owner of such business for the current year shall be, ipso facto, revoked. No new business tax registration shall be granted by the city for the operation of a business for which any part of the occupation tax provided for in this article is at that time unpaid, or to an individual, firm or corporation who has failed to submit adequate records as requested by the city clerk in accordance with provisions found in section 22-48. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-64) 
Sec. 22-55. - Noncompliance. 
    Any persons, their managers, agents or employees, who do business in the city after the registration for such business has been revoked as provided in this article, are hereby required to make occupation tax returns, and who fail to make such returns within the time and in the manner provided in this article, who refuse to amend such returns so as to set forth the truth, or who shall make false returns; and any persons, their managers, agents or employees who refuse to permit an inspection of books in their charge when the officers, agents, employees or representatives of the city request such inspection, during business hours, for the purpose of determining the accuracy of the returns provided for in this article, shall be subject to penalties provided in this article. In the case of those practitioners where the local government cannot suspend the right of the practitioner to conduct business, the imposition of civil penalties shall be permitted and pursued by the local government in the case of delinquent occupation tax. These penalties may consist of either a percentage of the amount due or a flat fee fine. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-65) 
Sec. 22-56. - Lien for delinquent tax. 
    In addition to the other remedies provided in this article for the collection of the occupation tax levied in this article, the city clerk, upon any tax becoming delinquent and remaining unpaid, may issue execution for the correct amount of the tax against the persons, partnership, or corporation liable for the tax, which execution shall bear interest at the rate of 12 percent per annum from the date when such tax or installment becomes delinquent, and the general lien shall cover all property in the city of the person, partnership or corporation liable for the tax, all as provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state. The lien of the occupation tax shall become fixed on and date from the time when such tax or any installment thereof becomes delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon the property of defendant located in the jurisdiction, and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, with interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be had as is provided by the ordinances and Charter of the city and the laws of the state, and the defendant in the execution shall have rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality and otherwise, which are provided by the applicable laws in regard to tax executions. When a nulla bona entry has been entered by proper authority upon an execution issued by the city clerk against any person defaulting on the occupation tax, the person against whom the entry was made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatsoever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the entry of nulla bona has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due him as though he had never defaulted in the payment of the taxes. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-66) 
Sec. 22-57. - Amendment, repeal of article. 
    This article shall be subject to amendment or repeal, in whole or in part, at any time, and no such amendment or repeal shall be construed to deny the right of the city to assess and collect any of the taxes or other charges prescribed. Such amendment may increase or lower the amounts and tax rates of any occupation and may change the classification thereof. The payment of any occupation tax provided for shall not be construed as prohibiting the levy or collection by the city of additional occupation taxes upon the same person, property or business. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-67) 
Sec. 22-58. - Application of article to prior ordinance. 
    This article does not repeal or affect the force of any part of any ordinance heretofore passed where taxes levied under such prior ordinance have not been paid in full. So much and such parts of ordinances heretofore and hereinafter passed as provided for the issuing and enforcing of execution for any tax or assessment required by such ordinance, or that imposed fines or penalties for the nonpayment of such tax, or for failure to pay regulatory fees provided for in such ordinance or failure to comply with any other provisions of this article shall continue and remain in force until such tax, regulatory fee or assessment shall be fully paid. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-68) 
Sec. 22-59. - Enforcement. 
    It is hereby made the duty of the city clerk or designated representatives to see that the provisions of this article relating to occupation taxes are observed; and to summon all violators of the same to appear before the court. It is hereby made the further duty of the city clerk or designated representatives to inspect all registrations issued by the city, as often as in their judgment it may seem necessary to determine whether the registration held is the proper one for the business sought to be transacted thereunder. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-69) 
Sec. 22-60. - Article to remain in full force and effect. 
    This article shall remain in full force and effect until changed by amendment adopted by the city council. All provisions hereto relating to any form of tax levied in this article shall remain in full force and effect until such taxes have been paid in full. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-70) 
Sec. 22-61. - Public hearing for use of additional revenue. 
    In any year when revenue from occupation taxes is greater than revenue from occupation taxes for the preceding year, the city shall hold one or more public hearings as a part of the process of determining how to use the additional revenue. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-71) 
Sec. 22-62. - Option to establish exemption or reduction in tax. 
    Notwithstanding any other provision of this article, the mayor and city council may by subsequent ordinance or resolution provide for an exemption or reduction in occupation tax or a credit against occupation tax owed to one or more types of businesses or practitioners of occupations or professions as part of a plan for economic development or attracting or encouraging or maintaining selected types of businesses or practitioners of selected occupations or professions. Such exemptions or reductions in occupation tax shall not be arbitrary or capricious. 
(Ord. of 12-4-95, § 19-72) 
Secs. 22-63-22-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Taxation, ch. 86. 
State Law reference- County and municipal corporation tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; county and municipal corporation tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. 

Sec. 22-81. - License fees. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in an amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by section 22-82 which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is hereby levied a license fee in the amount as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. For the purposes of this article, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5. 
(Ord. of 10-17-94, § 1, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 22-82. - License fee for additional business locations. 
    For each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee pursuant to this section, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer for insurance, such insurer shall pay an additional license fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per location for each year. 
(Ord. of 10-17-94, § 2, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 22-83. - Insurers agency license fees; independent insurance agencies, brokers, not otherwise licensed. 
    There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by section 22-81 hereof in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges for each such location within the city. 
(Ord. of 10-17-94, § 3, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 22-84. - Gross premiums tax-Life insurers. 
    There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-81. 
(Ord. of 10-17-94, § 4, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 22-85. - Same-All other insurers. 
    There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business within the state in an amount equal to 2.5 percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by section 22-81. 
(Ord. of 10-17-94, § 5, eff. 1-1-95) 
Sec. 22-86. - Due date for license fees. 
    License fees imposed in sections 22-81 and 22-82 shall be due and payable on the first day of each year. 
(Ord. of 10-17-94, § 6, eff. 1-1-95) 
Secs. 22-87-22-105. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PEDDLERS, SOLICITORS AND CANVASSERS[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 
State Law reference- Georgia Charitable Solicitations Act of 1988, O.C.G.A. § 43-17-1 et seq.; peddlers and itinerant traders, O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1 et seq.; Transient Merchant Act of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 43-46-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - PEDDLING[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 12-2011, adopted Feb. 6, 2012, repealed the former Div. 1, §§ 22-106-22-110, and enacted a new Div. 1 as set out herein. The former Div. 1 was entitled "Generally" and derived from Code 1975, §§ 13-95-13-98; and Res. No. 03-2010, adopted July 12, 2010. 

Sec. 22-106. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by regulating peddling, itinerant traders, and other door-to-door salesmen, generally known as peddlers. Such persons typically market magazines, appliances, house wares, and other goods and services by going door to door in neighborhoods and business districts. The citizens of the City of Carrollton, Georgia, are subject to unregulated peddling by sometimes questionable organizations or individuals, with illegitimate products, or no intent to deliver. It is the purpose of this division to regulate peddling in the City of Carrollton, Georgia, to protect the public health, safety and welfare. To achieve this end, this division requires peddlers to seek licenses and peddle under certain limitations. It also allows for the Chief of Police of Carrollton, Georgia, in his or her discretion, to conduct background checks on peddlers. However, it is not the intent of this division to require legitimate sales representatives, visiting businesses or persons they have already made appointments with or already have a legitimate business relationship with, to need licensing. Neither is it the intent of this division to infringe free speech rights or require licensing for persons going door-to-door for political campaigns, religious proselytizing, or other free speech reasons. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-107. - Definitions. 
(a)  Definitions. The following words as used in this article shall have the following meanings: 
    Applicant shall mean the person seeking a license. 
    City means the City of Carrollton, Georgia 
    Goods shall mean any sort of personal property (tangible or intangible), wares or merchandise that can be sold, including, but not limited to, brushes, vacuums, magazines, newspapers, luggage, house wares, electronics, computers, furniture, food, agricultural products, flowers, tools, clothing, decorative accessories, rugs, paintings, sculpture, dishes, make-up, and so forth. 
    License shall mean a permit to peddle. 
    Official photo identification shall mean an unexpired driver's license or identification card issued by Georgia, another U.S. state, or the U.S. military; or a U.S. passport. 
    Peddler means any person who engages in peddling. 
    Peddling or to peddle shall mean traveling from place to place or door to door on foot or in a vehicle and exhibiting, offering to sell, or selling goods and/or services, to households, businesses or passers-by. It shall also mean traveling from place to place or door to door taking orders for the sale of goods and/or services for delivery at another time or place. The solicitation of orders combined with a separate transaction to make delivery to the purchaser as a part of a scheme or design to evade the provisions of this article shall be deemed peddling. Visits by sales representatives pursuant to previously-arranged appointments with a specific business or person, or as a part of an on-going business relationship, shall not be deemed peddling. 
    Person shall mean any natural person, organization, corporate entity, or other business entity. 
    Services means the provision of any sort of professional or trade service to another, including for example, general maintenance, construction, painting, lawn service, house cleaning, mending, sharpening, motor repair, appliance repair, life insurance, burial insurance, and so forth. 
    Police chief means the chief of police of the City of Carrollton, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-108. - Restrictions. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in peddling in the city without first obtaining a license. Licenses shall be for a period of six months, and may be renewed. Each natural person engaged by an organization, corporate entity, and/or other business entity shall have a separate license to engage in peddling. 
(b)  State law requirement. In addition to this article, peddlers, as defined by state law, must obtain a license from the Probate Court of Carroll County, Georgia, under the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 43-32-1, et seq. The requirements of that statute are separate from this article, and obtaining only that license shall not satisfy the requirements of this article. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-109. - License requirements. 
(a)  License application. All applications for a license must be provided to the police chief. The police chief shall issue a decision within five business days of the application being filed. 
(b)  Individual license required. Each natural person seeking to peddle must obtain a license. If the applicant is working for another individual, corporation, or other business entity, that information must be disclosed on the application and the license, if granted. 
(c)  Required information. All applications for licenses must include, at a minimum, the following information, and shall be signed by the applicant: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant, including a local address where the applicant will be staying while peddling. If the applicant is working for an entity other than himself, such as a corporation or another individual, provide the name of the employer, provide the headquarters address and address of the Carroll County, Georgia, office, or the address of the closest branch office if there is no Carroll County, Georgia office; 
(2)  Applicant's height, weight, age, sex, race, and social security number for background check purposes; 
(3)  Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo identification of the applicant; 
(4)  Proposed peddling activity including identification of the type of business, and the goods or services to be sold; 
(5)  If a vehicle is to be used, a description of the vehicle together with the license plate; 
(6)  The desired duration of the license (maximum is six months, except for yard sales, estate sales, and garage sales, as set forth in section 22-113); 
(7)  The application shall contain a statement that the submission of the application shall be considered to be consent that a background check may be run by the police chief at his or her discretion on the applicant, and a statement that all information contained therein is true and correct; and 
(8)  Any additional information the police chief may find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether the proposed event will endanger public health, safety or welfare. 
(d)  License and identification carried. The signed license is to be kept on-site in the possession of a peddler at all times that peddling is underway. Licenses shall be displayed at the request of any law enforcement personnel. Official photo identification shall also be kept on the person of a peddler at all times he or she is peddling, and shall be presented upon request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. It shall be a violation of this article to fail or refuse to display a license or official photo identification when requested by law enforcement personnel. 
(3)  Duration, renewal. A peddler license shall be valid for the period specified thereon, up to a maximum of six months. A peddler license may be renewed upon submission of an application for renewal. Upon application for renewal, the police chief shall check to insure no complaints or criminal charges have been made against the peddler, and shall apply the same criteria as applies to the initial grant of a license to renew the license. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-110. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Investigation. The police chief shall review the application for license for completeness and compliance with the terms of this article. The police chief may, at his or her discretion, determine whether there are any records of complaints against the applicant in the records of the police department or the GCIC/NCIC crime database system. The police chief may, at his or her discretion, conduct a background check of the applicant. The police chief may, at his or her discretion, make any other inquiries he or she deems necessary for the investigation of the applicant. 
(b)  Decision. The police chief may grant or deny a license. The police chief shall issue a license as provided in this article from a consideration of the application and from such information as may otherwise be obtained, unless he or she finds that any or all of the following apply: 
(1)  The applicant, or the organization, corporate entity or other business entity that the applicant is peddling on behalf of, has any criminal complaints pending against them, or has a criminal record involving crimes of theft, fraud, or other moral turpitude; 
(2)  The background check revealed the applicant is not of good character, or the proposed goods and/or services are not legitimate or legal; 
(3)  The grant of the license is contrary to the public's health, safety or general welfare; or 
(4)  The application was not complete, or the application or license requested is not fully in compliance with the requirements of this division. 
    The police chief shall indicate on the application review form all reasons for rejection of the application. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-111. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the denial or restriction of a license shall have the right to appeal the denial or restriction to the City Manager of Carrollton, Georgia. A written appeal shall be sent via certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to City of Carrollton, Attn: City Manager, 315 Bradley Street, Carrollton, Georgia 30117. 
(b)  Procedure. A meeting shall be conducted at Carrollton City Hall at a time mutually convenient to the applicant, police chief, and the city manager. The police chief shall appear and present his or her case and evidence as to why the license was denied. The applicant shall have the opportunity to present its case and evidence in support of the application. The hearing shall be conducted as a municipal court proceeding. 
(c)  Standard of review. The city manager, keeping in mind the purpose of this division, the substantive provisions therein, and giving deference to the judgment of the police chief, shall make a determination as to whether the denial or restriction was lawful and in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare, or whether the license should be issued or modified. If the latter, the city manager shall issue a license providing guidance as to the location, time, persons, and other criteria to comply with this division. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-112. - Peddling regulations; prohibited locations and times. 
(a)  Prohibited times. No solicitation shall be allowed during the following times: 
(1)  At any time, as set by the National Weather Service, after sunset or before sunrise. 
(b)  Prohibited locations. No peddling shall be allowed at the following locations: 
(1)  On any street or highway right-of-way; 
(2)  On any bridges and sidewalks; 
(3)  On any public property or governmentally-owned property; and 
(4)  On any private property without written permission of the property owner. 
(c)  Solicitation. Solicitation shall not be allowed under a peddler's license. A separate solicitation event permit is required. See chapter 22, article IV ("Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers"), division 2, sections 22-121 through 22-130 for additional requirements. 
(d)  Peddlers under the age of 18. Applications for peddlers under the age of 18 must be signed by an adult, and the adult must provide his or her address and relationship to the applicant, as well as be with the peddler under the age of 18 throughout his or her peddling activities. 
(e)  Exemptions. The following types of persons are exempt from the necessity of obtaining a license under this division. 
(1)  Stationary road-side stands operated by a local farmer (meaning farmers with farms in Carroll County, Georgia; Haralson County, Georgia; Heard County, Georgia; Coweta County, Georgia; Paulding County, Georgia; Randolph County, Alabama; and Cleburne County, Alabama); however, such stands must comply with the city zoning regulations and other applicable regulations, and shall not be located on public rights-of-way; 
(2)  If listed below, the person is exempt from the necessity of compliance with this division; however, if requested by a law enforcement officer, the person must provide proof that it falls within one of the below categories: 
a.  Organization qualified under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (certification from IRS must be provided if requested by a citizen or law enforcement officer); 
b.  Non-profit corporation registered in Georgia (certification from the Georgia Secretary of State must be provided if requested by a citizen or law enforcement officer); 
c.  Church; or 
d.  Public or private school. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-113. - Yard sales, estate sales, and garage sales. 
    Yard sales, estate sales, and garage sales shall be limited to four nonconsecutive "one-day" sales per calendar year per address. Goods are restricted to used goods only. All yard sales, estate sales, and garage sales must be permitted pursuant to this article, but no fee shall be charged. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-114. - Records of transactions. 
(a)  Every peddler - as that term is defined in section 22-107 above - who sales, trades, or purchases or who offers for sale, trade, or purchase any gold, silver, jewelry, coins, antiques, or the like shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its transactions in which an accurate description of all property sold, traded, or purchased by the peddler can be transmitted to the city police department via an electronic automated reporting system. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property sold, traded, or purchased by the peddler and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the sale, trade, or purchase of the property. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the customer making the sale, trade, or purchase. 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. 
(4)  A description of the property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.). 
(5)  The number of the receipt or transaction issued for the property. 
(6)  The price paid or the amount tendered. 
(7)  A photograph of the customer and the item sold, traded, or purchased, which will be taken with the electronic automated reporting system at the time of the transaction. 
(8)  The signature of the customer. 
(b)  Every such peddler shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch file of all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the city police department. 
(c)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, any such peddlers will be notified as soon as possible. In this event, any such peddlers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in paragraph (a) of this section. Any such peddlers shall maintain a three-day supply of these paper forms. 
(d)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any such peddler's electronic records at the peddler's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. 
(e)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. There will be a fee assessed to the peddler for each reported transaction, a copy of which fee schedule is on file in the office of the city clerk. This fee will be invoiced to the peddler and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-115. - Violations, enforcement. 
(a)  Persons peddling without a license, or in violation of the license, shall first be issued a written warning concerning his or her violation of this division. 
(b)  Regarding subsequent violations, persons shall be cited with a citation for prosecution in the Municipal Court of Carrollton, Georgia, in accordance with the requirements of law for such citations. Any law enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue such citations. 
(c)  Any person, organization, business, or entity in violation of the provisions of this division is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 per day per violation per individual participant. The minimum fine shall be $100.00 per day per violation per individual participant. 
(d)  Any violation of this article shall immediately revoke the license. The police chief shall also have the discretion to revoke the license upon charge of violation being made, or upon awareness of illegal or unauthorized activity, if license revocation is required in the best interests of public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Any person, organization, business, or entity found guilty of violating this division may not be issued a license for a two-year period from the date of the violation. Upon a second time being found guilty of violating this division, the person, organization, business, or entity shall be banned from further peddling in the city. 
(f)  The city attorney, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief and other relief in superior court if necessary to effectuate the intent of this division. The city shall be entitled to seek civil fines in the amounts specified above, and shall be entitled to its attorneys' fees for any successful action. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-116. - Severability. 
    If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this division be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, or if any provision of any part of this division as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances be declared invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the remaining portions of this division not so held to be invalid, or the application of this division or other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the mayor and city council of the city to provide for separable and devisable parts and they hereby readopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Sec. 22-117. - Repealer. 
    The resolution from which this division derives repeals any prior ordinance or resolution in conflict herewith, except to the extent that said ordinance or resolution is more restrictive than this division, in which case that ordinance or resolution shall control. 
(Res. No. 12-2011, 2-6-12) 
Secs. 22-118-22-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - SOLICITATION[6] 

Footnotes: 
--- (6) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 13-2011, adopted Dec. 5, 2011, repealed the former Div. 2, §§ 22-121-22-123, and enacted a new Div. 2 as set out herein. The former Div. 2 pertained to solicitors and canvassers and derived from Code 1975, § 13-106; and a motion adopted Feb. 15, 1982. 

Sec. 22-121. - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this division is to protect, maintain and enhance the public health, safety, and general welfare by regulating road-side solicitation and other charitable events where contributions are sought. Solicitors are put at risk by entering roadways and parking lots which put drivers and other pedestrians at risk. The citizens of the City of Carrollton, Georgia are subject to unregulated solicitation by sometimes questionable organizations, or solicitations in a hazardous manner or location. It is the purpose of this division to regulate solicitation on streets and highways and other public areas of the City of Carrollton, Georgia, to protect the public health, safety and welfare. Neither is it the intent of this division to infringe free speech rights or require permitting for persons going door-to-door for political campaigns, religious proselytizing, or other free speech reasons. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-122. - Definitions. 
    The following words, as used in this division, shall have the following meanings: 
    Applicant means the charitable organization seeking a permit. 
    Charitable organization means an organization which is qualified under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986, as amended; Georgia registered non-profit corporations; churches; and public and private schools. Charitable organizations must also either be registered with the Georgia Secretary of State pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5, or be exempt from such registration pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. 
    City means the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
    Event means any charitable solicitation within the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
    Event permit means a permit issued pursuant to this division to conduct an event. 
    Organizer means the person responsible for organizing the event and whose name shall be on the application. 
    Permit means an event permit. 
    Police chief means the chief of police of the City of Carrollton, Georgia, or his or her designee. 
    Solicitor means any person who engages in solicitation. 
    Solicitation or charitable solicitation means the act of asking for employment, business, or contributions on a public road, street, highway, right-of-way, sidewalk or other public property from the occupant of any vehicle or any pedestrian. 
    Travel lanes means the marked lanes on a road or highway, or the lanes of travel for vehicles, including turn lanes, access lanes, and acceleration or deceleration lanes. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-123. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Solicitation restricted. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-6-97(b), the city prohibits any person from standing or entering on a highway, public street, or public right-of-way of the city for the purposes of soliciting employment, business solicitations, and/or contributions from the occupant of any vehicle or any pedestrian. Solicitation shall only be allowed by charitable organizations with an event permit, under the terms of this division. It shall be a violation of this division to engage in solicitation without an event permit, or otherwise not in accordance with the terms of this division and the event permit. 
(b)  Event permit required. No charitable organization is allowed to engage in solicitation on any highway, public street, or public right-of-way in the city without first obtaining an event permit. Persons, businesses, and organizations that are not charitable organizations as defined in this division are not eligible to receive a permit for solicitation. An event permit shall be obtained from the police chief. An event permit is not required for any event sponsored or conducted by the city or its departments and agencies. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-124. - Permit requirements. 
(a)  Event permit application. All requests for an event permit must be provided to the police chief at least five business days but no more than 60 calendar days prior to the date of the requested event. The police chief shall issue a decision within three business days of the application being filed. The police chief, for good cause shown, shall have the authority to consider any application under this section which is filed less than five business days before the date such event is proposed to be conducted, provided the police chief shall have adequate time to conduct the investigation. An application and event permit shall be required for each event, provided however only one application and event permit shall be required for each proposed event. 
(b)  Required information for application. All applications for event permits must include at a minimum the following information, and shall be signed by the organizer(s): 
(1)  Name and address of charitable organization, including headquarters address and address of the office within Carroll County, Georgia, if any, or the address of the closest office if there is no Carroll County, Georgia, office; 
(2)  Type of organization and certification, if listed below. The organization must provide proof that it falls within one of the below categories in order to apply for a event permit: 
a.  Organization qualified under Section 501(c) of the Internal Revenue Code of 1986 (certification from IRS must be provided with the application for event permit); 
b.  Non-profit corporation registered in Georgia (certification from the Georgia Secretary of State must be provided with the application for event permit); 
c.  Church; or 
d.  Public or private school. 
(3)  Name of organizer(s), and address, height, weight, age, sex, race, and social security number of each organizer for background check purposes; 
(4)  Photocopy of unexpired driver's license or other official photo identification of each organizer; 
(5)  Proposed solicitation activity, and purpose for solicitation activity (i.e., use of funds); 
(6)  Specific location(s) for event, including specific intersections, and number of solicitors at each such location; 
(7)  Date(s) and time(s) of event(s); 
(8)  Names of all participants proposed to be solicitors, and their ages; 
(9)  If any solicitors are under the age of 18, the names and addresses of adult supervisors; one adult supervisor per four solicitors under the age of 18 is required; 
(10)  If the event is to be held on behalf of any person or organization other than the applicant, a communication in written form from that person or organization authorizing the applicant to apply for the event permit; 
(11)  The application shall contain a statement that the submission of the application shall be considered to be consent by the organizer(s), the charitable organization, and the officers of the charitable organization for a background check to be run by the police chief at his or her discretion on any person named on the application, and a statement that all information contained thereon is true and correct; and 
(12)  Any additional information the police chief may find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether the proposed event will endanger public health, safety, or welfare. 
(c)  Organizer. A minimum of one organizer is required for an event. No more than five persons shall be designated organizers for any event. The organizer(s) are required to be at the event in person at all times. There shall be one organizer for each location where solicitation is occurring. All events shall be conducted under the supervision of a person or persons making application for same (the organizer) and shall be conducted in a peaceable and orderly manner in compliance with the laws and ordinances applicable thereto. 
(d)  Permit onsite. The event permit bearing the signature of the police chief is to be kept on-site in the possession of an organizer at all times that the event is underway. If multiple locations are involved, an event permit copy shall be kept at each location by each organizer. Event permits shall be displayed at the request of any citizen or law enforcement personnel. 
(e)  Safety vests. Upon issuance of the event permit, the city shall provide city-owned safety vests that must be worn by each person participating in the event. At his or her discretion, the police chief may require a refundable deposit to ensure return of the city-owned safety vests. The amount of any such deposit, should the police chief deem it necessary, is in the sole discretion of the police chief. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-125. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Investigation. The police chief shall review the application for completeness and compliance with the terms of this division. The police chief shall check if the charitable organization is registered with the Georgia Secretary of State, or is exempt under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-9. The police chief may investigate, at his or her discretion, whether there are any records of complaints against the applicant or organizers in the records of the police department or the GCIC/NCIC crime database system. The police chief may, at his or her discretion, conduct a background check of the organizers or corporate officers, or any other person named on the application. The police chief may, at his or her discretion, make any other inquiries he or she deems necessary for the investigation of the applicant or the organizers. 
(b)  Decision. The police chief may grant the application for event permit, deny the application for event permit, or grant a restricted event permit. The police chief shall issue an event permit as provided in this division from a consideration of the application and from such information as may otherwise be obtained, unless he or she finds that any or all of the following apply: 
(1)  The conduct of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of traffic; 
(2)  The conduct of the event will substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of firefighting equipment en route to a fire, or other emergency services; 
(3)  The applicant or any organizers or participants have any criminal complaints pending against them, or have a criminal record involving crimes of theft, fraud, or other moral turpitude; 
(4)  The applicant is not a qualifying charitable organization or is otherwise not a legitimate organization; 
(5)  The police chief has reason to believe the event is a fraud or sham; 
(6)  If a charitable organization required to be registered with the Georgia Secretary of State, under O.C.G.A. § 43-17-5, it is not so registered; 
(7)  The conduct of the event is contrary to the public's health, safety, or general welfare; or 
(8)  The application was not complete, or the application or event permit requested is not fully in compliance with the requirements of this division. 
    The police chief shall indicate on the application review form all reasons for rejection of the application. 
(c)  Restrictions. The police chief shall indicate on the event permit the permitted activities, locations, and times of the event. The police chief may approve a smaller or shorter event than requested, may reduce the number of solicitors, may approve a different location, or may generally make any other adjustments he or she believes necessary to the application to serve the public health, safety and welfare. 
(d)  Non-content based review. The content of the message of any applicant, their beliefs, the identification of the participants, or any other matter which does not directly impact on the public health, safety, and welfare, shall not be relevant to the determination of whether to grant or deny an event permit. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-126. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the denial or restriction of an event permit shall have the right to appeal the denial or restriction to the City Manager of Carrollton, Georgia. A written appeal shall be sent via certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to City of Carrollton, Attn: City Manager, 315 Bradley Street, Carrollton, Georgia 30117. 
(b)  Procedure. A meeting shall be conducted at Carrollton City Hall at a time mutually convenient to the applicant, police chief, and the city manager. The police chief shall appear and present his or her case and evidence as to why the application was denied. The applicant shall have the opportunity to present its case and evidence in support of the application. 
(c)  Standard of review. The city manager, keeping in mind the purpose of this division, the substantive provisions, and giving deference to the judgment of the police chief, shall make a determination as to whether the denial or restriction was just and in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare, or whether the event permit should be issued or modified. If the latter, the City Manager of Carrollton, Georgia, shall issue an event permit providing guidance as to the location, time, persons, and other criteria of this division. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-127. - Solicitation regulations; locations and times. 
(a)  Prohibited times. No solicitation shall be allowed during the following times: 
(1)  At any time, as set by the National Weather Service, after sunset or before sunrise. 
(b)  Locations. No solicitation shall occur on private property without written permission of the property owner. Upon request from law enforcement personnel, a solicitor must provide such written permission to solicit on the private property where solicitation is occurring. As to solicitors holding a valid event permit, they are required to stay on median strips, sidewalks, or otherwise out of the travel lanes. Solicitation from travel lanes is not permitted. When all vehicles are stopped at an intersection, solicitors may approach cars to receive donations if the occupants have indicated they seek to make a donation. Walking along a line of cars shall ONLY be permitted if the solicitor stays out of the travel lanes. No more than one charitable organization may solicit at the same intersection at the same time. 
(c)  Duration. An event may last no longer than two days. A separate event permit shall be required for each additional event (i.e., six days would require three event permits). 
(d)  Solicitors under the age of 18. All charitable organizations which are permitted to solicit funds must have one adult supervisor over the age of 21 for every four persons under the age of 18. 
(e)  Peddling. Peddling shall not be allowed under an event permit. A separate peddler's license is required. See chapter 22, article IV ("Peddlers, Solicitors and Canvassers"), division 1, sections 22-106 through 22-117 for more information. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-128. - Violations, enforcement. 
(a)  Persons soliciting without an event permit or in violation of the event permit shall first be issued a written warning concerning his or her violation of this division. 
(b)  Regarding subsequent violations, persons shall be cited with a citation for prosecution in the Municipal Court of Carrollton, Georgia, in accordance with the requirements of law for such citations. Any law enforcement officer shall be authorized to issue such citations. 
(c)  Any person, organization, business, or entity in violation of the provisions of this division is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 per day per violation per individual participant. The minimum fine shall be $100.00 per day per violation per individual participant. 
(d)  Any violation of this division shall immediately revoke the event permit. The police chief shall also have the discretion to revoke the event permit upon charge of violation being made, or upon awareness of illegal or unauthorized activity, if event permit revocation is required in the best interests of public health, safety and welfare. 
(e)  Any person, organization, business, or entity found guilty of violating this division may not be issued an event permit for a two-year period from the date of the violation. Upon a second time being found guilty of violating this division, the person, organization, business, or entity shall be banned from further solicitation in the city. 
(f)  The city attorney, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief and other relief in superior court, if necessary, to effectuate the intent of this division. The city shall be entitled to seek civil fines in the amounts specified above, and shall be entitled to its attorneys' fees for any successful action. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-129. - Severability. 
    If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this division be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, or if any provision of any part of this division as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances be declared invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the remaining portions of this division not so held to be invalid, or the application of this division or other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the mayor and city council of the city to provide for separable and devisable parts and they hereby readopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Sec. 22-130. - Repealer. 
    The resoultion from which this division derives repeals any prior ordinance or resolution in conflict herewith, except to the extent that said ordinance or resolution is more restrictive than this division, in which case that ordinance or resolution shall control. 
(Res. No. 13-2011, 12-5-11) 
Secs. 22-131-22-140. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - MONETARY SOLICITATION[7] 

Footnotes: 
--- (7) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 06-2014, adopted May 5, 2014, supplied provisions to be added to this Code as §§ 22-151-22-153. At the discretion of the editor, in order to maintain the established numbering system, these provisions have been redesignated as §§ 22-141-22-143 to read as set out herein. 

Sec. 22-141. - Definitions. 
    The following words, as used in this division, shall have the following meanings Monetary solicitation or to monetarily solicit is an act or action performed by an individual that meets the following three criteria: 
(1)  Is an in-person request of another individual, either orally or by gesture; and 
(2)  The request is for an immediate distribution of money or anything of monetary value; and 
(3)  The request occurs on public property, including, without limitation, city streets, sidewalks and parks. 
    For purposes of this division, monetary solicitation or to monetarily solicit shall not include: requests for signatures on a petition or other document; distribution of written material that requests individuals to send contributions by mail or make donations in some other manner at a later time; distribution of pre-addressed envelopes along with a verbal plea to contribute money, provided that no request for an immediate contribution is made; sale of literature or other merchandise or food where payment occurs at a separate time and location, including through mail order; or solicitation that is lawfully permitted pursuant to chapter 22, division 2 of this Code of Ordinances. 
(Res. No. 06-2014, 5-5-14) 
Sec. 22-142. - Restrictions. 
(a)  Monetary solicitation in certain areas. It shall be unlawful for any person to monetarily solicit in any of the following places: 
(1)  Anywhere within the central business district of the city (i.e., that portion of the city zoned C-1 and generally described as Adamson Square and surrounding areas); 
(2)  Within 15 feet of the entrance to or exit from any public toilet facility, which includes any temporary use site (port-a-toilet); 
(3)  Within 15 feet of an automated teller machine (ATM), provided that when an ATM is located within an ATM facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the ATM facility; 
(4)  In or within 15 feet of a parking lot, garage, or deck owned or operated by the city, including entry ways or exits; 
(5)  Within 15 feet of any pay telephone, provided that when a pay telephone is located within a telephone booth or other facility, such distance shall be measured from the entrance or exit of the telephone booth or facility; 
(6)  Within 15 feet of the entrance or exit of a building, whether publicly or privately owned, including without limitation any residence, business, event venue or athletic facility; and 
(7)  Within 15 feet of or within a line for entry to any building, whether the building is publicly or privately owned, including without limitation any residence, business, event venue or athletic facility. 
(b)  Aggressive monetary solicitation. It shall be unlawful for any person to monetarily solicit in any of the following manners: 
(1)  Blocking the path or passage of the person solicited; 
(2)  Not allowing the person solicited to leave the presence of the solicitor, by following immediately behind or walking alongside the person solicited; 
(3)  Using profane or abusive language, either during the solicitation or following refusal; 
(4)  Continuing to monetarily solicit a person after that person has refused the solicitation verbally or by gesture; 
(5)  Continuing to monetarily solicit a person located in or on a motor vehicle after that person has refused the solicitation verbally or by gesture; 
(6)  Making any statement, gesture or other communication which a reasonable person in the situation of the person solicited would perceive to be a threat that is intended to compel or force the person solicited to accede to the demands of the solicitor; and/or 
(7)  Touching the person solicited. 
(Res. No. 06-2014, 5-5-14) 
Sec. 22-143. - Penalties. 
(a)  Upon conviction under section 22-142(a) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. 
(b)  Upon the first conviction under section 22-142(b) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days. 
(c)  Upon the second conviction under section 22-142(b) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, provided that the sentence must include a minimum of 30 days imprisonment. 
(d)  Upon the third and future convictions under section 22-142(b) above, the violator may be sentenced to one or more of the following: the performance of up to 30 days community service; a monetary fine not to exceed $1,000.00; and/or imprisonment not to exceed 180 days, provided that the sentence must include a minimum of 90 days imprisonment. 
(Res. No. 06-2014, 5-5-14) 
Secs. 22-144-22-150. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - LABOR ORGANIZERS 

Sec. 22-151. - Sworn statement required. 
    Each person employed and engaged by a labor union in the business, occupation, enterprise or calling of labor union agent, labor union promoter, labor union organizer or labor union solicitor within the city limits, and while so engaged undertakes to collect funds or secure subscriptions to union authorization cards or other subscriptions on behalf of a labor union, shall, prior to undertaking to collect funds or secure such subscriptions, file with the mayor and city council a written statement, signed under oath, providing the following information: 
(1)  His full name, including any name by which he is commonly known; 
(2)  His present home address; 
(3)  All previous home addresses for the past ten years if different from present address; 
(4)  His age; 
(5)  His place of birth; 
(6)  The nature of any crime of which he has ever been convicted, together with the date, place and court of conviction; 
(7)  The full name of the labor union by whom he is employed; 
(8)  His position with such labor union; 
(9)  The address of the principal office of such labor union; 
(10)  The address of the labor union office out of which he works together with the name and address of his immediate superior in such labor union; and 
(11)  Whether his income from such labor union depends in any manner upon his success in collecting funds or securing subscriptions to union authorization cards or other subscriptions. 
(Code 1975, § 13-61) 
Sec. 22-152. - Violations. 
    Any person failing to obtain a license under this article, or to comply with each of the terms of this article as herein provided and set out, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Code 1975, § 13-64) 
Secs. 22-153-22-180. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE VI. - PAWNSHOPS AND PAWNBROKERS[8] 

Footnotes: 
--- (8) --- 
Editor's note- Resolution 01-2009, adopted Jan. 5, 2009, repealed chapter 22, article VI, §§ 22-181-22-186, in its entirety. Exhibit A, of said resolution, enacted new provisions to read as herein set out. Prior to amendment article VI pertained to pawnbrokers and derived from the original 1975 Code. 
State Law reference- Pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130 et seq.; local pawnbroker regulation, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-135; supervision of pawnbrokers by municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-136. 

Sec. 22-181. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Employee means any person who works in a pawnshop, whether on a part-time or full-time basis, regardless of whether remuneration is received or not. 
    Pawnbroker means a person lending money on personal property, taking possession of such property and holding it as a pledge or pawn, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 44-12-130, for the security of a loan, or one who purchases property with the right of repurchase or redemption. Any person who purchases jewelry, guns, pistols, household effects or other articles of merchandise or personal property, and at the time thereof gives the seller the privilege of redeeming the same thereafter, shall be held and deemed a pawnbroker. 
    Pawnshop means any business that takes or receives by way of pledge, pawn or exchange, any goods, wares, merchandise or personal property of any kind as security for the repayment of money lent thereon. 
    Pawn or pledge means a bailment of personal property as security for any debt or engagement redeemable upon certain terms and with the implied power of sale or default. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
Cross reference- Definitions genereally, § 1-2 
Sec. 22-182. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    The city police department shall see that the provisions of this article are observed and enforced. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
Sec. 22-183. - Employees. 
    No person shall be an employee of a pawnshop in any capacity until such person has been fingerprinted by the city police department and has been issued an annual permit authorizing such person to be employed by a pawnshop. It shall be the duty of the pawnbroker to assure that there is compliance with the provisions of this section. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
Sec. 22-184. - Character of person connected with pawn business. 
    No owner, employee, pawnbroker or any person connected with a pawnshop for which a license or permit is sought shall have been convicted of a crime involving "moral turpitude" or shall have been convicted of any crime involving felony theft, burglary, robbery, or a violation of the "Family Violence Act." 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
Sec. 22-185. - Annual permit. 
    Before operating a pawnshop or becoming an employee of a pawnshop, any person must first file an application with the city police department for a permit to operate or be employed in the pawnshop, pursuant to the following: 
(1)  The application shall be made on an annual basis; 
(2)  No permit shall be issued until a fee in an amount established by the mayor and city council, a copy of which is on file in the office of the city clerk, is paid to the city; 
(3)  The application shall state the address of the pawnshop; and 
(4)  The application shall contain the full name, address, phone number, date of birth and social security number of any employee or pawnbroker; 
    The chief of police, or any other officer of the city designated by the mayor and city council, shall investigate each applicant for such license and shall report to the mayor and city council whether such applicant is a person of good character and has not been convicted of a criminal offense as indicated in this section. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
Sec. 22-186. - Records of transactions. 
(a)  Every pawnbroker shall maintain a permanent electronic record of its pawn transactions in which an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop can be transmitted to the city police department via an electronic automated reporting system. Each of these transactions shall contain an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to the pawnshop and shall be made at the time of each transaction, provided that the following information is included: 
(1)  The date and time of the purchase, pawn or sale of the property. 
(2)  The name, address and telephone number of the customer making the pledge, trade or sale. 
(3)  A description of the customer in terms of sex, race, date of birth, height and weight, as well as the driver's license number of the customer or some other identification card which contains a photograph of the customer. 
(4)  A description of the pledged or purchased property by serial, model or other number, if available, and by any identifying marks (e.g., brand name, color, style, etc.). 
(5)  The number of the receipt or pawn transaction issued for the property pawned or bought. 
(6)  The price paid or the amount loaned. 
(7)  The maturity date of the transaction, if a pawn. 
(8)  A photograph of the customer and the item pawned or bought which will be taken with the electronic automated reporting system at the time of the transaction. 
(9)  The signature of the customer. 
(b)  Every pawnshop shall enter each transaction as it occurs into the electronic automated reporting system or may elect to upload electronically via the internet a batch file of all transactions for each business day to the administrator of the electronic automated reporting system immediately at the conclusion of each business day. The administrator of the electronic automated reporting system will electronically transmit all transactions to the city police department. 
(c)  In the event that the electronic automated reporting system becomes temporarily or permanently disabled, pawnshops and pawnbrokers will be notified as soon as possible. In this event, the pawnbrokers will be required to make records of transactions in paper form. Such paper forms must include all information as enumerated in paragraph (a) of this section. Pawnbrokers shall maintain a three-day supply of these paper forms. 
(d)  Any duly authorized law enforcement officer may, during the ordinary hours of business or any other reasonable time, inspect any pawnbroker's electronic records at the pawnbroker's place of business to ensure compliance with this section. 
(e)  The chief of police or his designee shall select and designate the required automated reporting system. There will be a fee assessed to the pawnshop for each reported transaction, a copy of which fee schedule is on file in the office of the city clerk. This fee will be invoiced to the pawnbroker and collected by the chief of police or his designee, which may be a third party administrator of the automated reporting system. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
State Law reference- Required record of pawnbrokers, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-132 et seq. 
Sec. 22-187. - Waiting period for disposal of articles. 
    Any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop who makes a loan on pledged goods, or buys pledged goods on the condition that the seller may repurchase said goods, shall hold said goods for at least 30 days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. Nonpledged goods bought under this section shall be held for at least seven calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, shipment or otherwise. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
Sec. 22-188. - Dealing with minors. 
    It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to receive goods in pawn, trade, purchase or sale from a person under 18 years of age. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
State Law reference- Duration of pawn transactions, O.C.G.A. § 44-12-131. 
Sec. 22-189. - Lost or stolen items. 
(a)  It shall be the duty of every person operating as or employed by a pawnbroker to report to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent any article or goods sold or pawned to him if he shall have a reason to believe that the article or goods were stolen or lost when presented by the seller or customer. 
(b)  With respect to any items which would normally have a serial number or other means of identification, if any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop becomes aware that such items have had the identification removed, defaced or destroyed, such fact shall be immediately reported to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent. 
(c)  If it is determined that an item bought, sold, traded or pawned by a seller or customer to the pawnbroker or his employee is the subject of any reported theft, then the surrender of said item to the chief of police or his duly authorized agent shall be done upon demand. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
Sec. 22-190. - Violations. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to violate any of the provisions of this article, whether or not such person or employee is the holder of a current valid permit issued according to the terms of this article. Further, any person failing to comply with any provision of this article or other rules, ordinances and regulations as may be passed by the mayor and city council for conduct of the business of a pawnbroker, shall upon conviction, have the license to conduct business revoked. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any pawnbroker or employee of a pawnshop to: 
(1)  Make any false statement in an application for any permit provided for in this article. 
(2)  Make any false entry in any record book, ledger or form required by the terms of this article. 
(3)  Violate any criminal law of this state while acting in the course of business as a pawnbroker or employee of a pawnbroker. 
(c)  Persons who violate this article shall be guilty of a misdemeanor. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
Sec. 22-191. - Effective date. 
    The effective date of this article shall be April 1, 2009. 
(Res. No. 01-2009, Exh. A, 1-5-09) 
ARTICLE VII. - EVENT FACILITIES 

Sec. 22-200. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Event facility means any building or property located within the city with an allowed human occupancy exceeding 400 persons as determined by the city's fire marshal. The term event facility does not include (i) property owned by a public school, college, or university or (ii) cinemas or movie theaters where movies or motion pictures are shown on a daily basis and tickets are sold individually to customers or patrons. 
    Licensed event means any event at an event facility that is open to the general public; occurs in whole or in part between the hours of 9:00 p.m. and 9:00 a.m.; and is advertised through print, electronic, or social media beyond the corporate limits of the city. 
(Res. No. 04-2017, 2-17-17) 
Sec. 22-201. - Responsibility for enforcement. 
    The city police department shall see that the provisions of this [article] are observed and enforced. 
(Res. No. 04-2017, 2-17-17) 
Sec. 22-202. - License requirements. 
(a)  License required. It shall be unlawful for the owner, lessee, or operator of an event facility to allow any licensed event at the event facility without first obtaining a license. Licenses shall be issued on a per event basis. 
(b)  License application. All applications for a license must be provided to the police chief. The police chief shall issue a decision within five business days of the application being filed. 
(c)  Required information. All applications for licenses must include, at a minimum, the following information, and shall be signed by the applicant: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  Applicant's height, weight, age, sex, race, and social security number for background check purposes; 
(3)  Photocopy of driver's license or other official photo identification of the applicant; 
(4)  The nature of and expected attendance at the licensed event; 
(6)  The desired duration of the licensed event (maximum is six hours); 
(7)  The application shall contain a statement that the submission of the application shall be considered consent that a background check may be run by the police chief at his or her discretion on the applicant, and a statement that all information contained therein is true and correct; and 
(8)  If the licensed event is being promoted or sponsored by someone other than the owner of the event facility, then each promotor or sponsor shall provide the information set forth in subsections 22-202(c)(1)-(7) above. 
(9)  Any additional information the police chief may find reasonably necessary for a fair determination as to whether the licensed event will endanger public health, safety or welfare. 
(d)  License and identification carried. The signed license is to be kept on-site for the duration of the licensed event. Licenses shall be displayed at the request of any law enforcement personnel. Official photo identification shall also be kept on the person of the licensee at all times during the licensed event and shall be presented upon request of any law enforcement personnel. It shall be a violation of this article to fail or refuse to display a license or official photo identification when requested by law enforcement personnel. 
(e)  Cash bond. For each licensed event, the licensee shall be required to post a cash bond in the amount of $5,000.00, the purpose of which is to reimburse the city for any additional public safety or other costs occasioned by the event. Those portions of the bond not needed to reimburse the city for any additional public safety or other costs occasioned by the event shall be reimbursed to the licensee at the discretion of the city manager or his designee. 
(Res. No. 04-2017, 2-17-17) 
Sec. 22-203. - Investigation and issuance. 
(a)  Investigation. The police chief shall review the application for license for completeness and compliance with the terms of this article. The police chief may, at his or her discretion, determine whether there are any records of complaints against the applicant in the records of the police department or the GCIC/NCIC crime database system. The police chief may, at his or her discretion, conduct a background check of the applicant. The police chief may, at his or her discretion, make any other inquiries he or she deems necessary for the investigation of the applicant. 
(b)  Decision. The police chief may grant or deny a license. The police chief shall issue a license as provided in this article from a consideration of the application and from such information as may otherwise be obtained, unless he or she finds that any or all of the following apply: 
(1)  The applicant, or the organization, corporate entity or other business entity that the applicant is applying on behalf of, has any criminal complaints pending against them, or has a criminal record involving crimes of theft, fraud, or other moral turpitude; 
(2)  The background check revealed the applicant is not of good character; 
(3)  The grant of the license is contrary to the public's health, safety or general welfare; or 
(4)  The application was not complete, or the application or license requested is not fully in compliance with the requirements of this division. 
    The police chief shall indicate on the application review form all reasons for rejection of the application. 
(Res. No. 04-2017, 2-17-17) 
Sec. 22-204. - Appeals. 
(a)  Appeals. Any person aggrieved by the denial or restriction of a license shall have the right to appeal the denial or restriction to the city manager of Carrollton, Georgia. A written appeal shall be sent via certified mail or statutory overnight delivery to City of Carrollton, Attn: City Manager, 315 Bradley Street, Carrollton, Georgia 30117. 
(b)  Procedure. A meeting shall be conducted at Carrollton City Hall at a time mutually convenient to the applicant, police chief, and the city manager. The police chief shall appear and present his or her case and evidence as to why the license was denied. The applicant shall have the opportunity to present its case and evidence in support of the application. 
(c)  Standard of review. The city manager, keeping in mind the purpose of this article, the substantive provisions therein, and giving deference to the judgment of the police chief, shall make a determination as to whether the denial or restriction was lawful and in the interests of the public health, safety and welfare, or whether the license should be issued or modified. If the latter, the city manager shall issue a license providing guidance as to the location, time, persons, and other criteria to comply with this division. 
(Res. No. 04-2017, 2-17-17) 
Sec. 22-205. - Violations, enforcement. 
(a)  Any person, organization, business, or entity in violation of the provisions of this article is subject to a fine of up to $1,000.00 per violation. The minimum fine shall be $100.00 per violation. 
(b)  Any violation of this article shall immediately revoke the license. The police chief shall also have the discretion to revoke the license upon charge of violation being made, or upon awareness of illegal or unauthorized activity, if license revocation is required in the best interests of public health, safety and welfare. 
(c)  Any person, organization, business, or entity found guilty of violating this article may not be issued another license for a six-month period from the date of the violation. Upon a second time being found guilty of violating this article, the person, organization, business, or entity shall be banned from further licensing in the city. 
(d)  The city attorney, or his or her designee, shall be authorized to seek injunctive relief and other relief in superior court if necessary to effectuate the intent of this article. The city shall be entitled to seek civil fines in the amounts specified above, and shall be entitled to its attorneys' fees for any successful action. 
(Res. No. 04-2017, 2-17-17) 
Sec. 22-206. - Severability. 
    If any paragraph, subparagraph, sentence, clause, phrase or any portion of this article be declared invalid or unconstitutional by a court of competent jurisdiction, or if any provision of any part of this division as applied to any particular situation or set of circumstances be declared invalid, or unconstitutional, such invalidity shall not be construed to affect the remaining portions of this article not so held to be invalid, or the application of this article or other circumstances not so held to be invalid. It is hereby declared to be the intent of the mayor and city council of the city to provide for separable and devisable parts and they hereby readopt any and all parts hereof as may not be held invalid for any reason. 
(Res. No. 04-2017, 2-17-17) 
Chapter 26 - CABLE COMMUNICATIONS[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The city's cable television franchise agreements are on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Consumer Choice for Television Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq.; municipalities prohibited from granting franchise for cable television within unincorporated area of county, O.C.G.A. § 36-18-3; avoiding or attempting to avoid charges for use of telecommunications service, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-2. 

Chapter 30 - CEMETERIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Parks, recreation and cultural arts commission, § 70-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Criminal trespass and damage to property, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-20 et seq.; abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds, O.C.G.A. § 36-72-1 et seq. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 30-1. - Driving in cemetery. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate or drive any motor vehicle in the city cemetery, except on the designated streets and thoroughfares. It shall be illegal for any person to drive any motor vehicles across or over any concrete walls or markers in such cemetery. 
(Code 1975, 14-20; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Secs. 30-2-30-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RULES AND REGULATIONS 

Sec. 30-26. - Supervision. 
    The supervision and care of the city cemeteries shall be the duty of the parks, recreation, and cultural arts department (hereinafter referred to as the department) by agreement with the mayor and city council. The department will employ a cemetery coordinator to oversee the care and enforce the rules and regulations of the city cemetery. The coordinator shall be under the supervision of the department. 
(Ord. Of 8-2-93; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Sec. 30-27. - Lot sales and records. 
(a)  The department's cemetery division shall collect fees and issue receipts, sell lots and permits, and any other documents required. 
(b)  The planning department of the city shall maintain maps of all cemetery lots with owners designated on those sold and provide a current copy of same to the department. 
(c)  The cemetery secretary will keep a typed record of all burials in the city cemetery, giving the names, nativity, age, and sex of each person. 
(d)  The cemetery coordinator will also keep a record of the number of lots in which persons are interred and if the bodies are removed to any other lot, will make a record of the fact. This record shall be subject to inspection of persons desiring to see such book. 
(e)  No cemetery lots shall be reserved in any section of the cemetery. No lots will be sold in sections not opened by the city. 
(f)  A cemetery lot price schedule will be on file in the office of the parks, recreation and cultural arts department. The price of the cemetery lots shall be based upon the number of burial spaces. Each burial space shall be five feet by ten feet with the exception of the infant section which shall be three feet by four feet. 
(Ord. Of 8-2-93, § A; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Sec. 30-28. - Permits. 
(a)  A permit fee shall be charged for. 
(1)  A grave to be dug. 
(2)  A grave to be reopened. 
(3)  A grave to be disintered. 
(4)  A grave to be owner transferred. 
(b)  Permits will be issued by the cemetery coordinator and must be obtained 12 hours prior to the planned activity. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, § B; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Sec. 30-29. - Grave digging or maintenance. 
(a)  Only approved persons or firms with a state license, upon receipt of a permit from family, may dig graves in the city cemeteries. 
(b)  General maintenance may be done by lot owners on their lots at anytime except while a burial is in progress. 
(c)  The lot owner is responsible for insuring that all excess dirt is removed from city cemetery, leaving at least two feet covering the vault and shall level off and place or make permanent grave site covering. At the end of 30 days, the city will remove the excess dirt to level off and make permanent grave site covering and bill the lot owner or family, $25.00 for the service. 
(d)  No grave shall be less than four feet to the bottom of the vault. No wooden boxes shall be used for burial. Vaults are required for all burials having a length of five feet. Vaults must be made of concrete, fiberglass, steel, or equal. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, C; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Sec. 30-30. - Trees and shrubs. 
(a)  Trees are not permitted. Shrubs or plants may be planted within the confine of the grave plots. 
(b)  If trees or plants currently exist on a grave lot the cemetery coordinator has the authority to remove them if they become unsightly or interfere with the maintenance or orderly operation of other plots. 
(c)  The cemetery coordinator will notify the lot owner of maintenance needs which shall be done by the owner. 
(d)  If the city maintenance crew is required to perform necessary lot maintenance the owner will be billed for the work at $25.00 per hour. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, D; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Sec. 30-31. - Lot flowers, wreaths, etc. 
(a)  Lot owners may place flowers, wreaths, etc., on their plots at any time. 
(b)  Live flowers shall be removed by the owner within 14 days of their placement. 
(c)  Plastic or silk arrangements shall be removed within two months of their placement. 
(d)  Items not removed by the owner may be removed by the cemetery coordinator when he determines they are unsightly or faded. 
(e)  Following a burial the owner shall remove all original arrangements within 14 days. 
(f)  If lot arrangements are vandalized the cemetery coordinator may immediately clean the lot without notifying the owner. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, E; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Sec. 30-32. - Erection of monuments, gravestones, and markers. 
(a)  In all sections of the city cemetery: 
(1)  Grave markers will carry no restrictions. However, they must be inside the boundaries of the owner's lot by six inches on all sides. Damage to markers shall be repaired within two weeks of notification of the owner by the owner. 
(2)  Each headstone and foot stone shall have a six-inch concrete base or footing. All footings will be inspected by the cemetery coordinator prior to the stone being set. 
(3)  Effective December 1, 2016, gravel covering for new graves is prohibited. For existing graves with gravel covering as of December 1, 2016, gravel may be replenished by the owner to maintain sufficient ground cover. 
(4)  Effective December 1, 2016, coping, walls, and fences are prohibited. For existing graves with coping, walls, or fences as of December 1, 2016, such coping, walls, or fencing may be repaired with similar material by the owner. Coping, walls, or fencing that is damaged or deteriorated and deemed unsafe or unsightly by the cemetery coordinator will be removed and will not be replaced by the department. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, F; Ord. of 10-4-99; Res. No. 28-2016, 12-5-16) 
Sec. 30-33. - Aboveground vaults, crypts, or mausoleums. 
    Aboveground vaults, crypts, or mausoleums are allowed in all sections of the city cemetery. Mausoleums may be a maximum of nine feet in height, designed to accommodate two vaults (bodies). 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, G; Ord. of 10-4-99; Res. No. 28-2016, 12-5-16) 
Sec. 30-34. - Burial of paupers. 
    The burial of paupers must be approved by the mayor and city council or their assigned representatives. At the request of the assigned representative, the party requesting burial shall disclose pertinent information that is related to the burial. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, H; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
State Law reference- Burial of paupers, O.C.G.A. 31-21-20 et seq. 
Sec. 30-35. - Burials. 
(a)  The city cemetery will accommodate burials of humans only. 
(b)  Cremation burial policy. 
(1)  Cemetery coordinator must pre-approve any grave opening in the city cemetery. 
(2)  All grave sites must be dug by a licensed grave digger. 
(3)  Cremation vaults are required. 
(4)  Vaults must have a minimum of 24 inches of dirt covering the top. 
(5)  Burial of cremains limited to two per grave. 
(Ord. of 10-4-99; Amd. of 3-4-02) 
Editor's note- An ordinance of October 4, 1999, amended ch. 30 by adding a new § 30-35, and renumbering former §§ 30-35-30-40 as new §§ 30-36-30-41. 
Sec. 30-36. - Disinterment. 
    No disinterment shall be allowed, except as provided by state law. The cemetery coordinator shall make arrangements with the owner or person obtaining the permit for disinterment for such work. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, I; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Note- Former § 30-35. See editor's note, § 30-35. 
State Law reference- Coroner's authority, O.C.G.A., 45-16-45. 
Sec. 30-37. - Vandalism. 
    It shall be unlawful to mutilate or deface any portion of a grave in the city cemetery. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, J(1); Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Note- Former § 30-36. See editor's note, § 30-35. 
Sec. 30-38. - Cemetery hours. 
    The city cemeteries are closed every day from sundown to sunup. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, J(2); Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Note- Former § 30-37. See editor's note, § 30-35. 
Sec. 30-39. - Burial notification. 
    The cemetery coordinator shall be notified by the owner or his assigned representative 12 hours prior to a burial. 
(Ord. of 8-2-93, K; Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Note- Former § 30-38. See editor's note, § 30-35. 
Sec. 30-40. - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Res. No. 01-2017, adopted January 9, 2017, repealed § 30-40, which pertained to fees and derived from Ord. of 8-2-93; Ord. of 10-4-99; Res. No. 28-2016, 12-5-16. 
Sec. 30-41. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    All violations of this article shall be punished upon conviction pursuant to section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 10-4-99) 
Note- Former § 30-40. See editor's note, § 30-35. 
Chapter 34 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES[1] 
(RESERVED) 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to an agreement dated December 7, 1993, city and county officials approved a comprehensive emergency operations plan which established the Carroll County Emergency Management Agency and provided for a director of emergency management. An official copy of such plan is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference- Emergency services, ch. 46; fire protection and prevention, ch. 54; floods, ch. 58; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66. 
State Law reference- Georgia Mutual Aid Act, O.C.G.A. § 36-69-1 et seq.; Georgia Emergency Management Act of 1981, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-1 et seq.; Interstate Civil Defense and Disaster Compact, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-70; authority to adopt temporary or experimental traffic regulations to cover emergencies or special conditions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371(a)(19). 

Chapter 38 - COURTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- City attorney, § 2-131 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 38-1-38-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - MUNICIPAL COURT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The city has developed a schedule of fines to be imposed for violations of ordinances and traffic offenses. An official copy of such schedule is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
State Law reference- Contracts to furnish municipal court services authorized, O.C.G.A. § 15-7-80 et seq.; powers of presiding officer in court of a municipal corporation to bind over or commit criminal offenders to jail, O.C.G.A. § 17-7-22; municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; establishment and jurisdiction of municipal courts, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶I. 

Sec. 38-26. - Municipal court. 
    There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Carrollton. 
Sec. 38-27. - Judges. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he shall have attained the age of 21 years and shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be appointed by the city council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of three members of the city council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council journal. 
Sec. 38-28. - Convening of court. 
    The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance. 
Sec. 38-29. - Powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of the city Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have the authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed a fine of $200.00 or 20 days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for not more than six months or both such fine and imprisonment or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have the authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operation and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the actual cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violation of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizance to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before the court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety bond for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, his bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution shall be issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments, and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears by probable cause that state law has been violated. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(i)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(j)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to municipal courts and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations. 
Sec. 38-30. - Certiorari. 
    The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the county superior court, under the laws of the state regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
Sec. 38-31. - Rules. 
    With the approval of the city council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the city council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to such proceedings. 
Secs. 38-32-38-39. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - OFFICE OF PROSECUTING ATTORNEY OF THE MUNICIPAL COURT 

Sec. 38-40. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Office of Prosecuting Attorney of the Municipal Court Ordinance." 
(Res. No. 03-2018, 2-2-18) 
Sec. 38-41. - Findings and intent. 
    This article is adopted to address requirements made under Georgia law for the city to pass an ordinance or resolution creating the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court should the city choose to hire or have a prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. Under state law, in order to have a municipal court prosecutor, the city must pass this ordinance or resolution and provide to the prosecuting attorneys' council of the State of Georgia a copy of the same. The city is also required to submit the name of the person appointed to be the prosecuting attorney of the municipal court within 30 days of such appointment in order to maintain the office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court. It is therefore the intent of the city to comply with Georgia law, particularly O.C.G.A. Article 5, of Chapter 18, of Title 15, and to enact this article. 
(Res. No. 03-2018, 2-2-18) 
Sec. 38-42. - Establishment of office. 
    The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court is hereby established for the purpose of providing representation of the City of Carrollton in matters pertaining to ordinance violations of the city and state offenses enforceable in the municipal court as allowed by Georgia law. The prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall be a part-time position and shall be appointed by the city manager or his/her designee. 
(Res. No. 03-2018, 2-2-18) 
Sec. 38-43. - Qualifications. 
    Any person appointed as the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court of the City of Carrollton shall be a member in good standing of the state bar of Georgia and admitted to practice before the trial and appellate courts of this state. Nothing in this article shall prevent the city from appointing the city attorney to be the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court, so long as all other requirements under the law are met. 
(Res. No. 03-2018, 2-2-18) 
Sec. 38-44. - Oath. 
    The prosecuting attorney of the municipal court for the City of Carrolton shall take and subscribe to the following oath: 
'I swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and impartially and without fear, favor, or affection discharge my duties as prosecuting attorney of the Municipal Court for the City of Carrollton, and will take only my lawful compensation.' I do further swear (or affirm) that I am not the holder of any unaccounted for public money due this state, or any political subdivision or authority thereof; that I am not the holder of any office of trust under the government of the United States, any other state, or any foreign state which I am prohibited from holding by the laws of the State of Georgia; and that I am otherwise qualified to hold said office, according to the Constitution and Laws of Georgia; and that I will support the Constitutions of the United States and of this state.' 
(Res. No. 03-2018, 2-2-18) 
Sec. 38-45. - Term of office. 
    Unless otherwise provided by the charter for the City of Carrollton, the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court shall serve a term of office of two years. 
(Res. No. 03-2018, 2-2-18) 
Sec. 38-46. - Jurisdiction, duties, and authority. 
    The office of prosecuting attorney of the municipal court for the City of Carrollton shall have the duty and authority to represent the city as defined by the city charter and by state law, particularly as described in O.C.G.A. § 15-18-96. 
(Res. No. 03-2018, 2-2-18) 
Sec. 38-47. - Ratification. 
    This article shall ratify all actions that have been taken by the persons acting in the positions of the office of the prosecuting attorney for the municipal court to date as authorized by the mayor and city council. 
(Res. No. 03-2018, 2-2-18) 
Secs. 38-48-38-50. - Reserved. 
Chapter 42 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Mayor and council, § 2-26 et seq. 
State Law reference- Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 

Sec. 42-1. - Partisan primaries prohibited. 
    No political party may conduct primaries for the purpose of nominating candidates for municipal office in the city. 
(Code 1975, § 7-1) 
State Law reference- Prohibition of partisan primaries, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-139 
Sec. 42-2. - Location of polling places. 
    The five locations of voting precincts within the city are: 
North Lakeshore Recreation Center. 
Bonner Building. 
Westside Gymnasium. 
Food Service Center at West Georgia College. 
Carroll County Administrative Office Building. 
(Mo. of 3-4-85) 
State Law reference- Duty of municipal governing authority to fix location of polling places, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-265. 
Chapter 46 - EMERGENCY SERVICES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Pursuant to a letter of intent dated April 19, 1988, Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company was authorized to proceed with the implementation of an enhanced 911 emergency service system for Carrollton and Carroll County. A copy of such letter with addendums and exhibits is on file in the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference- Civil emergencies, ch. 34; fire protection and prevention, ch. 54; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; towing services, § 98-31 et seq. 
State Law reference- Georgia Emergency Telephone Number 911 Service Act of 1977, O.C.G.A. § 46-5-120 et seq. 

Sec. 46-1. - Exposure of emergency response employees to infectious diseases. 
(a)  Application. For the purposes of this section, the term "emergency response employees" includes law enforcement officers and firefighters. 
(b)  Designation of contact person. The police and fire chiefs will each assign a designated officer to serve as a contact person in case of exposure to a potentially fatal infectious disease. The list of life-threatening diseases includes tuberculosis, hepatitis B, HIV/AIDS, diphtheria, meningococcal disease, plague, rabies and certain exotic fevers. 
(c)  Standard operating procedure. The police and fire chiefs and/or their designees will develop and maintain a standard operating procedure in accordance with the Ryan White Comprehensive AIDS Resources Emergency Act and will work in cooperation with the public health department and local medical facilities. 
(d)  Counseling and testing upon exposure. Any emergency response employee who sustains significant exposure is assured counseling and testing will be made available. 
(e)  Responsibilities of officers. 
(1)  Reports will be maintained on each exposure by the designated officer with the fire department. 
(2)  Records of exposures will be maintained in confidential files by the fire chief or his designee. 
(3)  Training will be developed by the designated officers and made available to all emergency response employees. 
(4)  There will be ongoing coordination with the public health department and the local medical facilities. 
(Ord. of 5-16-94, §§ 1-4) 
Chapter 50 - ENVIRONMENT[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; parks and recreation, ch. 70; solid waste, ch. 78; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 50-1-50-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - NUISANCES[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- The city has developed instructions for filing a petition to abate a nuisance within the city pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. The instructions and related forms are available through the office of the city clerk. 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq.; animals, ch. 14; dogs, § 14-26 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 50-26. - General duty to maintain premises. 
    All property owners within the city are required to keep their premises in a clean, sanitary, and healthy condition. 
(Code 1975, § 9-2) 
Sec. 50-27. - General cleanliness of premises. 
    It shall be the duty of every owner or occupant of any parcel of land within the city to keep any and every house, building, establishment, lot, yard, or ground owned or occupied by him, at all times, free from filth, carrion, or impure or unwholesome matters or odors of any nature whatsoever. 
(Code 1975, § 9-3) 
Sec. 50-28. - Nuisances; offensive deposits in public places. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person: 
(1)  To deposit, throw, place, or cause to be deposited, thrown or placed, into or upon any public square, street, alley or sidewalk of the city, or the private property of another any paper, rag, shavings, trash, or rubbish; any chips, ashes, or cuttings of vines, shrubbery, or trees; any filth, offal, or rotten fruit, vegetable, or meat; any dead birds or animals; any human or other excrement or wastes; or any liquids or any other thing or things which are or may become offensive, or which may injure or damage any of the public squares, streets, alleys, or sidewalks of the city, or the private property of another, or interfere with the free use and enjoyment of same; 
(2)  To erect a dam or other obstruction or prevent the natural flow of water, causing it to collect in pools upon any public square, street, alley or sidewalk of the city, or the private property of another; to allow any such dam or obstruction to continue on any property owned or controlled by such person, after knowledge of its existence; or to do or cause to be done any work the effect of which will be to dam, obstruct, or prevent the natural flow of water, causing it to collect in pools upon any public square, street, alley or sidewalk of the city, or the private property of another; 
(3)  To knowingly dispose of waste or rubbish directly into an open or flowing body of water; or 
(4)  To cause or allow the erosion of soil from water or wind or the movement of sediments into state waters or onto any public square, street, alley or sidewalk of the city, or the private property of another, unless pursuant to and in compliance with a permit issued under article III of this chapter. 
(Code 1975, § 9-4; Res. No. 2-2006, 1-3-06) 
Sec. 50-29. - Nuisances: offensive accumulations. 
    An owner or occupant of property within the city shall not: 
(1)  Allow garbage, trash, rubbish, debris, filth, offal, human or other excrement or wastes, weeds, vines, grass, or other vegetation to accumulate on said property, which would likely become a breeding place for snakes, rats, flies, gnats, mosquitoes, or other harmful or dangerous creatures or insects, or is likely to cause personal injury or property damage by human illness or fire, or which may become a health hazard for any other reason, or may become a hazard to traffic on the public highways and streets of the city; or 
(2)  Allow or maintain a dwelling, building, or structure on said property that is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use; that is dangerous or injurious to the health and safety of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure or the occupants of surrounding dwellings, buildings, or structures; that increases the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; or lacks adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities. 
(Code 1975, § 9-5; Res. No. 2-2006, 1-3-06) 
Sec. 50-30. - Notice requiring abatement of nuisances. 
    Any person who allows or causes a condition described in section 50-28 or any owner or occupant of property who permits the same to become in a condition described in section 50-29 shall be notified in writing by the city manager or his designee to remove or remedy the condition within the period prescribed in the notice. However, the city manager or his designee is hereby expressly authorized-with or without notice to such persons, owners, or occupants-to take any reasonable actions necessary to remove or remedy such conditions in the event of an emergency situation, such that the city manager deems such actions necessary for the protection of the public health, safety, or welfare. Such actions include but are not limited to suspension of water and sewer service; rescinding certificates of occupancy or business licenses; fencing in or otherwise limiting access to the affected area; and/or removal or abatement of the nuisance by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 9-6; Res. No. 2-2006, 1-3-06; Ord. No. 11-2014, 9-8-14) 
Sec. 50-31. - Abatement by city; liability for costs. 
    If the person, property owner, or occupant of the property fails to remove or remedy the condition described in the notice to him within the period prescribed, the city shall complete the work and remove the matter complained of, and the city manager's office shall submit the costs of the work to the person, property owner, or occupant of the property, to whom the notice was given concerning the condition. In the event of an emergency as described in section 50-30, the city manager's office shall submit the costs of the work to the person, property owner, or occupant of the property who caused or allowed the condition. The person, property owner, or occupant of the property shall be liable for such costs, and if they fail to reimburse the city within thirty (30) days of receipt of an invoice for such costs, the city manager may undertake any lawful action to recover such costs, including but not limited to placing a lien on the affected property. 
(Code 1975, § 9-7; Res. No. 2-2006, 1-3-06) 
Sec. 50-32. - Sweeping trash onto streets, keeping sidewalks clean. 
    No person shall sweep any trash, dirt, filth, clay, manure or other objectionable matter from the sidewalks into the streets, nor shall any property owners or lessees permit any such matter to remain on the sidewalk in front of his property or on the space between the property line and outer edge of sidewalk. 
(Code 1975, § 9-8) 
Sec. 50-33. - Tall weeds-Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner in the city to allow noxious weeds and grasses to grow upon his premise or premises over a foot in height. 
(Code 1975, § 9-9) 
Sec. 50-34. - Same-Duty to cut. 
    Any property owner upon notice from the board of health, information by the chief of police, or complaint of any citizen of the existence of noxious weeds and grasses upon his premises over one foot in height shall immediately cause the same to be cut down and the premises cleaned up into a sanitary and healthy condition. 
(Code 1975, § 9-10) 
Sec. 50-35. - Responsibility for vegetation between property line and curb. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property owner or lessee of property within the city limits to allow any weeds, shrubbery or other rank vegetation of any character to grow between the property line and outer edge of the street curb, and it shall be the duty of such owner or lessee to keep grass plots between the property line and outer curb properly cut or mown. 
(Code 1975, § 9-11) 
Sec. 50-36. - Contractors to avoid spilling debris. 
    It shall be the duty of every contractor licensed to do business in the city to use extra diligence in their work and the conduct of their business, so that debris therefrom shall not be allowed to fall, be strewn upon, or accumulate upon the streets and sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 9-12) 
Sec. 50-37. - Duty to remove debris. 
    If debris shall be allowed to fall, be strewn, or accumulate upon the streets or sidewalks resulting from activities defined in this article, it shall be the duty of the contractor to immediately, within 24 hours, remove such debris leaving the streets and sidewalks in a clean, clear, and uncluttered condition, and failure to do so shall be a violation of this article. 
(Code 1975, § 9-13) 
Sec. 50-38. - Special permits for debris. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to deposit, place or dump any debris upon the streets or sidewalks of the city, except as provided in this section. 
(1)  Whenever a person shall deem it necessary or expedient to deposit, place or dump debris upon the streets or sidewalks on a temporary basis in conjunction with the efficient discharge of his efforts and responsibility on a project, he shall first obtain a written permit from the city, which shall state the nature of the debris, the location and length of time it will remain. 
(2)  Upon the termination of the permit, it shall be the duty of the person within 24 hours to remove such debris deposited upon the streets and sidewalks under the terms and conditions of the permit as provided in subsection (1) of this section. 
(Code 1975, § 9-14) 
Secs. 50-39-50-50. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - JUNKED OR ABANDONED VEHICLES[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4; when police officers may remove vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-206; abandoned motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-11-1 et seq.; removal of improperly parked cars, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-13. 

Sec. 50-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this division, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Junked motor vehicle means any contrivance, or part thereof, propelled by power and used for the transportation of persons or property on public streets and highways, the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
(1)  Wrecked. 
(2)  Dismantled. 
(3)  Partially dismantled. 
(4)  Inoperative. 
(5)  Abandoned. 
(6)  Discarded. 
(Code 1975, § 14-54) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 50-52. - Nuisance declared, prohibited; exceptions. 
    The presence of any junked motor vehicle on public property or any private lot, tract or parcel of land or portion thereof, occupied or unoccupied, improved or unimproved, within the city, shall be deemed a public nuisance. It shall be unlawful for any person to cause or maintain such a public nuisance by wrecking, dismantling, partially dismantling, rendering inoperable, abandoning or discarding any motor vehicle on the real property of another or to suffer, permit or allow junked motor vehicles to be parked, let or maintained on his own real property, provided that this section shall not apply with regard to: 
(1)  Any motor vehicle in an enclosed building; 
(2)  Any motor vehicle on the premises of a business enterprise operated in a lawful manner, when necessary to the operation of such business enterprise; or 
(3)  Any motor vehicle on property occupied and used for repair, reconditioning and remodeling of motor vehicles in conformance with the zoning ordinance of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 14-55) 
Sec. 50-53. - Provisions declared supplemental. 
    This division is not the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or inoperative vehicles within the city. It shall be supplemental and in addition to the other regulatory code, statutes and ordinances heretofore or hereinafter enacted by the city, the state or any other legal entity or agency having jurisdiction. 
(Code 1975, § 14-56) 
Sec. 50-54. - Administration. 
    The provisions of this division shall be administered and enforced by the chief of police. In the enforcement of this division, such officer and his duly authorized agents may enter upon private or public property to examine a junked motor vehicle, or obtain information as to the identity of a junked motor vehicle and to remove or cause the removal of a junked motor vehicle declared to be a nuisance pursuant to this division. 
(Code 1975, § 14-57) 
Sec. 50-55. - Agents of chief of police. 
    Included in the category of authorized agents as noted above in section 50-54 shall be any wrecker, towing, storage or other similar service as the chief of police may designate. 
(Code 1975, § 14-58) 
Sec. 50-56. - Notice required. 
    When the chief of police shall deem a public nuisance to exist under this division, he shall issue a notice to the parties hereinafter stated and such notice shall: 
(1)  Be in writing; 
(2)  Specify the public nuisance and its location; 
(3)  Request the public nuisance be abated; 
(4)  Request that the party appear at a public hearing at a stated date, time and place to be held on the question of abatement or removal of the junked motor vehicle if such notice is not complied with. 
(Code 1975, § 14-59) 
Sec. 50-57. - To whom notice given; manner of service. 
    The notice required by section 50-56 shall be given no less than ten days before the hearing and shall be served personally on, or mailed by certified mail return receipt requested, to the owner of the land as shown on the last city ad valorem tax digest or to the occupant if the owner is not in possession of the premises and to the last registered and legal owner of record of the junked motor vehicle unless the same is in such condition that identification numbers are not available to determine ownership. If the owner of any aforesaid junked motor vehicle, or his address, is not known or cannot be readily ascertained, the notice to him to abate and of the public hearing may be given by attaching such notice to the aforesaid vehicle and by posting such notice on the public bulletin board at city hall no less than ten days prior to such hearing. If the latter method of service is used the chief of police or his duly authorized agent shall make an affidavit attesting to such facts. 
(Code 1975, § 14-60) 
Sec. 50-58. - Hearing and action thereon. 
    All hearings under this division shall be held before a hearing officer duly designated by the chief of police who shall hear all facts and testimony on the condition of the junked motor vehicle and the circumstances concerning its location on the private property or public property. The hearing officer shall not be limited by the technical rules of evidence. The hearing officer may impose such conditions and take such other action as he deems appropriate under the circumstances to carry out the purpose of this article. He may delay the time for removal of the junked motor vehicle if in his opinion circumstances justify it. At the conclusion of the public hearing the hearing officer may find that a junked motor vehicle has been abandoned, wrecked, dismantled or is inoperative on private or public property and order the same removed from the property as a public nuisance and order disposal of the same. The order requiring removal shall include a description of the junked motor vehicle and the correct identification number and state license tag number of the junked motor vehicle, if available. 
(Code 1975, § 14-61) 
Sec. 50-59. - Appeal from hearing officer. 
(a)  Any interested party may appeal the decision of the hearing officer by filing a written notice of appeal with the clerk of the municipal court within five days after his decision. 
(b)  Such appeal shall be heard by the mayor's court judge who may affirm, amend or reverse the order to take other action deemed appropriate. 
(Code 1975, § 14-62) 
Sec. 50-60. - Redemption; sale upon failure to redeem, use of proceeds. 
    Once the junked motor vehicle is removed from the premises as stated in section 50-58, the owner may redeem the same by tendering to the chief of police an amount of money sufficient to cover the cost of removing the vehicle from the premises and storing same. If such redemption is not made within 30 days from the time such junked motor vehicle is removed from the premises then the chief of police is hereby authorized to sell such vehicle at either public or private sale whether by the taking of bids or other comparable method. Once such sale is made the proceeds shall first be used to defray any costs incurred in removing, storing, and selling the junked motor vehicle. Any remaining proceeds will then be paid to the owner of such vehicle or if no owner is known nor can such be ascertained by reasonable efforts said remaining proceeds will be deposited with the board of education to use for school purposes. 
(Code 1975, § 14-63) 
Sec. 50-61. - Disclaimer of liability. 
    Neither the owner or occupant of the premises from which any junked motor vehicle shall be removed, their servants or agents, or the chief of police of the city, or its agents, shall be liable for any loss or damage to such junked motor vehicle while being removed or as a result of any subsequent sale or other disposition. 
(Code 1975, § 14-64) 
Sec. 50-62. - Removal of vehicle or giving permission for removal deemed compliance. 
    The removal of the junked motor vehicle from the premises prior to the time of public hearing shall be considered compliance with the provisions of this division and no further action shall be taken against the owner of the junked motor vehicle, the owner or occupant of the premises. Further, written permission given to the chief of police for the removal of the junked motor vehicle by the owner of the same, the owner or occupant of the premises shall be considered in compliance with the provisions of this division on his part and no further action shall be taken against the ones giving such permission. 
(Code 1975, § 14-65) 
Secs. 50-63-50-75. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - NOISE[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; animals, ch. 14. 
State Law reference- Limits on sound volume produced by radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within the motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 

Sec. 50-76. - Findings of fact. 
    It is found and declared that: 
(1)  The making and creation of excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises within the city is a condition which has existed for some time and the extent and volume of such noise is increasing. 
(2)  The making, creation or maintenance of such excessive unnecessary, unnatural or unusually loud noises which are prolonged, unusual and unnatural in their time, place and use, affect and are a detriment to public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity of the residents of the city. 
(3)  The necessity in the public interest for the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article is declared as a matter of legislative determination and public policy, and it is further declared that the provisions and prohibitions contained and enacted in this article are in pursuance of and for the purpose of securing and promoting the public health, comfort, convenience, safety, welfare and prosperity and the peace and quiet of the city and its inhabitants. 
(Code 1975, § 15-1) 
Sec. 50-77. - Excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noises prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any excessive, unnecessary or unusually loud noise or any noise which either annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others, within the limits of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 15-2) 
Sec. 50-78. - Specific prohibitions enumerated. 
    The following acts, among others, are declared to be loud, disturbing and unnecessary noises in violation of this article, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive, namely: 
(1)  Horns, signaling devices, etc. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any vehicle on any street or public place of the city, except as a danger warning; the creation by means of any such signaling device of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound; the sounding of any such device for an unnecessary and unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device except one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust; and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is for any reason held up. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs, etc. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the persons who are in the room, vehicle or chamber in which such machine or device is operated and who are voluntary listeners thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, machine or device in such a manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers, amplifiers for advertising. The using, operating or permitting to be played, used or operated of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure. 
(4)  Yelling, shouting, etc. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of persons in any office, or in any dwelling, hotel or other type of residence, or of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals, birds, etc. The keeping of any animal or bird which by causing frequent or long-continued noise shall disturb the comfort or repose of any person in the vicinity. 
(6)  Steam whistles. The blowing of any locomotive steam whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work as a warning of fire or danger, or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motor boat or motor vehicle except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading, opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavation), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except in case of urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the building official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the building official should determine that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., and if he shall further determine that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest if such work were to be prohibited, he may grant permission for such work to be done within the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., upon application being made at the time the permit for the work is awarded or during the progress of the work. 
(11)  Schools, courts, churches, hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while the same are in use, or adjacent to any hospital, which unreasonably interferes with the workings of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital, provided conspicuous signs are displayed in such streets indicating that the same is a school, hospital or court street. 
(12)  Hawkers, peddlers. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturbs the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Drums. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention by creation of noise to any performance, show or sale. 
(14)  Metal rails, pillars and columns, transportation thereof. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(15)  Pile drivers, hammers, etc. The operation between the hours of 10:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m. of any pile driver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise. 
(16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(Code 1975, § 15-3) 
Sec. 50-79. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - UNSAFE BUILDINGS 

Sec. 50-80. - Definitions. 
(a)  As used in sections 50-80 through 50-90 herein, the terms: 
    Applicable codes means any optional housing or abatement standard provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2., as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. tit. 25, ch. 2; and any building codes adopted by local ordinance prior to October 1, 1991, or the minimum standard codes provided in O.C.G.A. tit. 8, ch. 2, after October 1, 1991, provided that such building or minimum standard codes for real property improvements shall be deemed to mean those buildings or minimum standard codes in existence at the time such real property improvements were constructed unless otherwise provided by law. 
    Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
    Drug crime means an act, which is a violation of O.C.G.A. tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
    Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. 
    Governing authority means the mayor and city council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
    Interested parties means: 
(1)  Owner; 
(2)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
(3)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; 
(4)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the petitioner or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of the court. Interested parties shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right of way whose interest is properly recorded which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
(5)  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
    Municipality means the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
    Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any housing authority officer, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the government of the Municipality relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the Municipality. 
    Public officer means the officer or officers who are authorized by O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 and by this article adopted under O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 to exercise the powers prescribed by this article or any agent of such officer or officers. 
    Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the dwelling, building, or structure is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
    Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the dwelling, building, or structure is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(b)  Definitions incorporated by reference. To the extent not stated above, the definitions set forth in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-8 are incorporated herein by reference. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-81. - Purpose. 
    It is found and declared that in the City of Carrollton, Georgia, there is the existence or occupancy of dwellings or other buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business occupancy or use and are inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City of Carrollton and are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Carrollton; and that a public necessity exists for the repair, closing, or demolition of such dwellings, buildings, or structures. It is further found and declared that in the City of Carrollton there is in existence conditions or uses of real estate which render adjacent real estate unsafe or inimical to safe human habitation, which such uses are dangerous and injurious to the health, safety, and welfare of the residents of the City of Carrollton, and that a public necessity exists for the repair of such conditions or the cessation of such uses. Therefore, it is the purpose of this article that whenever the governing authority finds that there exists in the City of Carrollton dwellings, buildings, or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings, or structures, unfit, unsafe, or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, or welfare, or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the City of Carrollton, or vacant dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties in which drug crimes are being committed, the City of Carrollton may exercise its police power to repair, close, or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings, or structures in the manner provided in this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. 
    All the provisions of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, including method and procedure, shall also be applied to private property where there exists an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions to those persons residing or working in the vicinity. A finding by any public authority or public officer shall constitute prima facie evidence that said property is in violation of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-8 through 41-2-17. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-82. - Scope and applicability. 
(a)  This article is enacted pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17, as amended, and sometimes referenced herein as the "statute" or "code." O.C.G.A. § 41-2-7 specifies the scope and purpose of this article. All powers and authorities granted to public authorities and public officers by the statute are hereby incorporated herein by reference so as to be assumed, delegated, and granted pursuant to this article. 
(b)  The provisions of this article shall apply to both residential and non-residential property, whether being occupied or not and whether being developed or not, within the corporate limits of the Municipality. 
(c)  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property within the Municipality to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the Municipality, or such ordinances which regulate or prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-83. - Authority and powers of the city manager or his designee. 
(a)  The city manager or his designee has been designated with the responsibility to exercise the powers prescribed by this article. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee is hereby authorized, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 41-2-11, to exercise such powers as may be necessary to carry out and effectuate the purpose and provisions of this article, including but not limited to the following powers: 
(1)  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the municipality in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(2)  To retain experts including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, and accountants; 
(3)  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
(4)  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
(5)  To appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents, and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; 
(6)  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers and agents as he may designate; and 
(7)  To issue citations for violations of the provisions of this article. The city manager or his designee shall also be authorized to request the city attorney to prepare and file complaints to enforce such citations in a court of competent jurisdiction prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-84. - Standards for determining unfit buildings and structures. 
(a)  Any dwelling, building, or structure that has any of the following conditions (as listed below under subsection (b)), such that the life, health, property, or safety of its occupants or the general public are endangered are hereby declared illegal and unfit for human habitation or the building or structure's current commercial, industrial or business use (as applicable), and shall be abated by repair or demolition. The complaint and inspection of an unfit dwelling, building, or structure shall be as set forth in section 50-85 of this article. 
(b)  The city manager or his designee is authorized to determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, structure, or property which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, structure, or property; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, structures, or properties; or of other residents of the City of Carrollton, Georgia. Examples of such conditions include, but are not limited to, the following conditions of any dwelling, building, structure, or property: 
(1)  Defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair; 
(5)  Structural defects; 
(6)  Uncleanliness, including but not limited to rodent infestation; 
(7)  Damage by fire, flood, wind, or other cause to the extent that the structural integrity of the building or structure is less than it was prior to damage and is less than the minimum requirement established by the applicable state minimum standard codes for similar new buildings; 
(8)  Construction or maintenance in violation of a specific requirement of the state minimum standard codes, or of any other applicable ordinance of the Municipality, or of any other applicable state law; 
(9)  Decay, deterioration, or dilapidation such that full or partial collapse is likely; 
(10)  The stress in any material, member, or portion thereof, due to all-imposed loads, including dead load, which exceeds the stresses allowed by the applicable state standard minimum code for similar new buildings; 
(11)  The means of egress are not of adequate size or are not arranged to provide a safe path of travel in case of fire or panic; or the fire doors, closing devices and similar features, are in disrepair or in a dilapidated or non-working condition to render the dwelling, building, structure, or property unsafe in case of fire or panic; 
(12)  Exterior siding that is inadequate and unsecured, or is not weather, water, and windproof, such that the dwelling, building, or structure would not pass existing state minimum standard codes for similar new dwellings, buildings, or structures; 
(13)  Conditions such that the structure or portion thereof, for whatever reason, is manifestly unsafe or unsanitary for the purpose for which it is being used; 
(14)  The dwelling, building, or structure is vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed; and 
(15)  Any other condition constituting a public nuisance, including for example, maintaining stagnant or fetid water on the premises; an accumulation of trash, junk, filth, or other unsanitary and unsafe conditions; the generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amounts to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the municipality; and/or maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl or maintaining such a number of animals in such foul and unsanitary conditions as to constitute a public nuisance. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-85. - Complaint and inspection. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the city manager or his designee, by a public authority, or by at least five residents of the municipality, that any dwelling, building, or structure: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
(4)  Has an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions constituting a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity; 
(5)  Constitutes a public nuisance; or 
(6)  Has one or more of the conditions defined in section 50-84 above, the city manager or his designee shall make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property. 
(b)  Upon finding that any dwelling, building, structure, or property: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
(4)  Has an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions constituting a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity; 
(5)  Constitutes a public nuisance; or 
(6)  Has one or more of the conditions defined in section 50-84 above, the city manager or his designee may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties for such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by city manager or his designee to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a date and time certain and at a place within the municipality. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the municipal court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing; 
(c)  That if, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question: 
(1)  Is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; 
(2)  Is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
(3)  Constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
(4)  Has an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth, and other unsanitary or unsafe conditions constituting a public health hazard or a general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity; 
(5)  Constitutes a public nuisance; or 
(6)  Has one or more of the conditions defined in section 50-84 above, the municipal court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
a.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
b.  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violation cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
    For purposes of this article, the municipal court shall make its determination of "reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure" without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be factor in the municipal court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a Georgia appraiser classification as provided in [O.C.G.A.], tit. 43, ch. 39A, qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation in force in the jurisdiction; 
(d)  That, if the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the city manager or his designee may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence within 270 days after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to section 50-87 below or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action must commence. The city manager or his designee shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the city manager or his designee has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any moneys received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The city manager or his designee and the governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials; and 
(f)  That the amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  Said lien shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Carroll County and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under subsection (c) of section 50-86 below. The Clerk of the Superior Court of Carroll County shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of Carroll County and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in force until paid. 
(h)  Upon final determination of costs, fees, and expenses incurred in accordance with this article, the city manager or his designee shall transmit to the county tax commissioner a statement of the total amount due and secured by said lien, together with copies of all notices provided to interested parties. The statement of the city manager or his designee shall be transmitted within 90 days of completion of the repairs, demolition, or closure. It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically [O.C.G.A.], tit. 48, ch. 4; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure shall not apply. The county tax commissioner shall collect and enforce municipal liens imposed pursuant to this article in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1. The county tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality. 
(i)  Enforcement of liens pursuant to this Code section may be initiated at any time following receipt by the county tax commissioner of the final determination of costs in accordance with this article. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. An enforcement proceeding pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78 for delinquent ad valorem taxes may include all amounts due under this article. 
(j)  The redemption amount in any enforcement proceeding pursuant to this article shall be the full amount of the costs as finally determined in accordance with this article, together with interest, penalties, and costs incurred by the governing authority and the county tax commissioner in the enforcement of such lien. Redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. 
(k)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(l)  Review of the municipal court's order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(m)  Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the Municipality to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by summary proceedings or otherwise. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-86. - Service of complaints and orders. 
(a)  Complaints issued by the city manager or his designee pursuant to this article shall be served in the following manner. At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the city manager or his designee shall mail copies of the complaint by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are reasonably ascertainable. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first-class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property within three business days of filing the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing. 
(b)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in Carroll County, Georgia once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
(c)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Carroll County at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
(d)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-87. - Injunctions. 
    Any person affected by an order issued by the public officer may petition to the superior court of Carroll County for an injunction restraining the city manager or his designee from carrying out the provisions of the order and the superior court may, upon such petition, issue a temporary injunction restraining the public officer pending the final disposition of the cause; provided, however, that such person shall present such petition to the court within 15 days of the posting and service of the order of the public officer. De novo hearings shall be had by the superior court on petitions within 20 days. The superior court shall hear and determine the issues raised and shall enter such final order or decree as law and justice may require; provided, however, that it shall not be necessary to file a bond in any amount before obtaining a temporary injunction under this section. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-88. - Compensation for property. 
    Nothing in this article shall be construed as preventing the owner or owners of any property from receiving just compensation for the taking of such property by the power of eminent domain under the laws of the State of Georgia nor as permitting any property to be condemned or destroyed except in accordance with the police power of the State of Georgia. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-89. - Appropriations; grants; donations. 
    The municipality is authorized to make such appropriations from its revenues as it may deem necessary and may accept and apply grants or donations to assist it in carrying out the provisions of this article. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Sec. 50-90. - Powers supplemental to other laws. 
    Nothing in this article or O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 shall be construed to abrogate or impair the power of the courts or any department of the municipality to enforce any provisions of the municipality's charter, ordinances, or regulations nor to prevent or punish violations thereof; and the powers conferred by this article or O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. Moreover, ordinances relating to the subject matter of this article and O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17 adopted prior to July 1, 2001, shall have the same force and effect on and after said date as ordinances adopted subsequent to and by authority of O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-7 through 41-2-17. In sum, this article provides remedies in addition to and cumulative of all other existing remedies of the Municipality and governing authority. 
(Res. No. 11-2016, Exh. A, 2-1-16) 
Secs. 50-91-50-100. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - LITTERING 

Sec. 50-101. - "Litter" defined. 
    For purposes of this article, the term "litter" shall mean garbage, trash, refuse, rubbish, and all other waste material that, if thrown or deposited contrary to the provisions of this article, would tend to create a danger to public health, safety and welfare. 
(Res. No. 04-2015, 5-4-15) 
Sec. 50-102. - Prohibition against littering on public or private property or in waters. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person or persons to dump, deposit, throw or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in the city or any waters in this city unless: 
(1)  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
(2)  The litter is placed into a receptacle or container installed on such property; or 
(3)  The person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, or has first obtained consent of the owner or tenant in lawful possession, or unless the act is done under the personal direction of the owner or tenant, all in a manner consistent with the public welfare. 
(Res. No. 04-2015, 5-4-15) 
Sec. 50-103. - Vehicle loads causing litter. 
    No person shall operate any motor vehicle with a load on or in such vehicle unless the load on or in such vehicle is adequately secured to prevent the dropping or shifting of materials from such load onto the roadway. 
(Res. No. 04-2015, 5-4-15) 
Sec. 50-104. - Violations, enforcement and penalties. 
(a)  Violations. It shall be unlawful for any person to violate any provision or fail to comply with any of the requirements of this article. Any person who has violated or continues to violate the provisions of this article, may be subject to the enforcement actions outlined in this section or may be restrained by injunction or otherwise sentenced in a manner provided by law. 
(b)  Evidence. 
(1)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane, or other conveyance in violation of this article, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(2)  Except as provided in subsection (1), whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of this article is discovered to contain any article or articles, including but not limited to letters, bills, publications or other writing which display the name of the person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated this article. 
(c)  Penalties. Any person who violates this article shall be guilty of a violation and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as follows: 
(1)  By a fine of not less than $250.00 and not more than $1,000.00; and 
(2)  In addition to the fine set out in subsection (1) above, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city. 
(d)  Enforcement. All code enforcement and law enforcement officers of the city, law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this article. 
(Res. No. 04-2015, 5-4-15) 
Secs. 50-105-50-120. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RESERVED[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Resolution 09-2007, § 2, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, repealed article IV, §§ 50-121-50-130, in its entirety. This article pertained to water resource districts and derived from Ord. of June 17, 2002. This information has been incorporated into the City of Carrollton's Code of Ordinances Unified Development Ordinance chapter. 

Secs. 50-121-50-130. - Reserved. 
Chapter 54 - FIRE PROTECTION AND PREVENTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; construction codes, § 18-26 et seq.; civil emergencies, ch. 34; emergency services, ch. 46; historical preservation, ch. 62; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; subdivisions, app. A. 
State Law reference- Statewide application of Standard Fire Prevention Code, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; providing of fire escapes and exits by building owners, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-200 et seq.; impersonating a public officer or employee, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-23; obstruction or hindering of firefighters, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-24.1; transmitting false report of a fire, O.C.G.A. § 16-10-27; regulation of fire and other hazards to persons and property generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq.; smoke detectors required in new dwellings and dwelling units, O.C.G.A. § 25-2-40; local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq.; authority to enact ordinances or fire and life safety codes, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-4; Georgia Firefighter Standards and Training Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-4-1 et seq.; mutual aid resource pacts, O.C.G.A. § 25-6-1 et seq.; Georgia Fire Academy Act, O.C.G.A. § 25-7-1 et seq.; regulation of fireworks, O.C.G.A. § 25-10-1 et seq.; following fire apparatus or emergency vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-247; crossing fire hose, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-248; authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III(a)(1). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 54-1. - Tampering with department equipment. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, other than members of the fire department, during a fire to tamper with the fire truck, hose or any of the firefighting implements, unless requested to do so by some member of the fire department of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 8-2) 
Secs. 54-2-54-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - FLAMMABLE LIQUIDS 

Sec. 54-26. - Storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in section 20.201 of the Fire Prevention Code in which storage of flammable liquids in outside aboveground tanks is prohibited, are hereby established as follows: 
    Commencing on North Park Street and West Reese Street; thence running east on Reese Street to College Street; thence south on College Street to Robinson Avenue; thence east on Robinson Avenue to South White Street; thence south on White Street to West Avenue; thence west on West Street to Dixie Street; thence south on Dixie Street to Center Street; thence west on Center Street to South Park Street; thence north on South Park Street to beginning point. 
(Code 1975, § 8-19) 
Sec. 54-27. - Bulk plants for flammable liquids prohibited. 
    The limits referred to in section 20.601 of the Fire Prevention Code, in which new bulk plants for flammable liquids are prohibited, are hereby established as follows: 
    Commencing on North Park Street and West Reese Street; thence running east on Reese Street to College Street; thence south on College Street to Robinson Avenue; thence east on Robinson Avenue to South White Street; thence south on White Street to West Avenue; thence west on West Street to Dixie Street; thence south on Dixie Street to Center Street; thence west on Center Street to South Park Street; thence north on South Park Street to beginning point. 
(Code 1975, § 8-20) 
Sec. 54-28. - Limits where bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas restricted. 
    The limits referred to in section 25.04 of the Fire Prevention Code, in which bulk storage of liquefied petroleum gas is restricted, are hereby established as follows: 
    Commencing on North Park Street and West Reese Street; thence running east on Reese Street to College Street; thence south on College Street to Robinson Avenue; thence east on Robinson Avenue to South White Street; thence south on White Street to West Avenue; thence west on West Street to Dixie Street; thence south on Dixie Street to Center Street; thence west on Center Street to South Park Street; thence north on South Park Street to beginning point. 
(Code 1975, § 8-21) 
Sec. 54-29. - Violations of article. 
(a)  Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of the code adopted by the city or fail to comply therewith, or who shall violate or fail to comply with any order made thereunder, or who shall build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder, or any certificate or permit issued thereunder, and from which no appeal has been taken, or who shall fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the mayor and city council or by a court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed herein, shall severally for each and every such violation and noncompliance respectively, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable, upon conviction as provided in section 1-11. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue; and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time; and when not otherwise specified, each ten days that prohibited conditions are maintained shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Code 1975, § 8-25) 
ARTICLE III. - FIRE SAFETY STANDARDS 

Sec. 54-30. - Application. 
(a)  The rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, Ga. Comp. R. & Regs. r. 120-3-3-.01 et seq., as may be amended or revised from time to time, are hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. Future amendments and revisions to the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner's rules and regulations are hereby adopted and shall become effective in the city upon promulgation without the necessity of further action on the part of the city. 
(b)  In addition to the rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, sections 54-31 through 54-39 shall apply to all buildings and structures within the city, except for one-family and two-family dwellings, one- and two-family row houses (townhouses) separated by a two-hour fire wall and two-family townhouses separated by a two-hour fire wall. 
(c)  For purposes of this article, a townhouse must be owner occupied. If at anytime the townhouse or a room within the townhouse is rented to a non-owner, the townhouse will be considered a multifamily dwelling for purposes of this article, and the property must comply with sections 54-31 through 54-39. Any townhouse not constructed to the standards set forth in sections 54-31 through 54-39 may only be owner occupied, and in order to obtain a certificate of occupancy, a deed restriction limiting such townhouses to owner occupancy must be recorded and proof of which must be provided to the city. 
(d)  In the event of any conflict between the provisions of this article and the rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, the more stringent provisions shall apply. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 54-31. - Fire apparatus access roads. 
    Appendix D "Fire Apparatus Access Roads" of the 2012 International Fire Code, as may be amended or revised from time to time, is hereby adopted and incorporated by reference. Future amendments to Appendix D "Fire Apparatus Access Roads" of the 2012 International Fire Code are hereby adopted and shall become effective in the city upon promulgation without the necessity of further action on the part of the city. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 54-32. - Sprinkler systems. 
(a)  Multifamily dwellings, as defined in section 1.09.01 of the City of Carrollton Unified Development Ordinance, and commercial buildings exceeding 5,000 square feet shall have a supervised sprinkler fire suppression system. All such sprinkler fire suppression systems shall be National Fire Protection Association Standards 13, 13R, and 13D, and as approved by the city fire marshal. 
(b)  Supervised sprinkler fire suppression systems shall be required on all new buildings that are more than two stories and less than 25 linear feet from another structure that is one story or more, regardless of construction type. 
(c)  Supervised sprinkler fire suppression systems shall be required for any existing commercial building being remodeled that has sleeping accommodations on any floor of the building. 
(d)  Sprinkler fire suppression systems shall be required to be installed in attics of new commercial buildings consisting of 12,000 square feet or more, regardless of how many stories are in the building. 
(e)  Residential kitchen fire suppression systems and residential-style hood systems ducted to the outside shall be required for all multifamily dwellings, as defined in section 1.09.01 of the City of Carrollton Unified Development Ordinance, personal care homes and facilities, day care facilities, community living arrangement facilities, board and care facilities, or assisted living facilities, where cooking units are installed and the stove can be used for food warming, cooking, limited cooking, rehabilitation training, or which produce grease laden vapors. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 54-33. - Fire alarm systems. 
(a)  Multifamily dwellings, as defined in section 1.09.01 of the City of Carrollton Unified Development Ordinance, shall be required to have a supervised fire alarm system connected to sprinkler fire suppression system. 
(b)  All new commercial buildings requiring sprinkler fire suppression systems shall be required to have a supervised fire alarm system. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 54-34. - Fire hydrants. 
    For all multifamily dwellings, as defined in section 1.09.01 of the City of Carrollton Unified Development Ordinance, townhouse or duplex developments, fire hydrants shall be located every 300 feet or as required by the city fire marshal or his designee. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 54-35. - Construction materials. 
    Multifamily dwellings, as defined in section 1.09.01 of the City of Carrollton Unified Development Ordinance, shall be constructed from materials permitted by the International Building Code. All breezeways, decks, or porches for new construction shall be constructed of non-combustible material. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16; Res. No. 01-2019-A, 1-7-19) 
Sec. 54-36. - Inspections. 
    The city fire marshal is hereby authorized to enforce both the rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner and this article, and the city fire marshal is hereby authorized to conduct inspections in accordance therewith. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 54-37. - Unsafe buildings. 
(a)  General. If the city fire marshal's inspection of a premises, building, structure, or any building system reveals, in whole or in part, a clear and inimical threat to human life, safety, or health, the city fire marshal shall issue such notices or orders to remove or remedy the conditions as shall be deemed necessary in accordance with this section, and shall refer the premises, building, structure, or building system to the city's building inspector and codes enforcement officer for any repairs, alterations, remodeling, removal or demolition required. 
(b)  Unsafe conditions. Structures or existing equipment that are or hereafter become unsafe or deficient because of inadequate means of egress or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life or the public welfare, or which involve illegal or improper occupancy or inadequate maintenance, shall be deemed an unsafe condition. A vacant structure which is not secured against unauthorized entry shall be deemed unsafe. 
(c)  Structural hazards. When an apparent structural hazard is caused by the faulty installation, operation or malfunction of any of the items or devices governed by this article, the city fire marshal shall immediately notify the city's building inspector and codes enforcement officer. 
(d)  Evacuation. The city fire marshal or the fire department official in charge of an incident shall be authorized to order the immediate evacuation of any occupied building deemed unsafe when such building has hazardous conditions that present imminent danger to building occupants. Persons so notified shall immediately leave the structure or premises and shall not enter or re-enter until authorized to do so by the city fire marshal or the fire department official in charge of the incident. 
(e)  Summary abatement. Where conditions exist that are deemed hazardous to life and property, the city fire marshal or fire department official in charge of the incident is authorized to abate summarily such hazardous conditions that are in violation of this article. 
(f)  Abatement. The owner, operator or occupant of a building or premises deemed unsafe by the city fire marshal shall abate or cause to be abated or corrected such unsafe conditions either by repair, rehabilitation, demolition or other approved corrective action. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 54-38. - Stop work orders. 
(a)  Order. Whenever the city fire marshal finds any work subject to this article being performed in a manner contrary to the provisions of this article, or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, the city fire marshal is authorized to issue a stop work order. 
(b)  Issuance. A stop work order shall be in writing and shall be given to the owner of the property, or to the owner's agent, or to the person doing the work. Upon issuance of a stop work order, the cited work shall immediately cease. The stop work order shall state the reason for the order, and the conditions under which the cited work is authorized to resume. 
(c)  Emergencies. Where an emergency exists, the city fire marshal shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work. 
(d)  Failure to comply. Any person who shall continue any work after having been served with a stop work order, except such work as that person is directed to perform to remove a violation or unsafe condition, shall be punished as provided in section 54-39 below. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16) 
Sec. 54-39. - Violations. 
(a)  Unlawful acts. It shall be unlawful for a person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, alter, repair, remove, demolish, utilize, or occupy a building, premises or system regulated by this article, or cause same to be done, in conflict with or in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(b)  Owner/occupant responsibility. Correction and abatement of violations of this article shall be the responsibility of the owner. If an occupant creates, or allows to be created, hazardous conditions in violation of this article, the occupant shall be held responsible for the abatement of such hazardous conditions. 
(c)  Notice of violation. When the city fire marshal finds a building, premises, vehicle, storage facility or outdoor area that is in violation of this article, the city fire marshal is authorized to prepare a written notice of violation describing the conditions deemed unsafe and, when compliance is not immediate, specifying a time for compliance and re-inspection. 
(d)  Service. A notice of violation issued pursuant to this section shall be served upon the owner, operator, occupant or other person responsible for the condition or violation, either by personal service, mail or by delivering the same to, and leaving it with, some person of responsibility upon the premises. For unattended or abandoned locations, a copy of such notice of violation shall be posted on the premises in a conspicuous place at or near the entrance to such premises and the notice of violation shall be mailed by certified mail with return receipt requested or a certificate of mailing, to the last known address of the owner, occupant or both. 
(e)  Punishment. Violations of any provision of this article shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. No. 20-2016, 8-1-16) 
Chapter 66 - OFFENSES AND MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq.; animals, ch. 14; civil emergencies, ch. 34; courts, ch. 38; nuisances, § 50-26 et seq.; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 
State Law reference- Criminal Code of Georgia, O.C.G.A. § 16-1-1 et seq.; limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 

Sec. 66-1. - Crowds on streets, sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to obstruct any sidewalk, street or alley by crowding with others. Whenever any such obstruction occurs, it shall be the duty of any policeman to notify the persons causing such obstruction to disperse, and on failure to do so they shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 16-1) 
Sec. 66-2. - Vehicles on sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drive, or place any vehicle on any sidewalk, or in any street which intersects any sidewalk in such manner as to prevent the free passage of persons; provided, that merchants may, subject to the direction of the city manager, temporarily use sidewalks in loading and unloading merchandise. 
(Code 1975, § 21-5) 
Sec. 66-3. - Firearms; discharging. 
    It shall be unlawful to discharge a gun, pistol, pellet gun or other type of firearm within the city; provided, however, the chief of police is hereby authorized to issue a permit under rules and regulations to be established by such officer to ensure the safety of the general public to operate a gun or rifle range at such location or locations as he may prescribe, and provided further, this section shall not apply to police officers, sheriffs, security guards and others authorized by law to carry firearms. 
(Code 1975, § 16-7) 
Sec. 66-4. - Open wells. 
    All wells not properly covered are hereby declared nuisances, and it shall be unlawful for any person to refuse or neglect to safely cover and properly protect persons and animals from danger from any open well on his property, within four hours after notice to do so by the manager or chief of police. 
(Code 1975, § 16-9) 
State Law reference- Abatement by county of hazard from abandoned well or hole, O.C.G.A. § 44-1-14. 
Sec. 66-5. - Posting signs, etc., on utility poles. 
    It shall be unlawful to nail, tack, stick or fasten in any way, any sign, picture, placard, or similar writing, placard or painting, on or to any utility pole within the city. 
(Code 1975, § 16-11) 
State Law reference- Prohibited placement of campaign posters, signs and advertisements, O.C.G.A. § 21-1-1; unlawful placement of signs within right-of-way of public road, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-51; regulation of outdoor advertising in vicinity of interstate highways, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-70 et seq. 
Sec. 66-6. - Possession of alcoholic beverage on city property prohibited. 
    The consumption or open possession of alcoholic beverages, including beer or wine, upon the grounds or within the confines of any facility of the mayor and city council, the board of education for the city, or the Carrollton Parks, Recreation and Cultural Arts Department shall be in violation of this Code. Any person violating the same shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in section 1-11. Open Possession, as used herein, shall mean possession in such a manner as may be observed by the general public. 
(Ord. of 2-16-81) 
Sec. 66-7. - Disorderly conduct. 
(a)  Any person shall be guilty of disorderly conduct if he: 
(1)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in fear for the safety of his life, limb or health; 
(2)  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged; 
(3)  Endangers lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence, angry threats and abusive conduct; 
(4)  Causes, provokes or engages in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property; 
(5)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of causing, provoking or engaging in any fight or brawl; 
(6)  Jostles or roughly crowds or pushes any person in any public place; 
(7)  Collects in bodies or in crowds for unlawful purposes; 
(8)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of or with the intent to engage in gaming; 
(9)  Frequents any public place with the intent to obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device; 
(10)  Assembles with another or others for the purpose of engaging in any fraudulent scheme, device or trick to obtain any valuable thing in any place or from any person in the city, or aids or abets therein; 
(11)  Utters, while in a state of anger, in the presence of another, any lewd or obscene words or epithets; 
(12)  Frequents any place where gaming or the illegal sale or possession of alcoholic beverages or narcotics or dangerous drugs is practiced, allowed or tolerated; 
(13)  Acts in a dangerous manner toward others; 
(14)  Uses fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil; 
(15)  Assembles or congregates with another or others for the purpose of doing bodily harm to another; 
(16)  By acts of violence, interferes with another's pursuit of a lawful occupation; 
(17)  Congregates with another or others in or on any public way so as to halt the flow of vehicular or pedestrian traffic and refuses to clear such public way when ordered to do so by a peace officer or other person having authority; 
(18)  Makes any unreasonably loud and unnecessary noise; 
(19)  Damages, befouls or disturbs public property or the property of another so as to create a hazardous, unhealthy or physically offensive condition; 
(20)  a.  Consumes alcoholic beverages on any public street, sidewalk, or any other public property within the corporate limits of the city; 
b.  Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption; 
c.  Consumes alcoholic beverages in a vehicle or on any public or private parking lot within the corporate limits of the city, except those maintained at establishments holding a valid on-premises license for the retail sale of beer or wine. Possession of open containers of alcoholic beverages or containers with the seal broken shall be prima facie evidence of consumption. 
(21)  Within the corporate limits of the city, is or appears to be in an intoxicated condition, whether by alcohol or drugs, on the sidewalks, in the parks, the square, the streets, public buildings and other public places, in which condition is made manifest by boisterousness including vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language, by indecent condition or act, or by behavior that endangers his or her life or safety or that of any other person; 
(22)  Willfully obstructs or hinders a Carrollton Police Officer in the lawful discharge of his or her duties; to include fleeing after being given a lawful command to stop, resisting a lawful arrest, refusing to identify himself when given a lawful request to do so, providing false identification, and/or failing to disperse an incident scene or scene of investigation after being instructed to do so; 
(23)  Remains, loiters, or prowls in a place, at a time, or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
(24)  Keeps and maintains, either by himself or with others, a common, ill-governed, and disorderly house, to the encouragement of gaming, drinking, or other misbehavior, or to the common disturbance of the neighborhood or orderly citizens. 
(b)  Any person convicted of disorderly conduct, as defined in this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 02-2010, 6-7-10; Res. No. 10-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 66-8. - Provisions saved from repeal. 
    Section 16-2 relating to the curfew for minors and section 16-8 relating to loitering as contained in the 1975 Code are not repealed and shall continue in full force and effect pending a revision of the subject matter by the city council. 
Sec. 66-9. - Solicitation for an illicit sexual act. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person, while in any place open to the public and whether as a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, to offer or consent to perform any illicit sexual act for money. Furthermore, it shall be unlawful for any person, while in any place open to the public and whether as a pedestrian or in a motor vehicle, to attempt to induce, entice, solicit, pander, purchase or procure another to commit any illicit sexual act for money. An illicit sexual act is defined as one or more of the following: 
(1)  Prostitution; 
(2)  Sodomy for hire; or 
(3)  Masturbation for hire. 
Any person in violation of this section shall be guilty of the offense of solicitation of an illicit sexual act. 
(b)  For the purpose of subsection (a) any person shall include solicitors of illicit sexual acts or panderers, who solicit, procure or purchase another to perform any illicit sexual act in exchange for money, and who are commonly referred to as "johns" or "tricks." 
(c)  The following penalties shall be imposed upon the conviction of subsection (a) or (b) of this section: 
(1)  First conviction. A minimum mandatory fine of $250.00. 
(2)  Second conviction. A mandatory minimum term of imprisonment of 15 days and a minimum mandatory fine of $1,000.00. 
(3)  Third and subsequent convictions . 
a.  A mandatory term of 180 days imprisonment with a minimum of 60 days of said sentence of imprisonment to be served in confinement. The remaining 120 days may, at the sentencing court's discretion, be served on probation as prescribed in subsection 3(b). 
b.  The sentencing court may, in its discretion, require any person convicted of a third violation of subsection (a) or (b) of this section, as a special condition of probation, to leave the corporate limits of the city and not return during the probationary period. 
(4)  None of the mandatory sentences referred to in this section shall be suspended, probated, deferred or withheld, except as provided herein. 
(5)  Nothing in this section shall affect the sentencing court's authority to impose any other condition of probation as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 42-8-35. 
(6)  The city solicitor may move the sentencing court to impose a reduced or suspended sentence upon any person who is convicted of a violation of this section and who provides substantial assistance in the identification, arrest, or conviction of any of his or her accomplices, accessories, co-conspirators, or principals. Upon good cause shown, the motion may be filed and heard in camera. The judge hearing the motion may impose a reduced or suspended sentence if he finds that the defendant has rendered such substantial assistance. 
(Res. No. 08-2006, 4-17-06) 
Sec. 66-10. - Prohibition on the use, sale, or delivery of certain dangerous substances. 
(a)  The following words as used in this section shall have the following meanings: 
    Person shall mean an individual, corporation, partnership, wholesaler, retailer or any licensed or unlicensed business. 
    Banned smoking product shall mean any substance whether described as tobacco herbs, incense spice, aromatherapy incense, or aromatic substance that may cause a sense of euphoria, novelty aromatic, or any blend thereof - regardless of whether the substance is marketed for the purpose of being smoked - which includes, but is not limited to, any one or more of the following chemicals: 
(1)  Salviadivinorum or salvinorum A, all parts of the plant presently classified botanically as salvia divinorum whether growing or not, the seeds thereof, any extract from any part of such plant, and every compound, manufacture, salts, derivative, mixture, or preparation of such plant, its seeds or extracts; 
(2)  2-[1R,3S)-3-hydroxycyclohexyl]-5-(2methyloctan-2-yl)phenol (also known as CP47,497) and homologues; 
(3)  (6aR, 10aR)- 9-(hydroxymethyl)-6,6-dimethyl-3-(2-methyloctan-2-yl)-6a,7,10,10a - tetrahydrobenzo[c]chromen-1-ol, some other trade or other names: HU-210; 
(4)  1-Pentyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole, some trade or other names: JWH-018; 
(5)  1-Butyl-3-(1-naphthoyl)indole, some trade or other names: JWH-073; 
(6)  (4-methoxynaphthalen-1-yl-(1pentylindol-3-yl)methanone, some trade or other names: JWH-081; 
(7)  Any non-prescription or other substance not prescribed by a physician whose affects mimic those of marijuana; or 
(8)  Products containing some or all of the above substances that are currently being marketed under the following commercial names: "K-2", "K-2 Summit", "Genie", "Dascents", "Zohai", "Sage", "Spice", "Ko Knockout 2", "Spice Gold", "Spice Diamond", "Yucatan Fire", "Solar Flare", "Pep Spice", "Fire N' Ice", "Black Magic Smoke" and "Salvia Divinorum." 
    Any product containing any of the chemical compounds set forth above shall be subject to the provisions of this section, regardless of whether they are marketed under alternative names. 
    Banned smoking product shall also include all tobacco herbs, incense spice, aromatherapy incense, aromatic substance, or any blend thereof that may not contain any chemical listed above but may cause sense of euphoria or any side effect that may alter mental state of person(s). 
    Finally, banned smoking product shall include small weight scales, small plastic bags, and other similar products used in the sale or distribution of such products, when such products or the residue or traces of such products is also present. 
    Ingestion device shall mean equipment, product or material that is used, intended for use, or designed for use in ingesting, inhaling, or otherwise introducing an illegal or banned smoking product into the human body such as, but not limited to: 
(1)  Metal, wooden, acrylic, glass, stone, plastic or ceramic pipe with or without screens, permanent screens, hashish heads or punctured metal bowls; 
(2)  Water pipes; 
(3)  Carburetion tubes or devices; 
(4)  Smoking and carburetion masks; 
(5)  Roach clips: meaning objects used to hold burning material, such as a marijuana cigarette, that has become too small or too short to be held in the hand; 
(6)  Chamber pipes; 
(7)  Carburetor pipes; 
(8)  Electric pipes; 
(9)  Air driven pipes; 
(10)  Chillum; 
(11)  Bongs; 
(12)  Ice pipes or chillers; or 
(13)  Glass tubes which are hollow, cylindrical items made of glass which are smaller then three-quarters of an inch in diameter, shorter than 12 inches in length, and which are not sealed with glass at both ends. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to use, possess, purchase, barter, give, publicly display, sell, or offer for sale within the city limits of Carrollton, Georgia, any banned smoking product or ingestion device. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person(s) to use or possess with intent to use within the city limits of Carrollton, Georgia, an ingestion device to inject, ingest, inhale or otherwise introduce into the human body a banned smoking product. 
(d)  Any person, firm, corporation or entity violating this section, as it exists or may be amended, upon conviction thereof, shall be fined a sum not exceeding $500.00 and may be sentenced up to 60 days in jail. Conviction may also result in city revoking any person, firm, corporation or entity's privilege of operating a business within the city limits. Each continuing day's violation under this section shall constitute a separate offense. 
(e)  All provisions of any ordinance in conflict with this section are hereby repealed to the extent they are in conflict; but such repeal shall not abate any pending prosecution for violation of the repealed ordinance, nor shall the repeal prevent a prosecution from being commenced for any violation if occurring prior to the repeal of the ordinance. Any remaining portions of said ordinance shall remain in full force and effect. 
(f)  Should any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section be declared unconstitutional or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, it is expressly provided that any and all remaining portions of this section shall remain in full force and effect. 
(g)  This section shall become effective immediately upon its adoption. 
(Res. No. 05-2012, 4-9-12) 
Sec. 66-11. - Criminal trespass. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he or she intentionally damages any property of another without consent of that other person and the damage thereto is $500.00 or less or knowingly and maliciously interferes with the possession or use of the property of another person without consent of that person. 
(b)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he or she knowingly and without authority: 
(1)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person for an unlawful purpose; 
(2)  Enters upon the land or premises of another person or into any part of any vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving, prior to such entry, notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant that such entry is forbidden; or 
(3)  Remains upon the land or premises of another person or within the vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft of another person after receiving notice from the owner, rightful occupant, or, upon proper identification, an authorized representative of the owner or rightful occupant to depart. 
(c)  For the purposes of subsection (b) of this section, permission to enter or invitation to enter given by a minor who is or is not present on or in the property of the minor's parent or guardian is not sufficient to allow lawful entry of another person upon the land, premises, vehicle, railroad car, aircraft, or watercraft owned or rightfully occupied by such minor's parent or guardian if such parent or guardian has previously given notice that such entry is forbidden or notice to depart. 
(d)  A person commits the offense of criminal trespass when he or she intentionally defaces, mutilates, or defiles any grave marker, monument, or memorial to one or more deceased persons who served in the military service of this state, the United States of America or any of the states thereof, or the Confederate States of America or any of the states thereof, or a monument, plaque, marker, or memorial which is dedicated to, honors, or recounts the military service of any past or present military personnel of this state, the United States of America or any of the states thereof, or the Confederate States of America or any of the states thereof if such grave marker, monument, memorial, plaque, or marker is privately owned or located on land which is privately owned. 
(e)  A person convicted of criminal trespass, as defined in this section, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 09-2019, 2-4-19) 
Chapter 70 - PARKS AND RECREATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Stadium authority, § 2-176 et seq.; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; environment, ch. 50; parades, § 82-96 et seq. 
State Law reference- Parks, O.C.G.A. § 12-3-1 et seq.; authority of municipality to construct and operate parks, swimming pools, golf courses, recreation grounds and buildings used for sports, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; establishment of recreation systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-64-1 et seq.; power to provide parks, recreation areas, programs and facilities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III(a)(5). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Secs. 70-1-70-25. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - PARKS AND RECREATION COMMISSION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. No. 05-2017, adopted May 1, 2017, amended article II in its entirety to read as herein set out. Former article II, §§ 70-26-70-32, pertained to parks, recreation and cultural arts commission, and derived from Code 1975, §§ 17-1-17-7; Mo. of 10-19-81; Res. No. 15-2006, 12-4-06; Res. No. 07-2007, 9-10-07; Res. No. 12-2012, 11-5-12. 
Cross reference- Authorities, boards and commissions, § 2-156 et seq.; cemeteries, ch. 30; historical preservation, ch. 62. 

Sec. 70-26. - Created; membership; terms. 
    There is hereby established the Carrollton Parks and Recreation Commission, referred to throughout this article as the parks and recreation commission. This parks and recreation commission shall consist of seven persons serving without pay who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. The term of office shall be for three years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Terms shall expire on the second Monday in October. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-27. - Filling vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the parks and recreation commission due to resignation, death, expiration of term or otherwise shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-28. - Organization; conduct of business. 
    Immediately after its appointment, the parks and recreation commission shall meet and organize by electing one member chairman and such other officers as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-29. - Authority to accept gifts. 
    The parks and recreation commission may solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreational purposes. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-30. - Reports. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall make full and complete monthly and annual reports to the council and other reports from time to time as requested. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-31. - General powers, duties. 
    The parks and recreation commission shall serve as an advisory board to the parks and recreation director and to the mayor and city council with respect to public parks, playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers and other recreation facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the city, or on other properties with the consent of the owners and authorities thereof. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Secs. 70-32-70-35. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - ARTS COMMISSION 

Sec. 70-36. - Created; membership; terms. 
    There is hereby established the Carrollton Arts Commission, referred to throughout this article as the arts commission. This arts commission shall consist of 12 persons serving without pay who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. Initially, four members shall be appointed for one year, four members shall be appointed for two years, and four members shall be appointed for three years. After the initial appointments, the term of office shall be for three years or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Terms shall expire on the 30th day of June. Upon completion of a full, three-year term, no commissioner shall be eligible for reappointment until at least 12 months have elapsed from the end of the commissioner's last completed term. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-37. - Filling vacancies. 
    Vacancies on the arts commission due to resignation, death, expiration of term or otherwise shall be filled by appointment by the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-38. - Organization; conduct of business. 
    Immediately after its appointment, the arts commission shall meet and organize by electing one member chairperson and such other officers as may be necessary. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-39. - Authority to accept gifts. 
    The arts commission may solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or any donation to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for arts purposes. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-40. - Reports. 
    The arts commission shall make full and complete monthly and annual reports to the council and other reports from time to time as requested. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Sec. 70-41. - General powers, duties. 
    The arts commission shall serve as an advisory board to the arts superintendent and to the mayor and city council with respect to arts facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the city, or on other properties with the consent of the owners and authorities thereof. 
(Ord. No. 05-2017, 5-1-17) 
Secs. 70-42-70-45. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR LAKE CARROLL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 05-2017, adopted May 1, 2017, renumbered article III as article IV. 
Editor's note- The within rules and regulations derive from the city's reservoirs management plan for Lake Buckhorn, Lake Carroll and the Sharpe Creek Impoundment. Adopted in June 1992, the plan was prepared to protect the water quality of the reservoirs for drinking purposes and to address the recreational uses and buffer maintenance for the three water storage reservoirs. An official copy of the reservoirs management plan is on file in the office of the city clerk. The rules and regulations have been amended in their entirety by a resolution of February 15, 1999. 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 

Sec. 70-46. - Provisions. 
    Except as provided in this section and in this article, all federal and state laws regarding watercrafts and water safety are adopted and shall govern the use and enjoyment of Lake Carroll. 
(1)  It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a watercraft on Lake Carroll without obtaining a permit, the price of which shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. Permits are issued by the CPRCAD. Call 770-832-1161 for a permit application. 
(2)  All watercraft permits are valid for one year and will expire one year from the date of purchase. 
Boating permit fees are as follows: 
Resident of Carrollton. (Resident is defined as any person having real estate on the city tax digest.) 
Boating (skiing, fishing, etc.) ..... $50.00 
Sailing ..... 20.00 
Personal watercraft (PWC) (jet skis, jet boats, etc.) ..... 50.00 
Non-fuel powered watercraft (electric trolling motors, kayaks, canoes, john boats, etc.) ..... 15.00 
Pontoon boats ..... 50.00 
Nonresident boating permit (proof will be, state boat registration and the owner's driver's license). 
Boating ..... $100.00 
Boating, per day* (max. five-day permit) ..... 10.00 
*Five-day boating permits can only be purchased by persons living outside the county boundaries. Five-day permits may be purchased more than one time per year. 
Business and commercial permit. 
Resident ..... $50.00 
Nonresident business (personal ski boat, etc.) ..... 65.00 
(3)  Maximum watercraft length shall be no more than 21 feet, two inches (measured end to end). 
(4)  Motor horsepower shall be limited to the size specified by the original factory installed capacity plate on the watercraft. 
(5)  No inboard motors are permitted on the lake, only single gasoline motors of outboard style and jet powered types (PWC's) are permitted on the lake. 
(6)  No changing of capacity plates or cowlings of outboard motors will be permitted. 
(7)  The speed limit of watercraft shall be 30 miles per hour. 
(8)  Watercraft not identified in this article will not be permitted on Lake Carroll. 
(9)  The city parks, recreation, and cultural arts commission will provide a lake patrolman from April to September. Normally the patrolman will be on duty from 1:00 p.m. until sundown. 
(10)  All watercraft placed in the lake for the first time shall be inspected by the lake patrolman and shall be entered at the public dock. Watercraft thus entered, may be removed from the lake to lake front lots or for temporary storage. No boat may be entered into the lake or removed there from at any location other than the public dock, except watercraft which have been inspected and approved by the lake patrolman and specific approval given to remove and enter the lake from any location other than the public dock. 
(11)  Any size watercraft or rig that is judged unsafe may be prohibited by the lake patrolman. 
(12)  The patrolman at Lake Carroll shall have the authority to restrict the number of watercraft operating on Lake Carroll to 15. 
(13)  It shall be unlawful for a person who has temporary or permanent responsibility of a child, ward, or guest to allow the child, ward, or guest to violate any of the requirements listed within this article. 
(14)  Violators of this article shall upon conviction be punished as provided in section 1-11 of the City Code. 
(Res. of 2-15-99; Amd. of 7-1-02; Res. No. 9-2006, 5-2-06; Res. No. 08-2009, 9-14-09) 
Sec. 70-47. - Minimum age and requirements for watercraft operation. 
(a)  A person under age 12 may not operate a personal watercraft (PWC). 
(b)  A person under age 12 may operate a Class A vessel (16 feet or less) with a 30 horsepower or less motor if they are accompanied by an adult 18 years or older who is not under the influence of alcohol or drugs. 
(c)  A person age 12-15 may operate in Georgia a Class A vessel with a 30 H.P. or less motor or a PWC only if they have completed a Georgia Department of Natural Resources approved boating and personal watercraft safety course and possess proof on board. 
(d)  A person age 14-15 may operate a Class A or Class 1, 2, or 3 vessel only if they completed a Department of Natural Resources approved boating safety course and they possess proof on board. 
(e)  A person age 16 or older may operate any vessel or a PWC provided they are carrying proper identification on board. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-48. - Manner of boat operation. 
(a)  Watercrafts shall operate in one direction, i.e., counter clockwise, and all recognized water and watercraft laws shall be enforced. There shall be two people in or on watercrafts pulling skiers or any other apparatus, of which, one will be a competent observer. 
(b)  No person shall operate any watercraft or manipulate any other recreational, water devices in a reckless or negligent manner so as to endanger the life, limb, or property of any person. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-49. - Life preservers. 
    It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of ten to ride in any boat on Lake Carroll without wearing a Coast Guard approved personal flotation device. Any person/persons being pulled behind a watercraft must wear an approved Coast Guard flotation device. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-50. - Speed near piers, persons, etc. 
    Watercrafts must operate at idle speed within 100 feet of any moored or anchored vessel, vessel adrift, or any wharf, pier, piling, or person in the water, or shoreline adjacent to a full-time or part-time residence, public park, public beach, public swimming area, marina, restaurant, or other public use area. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-51. - Hours for operation of boats. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate a boat on Lake Carroll before sunrise or after sunset. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-52. - Open exhausts prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a motor on Lake Carroll with an open exhaust. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-53. - Swimming restricted. 
    No swimming will be allowed in or around the public areas of Lake Carroll (spillway. dam, launch area). 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-54. - Alcoholic beverages and drugs. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any watercraft while under the influence of alcohol or drugs. It is unlawful, as well, to possess any alcohol or drugs on any public grounds or facility that is owned, maintained, and operated by the city. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-55. - Pontoon boats and personal watercraft (jet skis, jet boats, etc.). 
(a)  Pontoon boats. 
(1)  Description: A boat floated by two round bullet shaped pontoons. 
(2)  No inboard motors. 
(3)  When the take is crowded with faster boats, the lake patrolman or official may restrict the pontoon boats. This may mean the pontoon boats are not permitted on the lake at times. 
(4)  Pontoon boats may not exceed 24 feet in length (measured end to end on the pontoon). 
(5)  The H.P. of motors powering pontoons will be governed by the capacity plate an the boat. 
(6)  Sleeping or camping on pontoons on Lake Carroll will not be permitted. 
(7)  Pontoons are also governed by all Lake Carroll Rules and Regulations and Georgia Safe Boating Guidelines. 
(b)  Personal watercraft (jet skis, jet boats, etc. ). 
(1)  Personal watercrafts (PWC) are governed by all Lake Carroll rules and regulations and Georgia safe boating guidelines. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-56. - Fishing from the bank, in pothole. 
    No permit shall be required to fish from the banks of Lake Carroll or in the pothole (area below the dam). 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-57. - Bag limits for fish. 
    Game species daily creel and possession limits will be governed by the current Georgia freshwater and saltwater sport fishing regulations. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-58. - Permit required to alter shoreline or construct docks, piers, or boathouse. 
    The shoreline of Lake Carroll shall not be altered or changed in any manner whatsoever without written consent and a permit granted by the building official at city hall. Call the city building official at 770-830-2000. The authorization and permit will not be unreasonably withheld where the alteration does not hinder or interfere with the use and purpose of the lake and the alteration does not, in the opinion of the city building official, adversely affect adjoining property owners. The city building official may make his permit or authorization conditional upon any terms which are consistent with the purpose and intention of this section. A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges, in addition to any other building permits or fees required, shall be charged (fee schedules can be obtained at city hall). 
    Private docks. boathouses, piers or related structures are permitted, provided that: 
(1)  A plan of the proposed structure showing the size, location, construction materials, use, design, and other pertinent factors which may be reasonably and appropriately applied to protect the water quality of the reservoir is submitted to the building official for review, approval and issuance of a permit; 
(2)  In addition to approval by the city building official, the dock, boathouse, pier or related structure must meet all applicable provisions of the zoning ordinance and the owner obtains a valid building permit as required by law or regulation; 
(3)  The city building official or other designated representative of the city is provided access to conduct inspections of the structure during construction and periodically thereafter; 
(4)  No more than one structure per parcel fronting on the lake, but no more than one structure per 100 feet of shoreline; 
(5)  No dock, piers or related structures may extend further than 20 feet from the shoreline into the lake. 
(6)  Boathouses must be dug back into the lake front owner's property so as not to extend out into the water. 
    The cost and liability of constructing a private dock, pier or boathouse shall be borne entirely by the owner of the property. The city assumes no responsibility or liability for the integrity, soundness, structure or material used. 
    The city reserved the right to require that docks, piers, or boathouses be moved, relocated or removed from the reservoir at the property owners expense upon reasonable request at any time for purposes of maintaining water quality. 
    All maintenance of private docks, piers, or boathouses shall be the responsibility of the owner. If a dock becomes damaged or is deemed in the reasonable opinion of the city unsuitable for the reservoir, the dock, pier or boathouse must be removed from the reservoir at the owner's expense. 
    The city reserves the right to remove the dock, pier, boathouse from the reservoir at the owner's expense and without liability for damage to the dock or the owner's private property if the owner fails to comply with the city rules, regulations, and directions. 
    No cleaning of docks, decking, piers, boathouses or boats moored at same with soaps or solvents is permitted. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Sec. 70-59. - Boy Scout Island. 
    The general public use of the land area commonly referred to as "Boy Scout Island" is prohibited. Any special use must be approved in writing by the director of the parks, recreation, and cultural arts department. 
(Res. of 2-15-99) 
Secs. 70-60-70-69. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE V. - RULES AND REGULATIONS FOR THE CARROLLTON GREENBELT[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance No. 05-2017, adopted May 1, 2017, renumbered article IV as article V. 

Sec. 70-70. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Greenbelt Trail means that certain trail or path, or any portion thereof, designated by the mayor and city council for pleasure or for use as an alternative mode of transportation within the city and includes uses for walking, jogging, running, bicycling, or horseback riding (in designated areas). 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 70-71. - Motorized vehicles prohibited. 
    With the exception of motorized wheelchairs, no person shall operate a motorized vehicle in, over, through or upon the Greenbelt Trail or any portion thereof, except when specifically authorized by law. 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 70-72. - Horseback riding prohibited, except in designated areas. 
    No person shall ride a horse in, over, through or upon the Greenbelt Trail, except in areas designated for such use, and where permitted, no person shall ride a horse in a reckless manner or in any other manner which endangers other users of the Greenbelt Trail. 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 70-73. - Operation of bicycles. 
    No person shall operate a bicycle on the Greenbelt Trail in a reckless manner or in any other manner which endangers other users of the Greenbelt Trail. 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 70-74. - Animals. 
    No person shall bring any animal on the Greenbelt Trail, except when such animal is under the direction and control of its owner and is secured by a leash, chain, or lead of sufficient strength to prevent it from escaping from its owner. As used in this section, the term "animal" shall include any type of animal, including, but not limited to, dogs, cats, and horses. 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 70-75. - Climbing bridges, trestles, etc. 
    No person shall climb the exterior of, repel from, or jump from any bridge, trestle, overpass, wall, cliff, embankment, building, or monument which is located on or adjacent to the Greenbelt Trail. 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 70-76. - Hours of operation. 
    The Greenbelt Trail is open from dawn until dusk each day, and it shall be unlawful for any person to be on the Greenbelt Trail before sunrise or after sunset, unless otherwise and specifically authorized by law. 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 70-77. - Alcoholic beverages and drugs prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to possess any alcoholic beverages and illegal drugs on the Greenbelt Trail. 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12; Res. No. 08-2014, 5-5-14) 
Editor's note- Res. No. 08-2014, adopted May 5, 2014, changed the title of § 70-77 from " Alcoholic beverages, drugs, and non-permitted firearms prohibited" to "Alcoholic beverages and drugs prohibited." 
Sec. 70-78. - Vandalism or theft of trail amenities. 
    It shall be unlawful to vandalize, mutilate, deface, or steal any portion of the Greenbelt Trail or any amenities thereto. 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12) 
Sec. 70-79. - Penalty for violations. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 03-2012, 1-10-12) 
Secs. 70-80-70-90. - Reserved. 
Chapter 78 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Flow-rate restrictions on plumbing fixtures, § 18-46 et seq.; environment, ch. 50; utilities, ch. 94. 
State Law reference- Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq.; local and regional solid waste plans, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-31.1; scrap tire disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.1; Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-60 et seq.; Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-42 et seq.; transporting garbage or waste across state or county boundaries without permission, O.C.G.A. § 36-1-16; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249; authorization to provide garbage and solid waste collection and disposal, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 78-1. - Comprehensive solid waste management plan adopted. 
    In order to attain compliance with the tenets set forth in the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq., the city hereby adopts the comprehensive regional solid waste management plan heretofore approved by the Chattahoochee-Flint Regional Development Commission and the state department of community affairs. 
(Res. of 5-3-93) 
Secs. 78-2-78-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 

Sec. 78-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Bundled garden trash means garden trash which is gathered into bundles and tied securely so that each bundle does not exceed three feet in length nor weigh in excess of 50 pounds. 
    Containerized trash means refuse which is placed in disposable containers and including bundled garden trash, each unit of which shall not exceed three feet in length nor weigh in excess of 50 pounds. 
    Contractor includes every person, and the agents and employees thereof, engaged in construction, electrical, mechanical, air conditioning, heating, plumbing, roofing, demolition, landscaping, masonry, and allied-type work, and shall include nurserymen, and tree trimmers. 
    Debris includes residue of any nature accumulating from the activities defined in the definition of "contractor." 
    Disposable trash containers means plastic bags and cardboard, wooden and corrugated boxes which shall be nonreturnable and shall be collected and packed into the truck as is. 
    Garbage means all vegetable and animal matter, food and other refuse from a kitchen, market, store or elsewhere, including all matters that decay, attract flies or create disagreeable odors. 
    Health officer means those persons employed by the county health department who are employed to enforce health regulations of the city and county. 
    Miscellaneous refuse means small items of rubbish and refuse which are incident to the ordinary conduct of the household, not included in the definitions of "garbage," "trash" or "rubbish." 
    Multiple residential unit means any duplex, apartment or groups of apartments under a single roof and used for dwelling places for more than one family. 
    Offal means the inedible parts of a butchered animal and waste parts of the animal. 
    Plastic bags means a polyethylene or other heavy-duty plastic bag meeting the National Sanitation Foundation standard of 1.5 mils and not exceeding a 30-gallon capacity, with securing twist tie. An untied plastic bag shall not be an approved container. 
    Rubbish means bushes, trees, limbs, boxes, planks, boards, old furniture, scrap iron, tin and all other articles of similar nature and large in size, that are not included in the definitions of "garbage" or "trash." 
    Single residential unit means any dwelling place occupied by one family. 
    Trash means ashes, dirt, paper, yard sweepings and all other accumulations of similar nature and small in size that are not included in the definition of garbage. 
    Wheeled container means an 80-gallon plastic, covered container permanently attached to a wheeled tubular steel cart designed for use by residential units for storage of household garbage. 
(Code 1975, § 9-1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 78-32. - Reserved. 
Sec. 78-33. - City to collect and dispose; permit for private operators. 
    The city by and through its proper departments shall collect and dispose of all properly placed garbage, trash, and refuse within the city, and no person shall collect and dispose of or transport over the streets of the city any garbage, trash, or refuse without first obtaining a written permit from the city to do so. 
(Code 1975, § 9-27) 
Sec. 78-34. - Disposal of construction refuse or rubbish generated by commercial landscapers, tree removal services, or handymen. 
    Construction refuse shall not be collected by the city, but shall be disposed of by persons in charge of the establishment where such refuse or waste material accumulates. The disposal of construction refuse must be in a manner satisfactory to the sanitation superintendent. In addition, rubbish generated by a commercial landscaper, tree removal service, or paid handyman shall be disposed of by the customer and shall not be removed by the city. In the alternative, the city may, at its sole discretion, remove such construction refuse or rubbish and charge the customer at the rates set forth in the fee schedule established pursuant to section 78-50 below. The movement of rubbish generated by a commercial landscaper, tree removal service, or paid handyman from one address to another in order to circumvent the above prohibition is strictly prohibited and is punishable upon conviction as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1975, § 9-28; Res. No. 14-2006, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 78-35. - Place, manner of private disposal. 
    Every person who disposes of any garbage, rubbish, or industrial refuse, whether required to do so by this article or otherwise, shall make such disposal at the city landfill, or other authorized area, as specified by the superintendent of the sanitation department. 
(Code 1975, § 9-29) 
Sec. 78-36. - Permitting accumulation or scattering. 
    No person who shall own or occupy a premises within the city shall permit trash, garbage, or refuse to collect or remain on such premises, except during periods between city sanitation department pickups, and no person who shall own or occupy a premises in the city shall permit garbage, trash, or refuse to be scattered from such premises into the public streets or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 9-30) 
Sec. 78-37. - Draining, storage of garbage. 
    All garbage shall be free from liquid and shall be placed and kept covered in a wheeled container. 
(Code 1975, § 9-31) 
Sec. 78-38. - Storage of trash. 
    Trash shall be placed and kept in a wheeled container, which container shall always be kept covered. 
(Code 1975, § 9-32) 
Sec. 78-39. - Placement of containerized trash for collection. 
    With the exception of furniture, brush and yard clippings, tires, and appliances, all trash must be placed in an individual wheeled container provided by the city. Trash in excess of the capacity of wheeled container shall only be collected as containerized trash when placed adjacent to the wheeled container at curbside on regular collection days. Any such excess trash will be charged to the customer at the rates set forth in the fee schedule established pursuant to section 78-50 below. Also, where customers repeatedly have excess trash, the city may, at its sole discretion, assign additional wheeled containers to the customer and charge the customer at the rates set forth in the fee schedule established pursuant to section 78-50 below. 
(Code 1975, § 9-33; Res. No. 14-2006, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 78-40. - Disposal of rubbish. 
    Rubbish shall not be placed or kept in either garbage container nor in trash container or box, but shall be removed or disposed of by the person on whose premises such rubbish accumulates. 
(Code 1975, § 9-34) 
Sec. 78-41. - Location of wheeled containers for collection. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant of any single or multiple residential unit to place the wheeled container, on the assigned collection day, at front curbside location in such a manner as not to obstruct pedestrian passage, except that the sanitation superintendent may require the wheeled container to be placed on any side of a property for the reasons of topography or efficiency. 
(Code 1975, § 9-35) 
Sec. 78-42. - Time for placement of wheeled containers. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant of any single or multiple residential unit to place the wheeled container at his appropriate curbside location at or before 7:00 a.m. or prior to the arrival of the sanitation truck on the regular collection day, such placement shall not be made before 5:00 a.m. on the regular collection day. 
(Code 1975, § 9-36) 
Sec. 78-43. - Removal of wheeled containers. 
    It shall be the duty of the occupant of any single or multiple residential unit to remove the container from curbside location to storage location, which storage location shall be nearer to the residential unit located on the premises than to any street abutting such premises. Such removal shall be accomplished not later than 7:00 p.m. on the day the contents thereof are emptied and collected. 
(Code 1975, § 9-37) 
Sec. 78-44. - Responsibility for maintenance of wheeled container. 
    The owner or occupant of every improved premises, within the city, which is furnished a wheeled container by the city, shall be liable for any damage to such container and shall be liable for the expense of repairs which shall be required other than normal wear and tear. Such repair shall be made by the city and billed to the occupant. If for any reason an occupant shall fail to pay such charges, then the owner of such improved premises shall be liable for the payment thereof. The charges shall be the actual cost of labor and material. 
(Code 1975, § 9-38) 
Sec. 78-45. - Notice, surrender of container when premises vacated. 
    The owner or occupant of any improved premises within the city who intends to vacate such premises must notify the sanitation department which will pick up the wheeled container and issue a receipt to such owner or occupant. 
(Code 1975, § 9-39) 
Sec. 78-46. - Tampering with containers. 
    No person shall overhaul, molest or interfere with the contents of any wheeled container or adjacent containerized trash set out for collection for emptying or removal by the city, unless by permission of the general superintendent. No person shall remove from its assigned premises any wheeled container provided by the city. 
(Code 1975, § 9-40) 
Sec. 78-47. - Requirement of additional containers. 
    If the amount of garbage in any single or multiple housing premises is accumulated, the city may require additional wheeled containers sufficient to accommodate the same and an additional charge shall be made for each additional container. 
(Code 1975, § 9-41) 
Sec. 78-48. - Disabled persons need not place container at curb. 
    Any person who is a full-time resident of a residential unit who is disabled to the extent that he is incapable of moving the wheeled container, in the opinion of the city manager and sanitation superintendent, shall not be required to place the wheeled container at curbside. This section shall not apply unless all of the persons in a residential unit are thus disabled. 
(Code 1975, § 9-42) 
Sec. 78-49. - Charge assessed; to include wheeled container. 
    A monthly sanitary and health charge is hereby fixed and assessed against the owner or occupant of all improved premises within the city for which the occupant shall be liable for payment, but if for any reason an occupant of an improved premises shall fail to pay the monthly charge to the city, then the owner of such improved premises shall be liable for the payment thereof. Each individual charge shall entitle the person making the payment to one wheeled container which is not assignable, but the city shall have no obligation to provide individual wheeled containers to commercial properties unless a rear-loader-type truck already services the immediate vicinity. 
(Code 1975, § 9-43; Res. No. 14-2006, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 78-50. - Amount of charges. 
    The monthly sanitary and health charges provided for in this article within the city shall be as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1975, § 9-44) 
Sec. 78-51. - Assignment of classifications. 
    Each business and commercial premises and multiple family residence within the city shall be assigned a commercial classification by the city based on the average number of cubic yards of garbage, trash, and refuse collected from such premises within the three preceding months. 
(Code 1975, § 9-45) 
Sec. 78-52. - Charges assigned by water meter; multiple units using one water meter; collection after delinquency. 
    The city will only collect and remove garbage, trash, or refuse from those premises that receive a water bill from the city. Both commercial and residential garbage charges shall be attached to the water bill, and all residential water customers shall pay the residential garbage charges as long as water service is active. In all instances when a residential or commercial premises is occupied by more than one unit and is served by a single water meter, the sanitary charges applicable to the premises at such location shall all be billed to the person in whose name the water meter is registered at the office of the water department, the sanitary charge to be included thereon for each unit on the premises. In all instances when a residential or commercial premises is occupied by more than one unit and each such unit is served by a separate water meter, the sanitary charges applicable to each unit shall be billed separately and at the rates set forth in the fee schedule established pursuant to section 78-50 above. Upon failure to pay the bill in accordance with other ordinances applicable thereto, the city, by and through its proper officials may proceed to enforce collection of same as provided by ordinance, and in addition to such remedies failure to pay the bill within 30 days from date of issue will constitute adequate cause to have such water service disconnected and discontinued to that premises. 
(Code 1975, § 9-47; Res. No. 14-2006, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 78-53. - Charges for repairs to wheeled containers. 
    Charges for repairs to wheeled containers shall be billed and collected with the following billing of sanitary and health charges. Section 78-52 is applicable to wheeled container repair charges. 
(Code 1975, § 9-48) 
Sec. 78-54. - Enforcement of collection of fees by execution. 
    Should any person liable for payment of the fees and charges hereby fixed and imposed fail to pay the same within ten days after having been billed therefor, the city clerk is authorized to issue an execution therefor against such person in the same manner provided in cases of default in payment of bills to the utility commission and shall deliver such execution to the chief of police for levy and sale as provided by law. 
(Code 1975, § 9-49) 
Sec. 78-55. - Failure to pay declared unlawful. 
    Any person failing for any reason or refusing to pay the monthly sanitary and health charge provided for in this article, after having been duly billed for same by the city, shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this Code, and all sanitary and health services and water services provided by the city to the premises for which the monthly charges are past due shall be terminated by the city. This shall be in addition to the penalty provided for violation of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 9-50) 
Sec. 78-56. - Size, weight of trash and rubbish for collection. 
    Unless the customer has obtained a special permit from the city, the agents or employees of the city shall not move from any premises within the city any rubbish or trash: 
(1)  Which exceeds 50 pounds in weight in any one unit or piece; 
(2)  Which exceeds six feet in length; or 
(3)  Which due to its size or weight cannot be loaded upon the trash trucks of the city by one employee. 
In the absence of a special permit, the city may, at its sole discretion, remove such rubbish or trash and charge the customer at the rates set forth in the fee schedule established pursuant to section 78-50 above. All rubbish or trash shall be kept separate from leaves, brush, and yard clippings, and all leaves, brush, and yard clippings shall be placed in such a way as to be reasonably accessible to the city's mechanical pickup equipment. In addition, leaves, brush, and yard clippings shall be limited to two cubic yards per two-week collection cycle, and the city will charge for any additional amounts at the rates set forth in the fee schedule established pursuant to section 78-50 above. The amount of any such leaves, brush, and yard clippings shall be estimated by the city employee responsible for collection and, where disputed, shall be determined by the public works director or his designee, whose decision shall be final. The movement of leaves, brush, and yard clippings from one address to another in order to comply with the two cubic yard limit is strictly prohibited and is punishable upon conviction as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1975, § 9-51; Res. No. 14-2006, 9-12-06) 
Sec. 78-57. - Furniture and appliances; household items upon relocation or eviction; tires from a commercial establishment. 
    The provisions of section 78-56 notwithstanding, the city will remove one appliance or one unit of furniture per customer per two-week collection cycle, and the removal of any additional appliances or furniture will be charged at the rates set forth in the fee schedule established pursuant to section 78-50 above. In addition, the removal of any refrigerators, freezers, air conditioners, or other items containing coolants or refrigerants will be charged at the rates set forth in the fee schedule established pursuant to section 78-50 above. The city will not remove any household items where a resident is moving or relocating or has been evicted. The city will not remove any tires from a commercial establishment. 
(Res. No. 14-2006, 9-12-06) 
Secs. 78-58-78-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEPTIC TANK WASTE HAULERS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 78-81. - Acceptable waste for receiving facility. 
    Only domestic waste originating/generated within the county will be allowed to be discharged into the receiving facility. The waste characteristics must be in compliance with the city's current sewer use ordinance, set forth in chapter 94, article III. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 3) 
Sec. 78-82. - Right to refuse or limit waste. 
    The city reserves the right to refuse waste or to limit the amount of waste to be discharged into the receiving facility. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 4) 
Sec. 78-83. - Discharge location. 
    All acceptable wastes must be discharged at the city's water and sewer maintenance facility, referred to in this article as the "receiving facility," located at 533 Kings Bridge Road, Carrollton, Georgia. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 5) 
Sec. 78-84. - Receiving facility hours of operation. 
    The city will receive acceptable wastes at the receiving facility during the hours of 8:00 a.m. to 4:00 p.m. (Monday through Friday) only, except holidays. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 6) 
Sec. 78-85. - Display of company name. 
    The permitted waste hauler shall have its company name legibly displayed on both sides of all waste hauler vehicles that discharge into the city's receiving facility. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 7) 
Sec. 78-86. - Manifest form, contents. 
    The permitted waste hauler shall manifest the source, volume and type of all wastes to be discharged into the city's receiving facility upon forms provided by the city. These completed manifests shall be submitted by the waste hauler at the receiving facility before unloading the contents of the waste hauler's tanks. The city reserves the right to verify any and all data provided on the waste hauler's manifest forms. The waste hauler must use the waste manifest forms provided by the city to report every load that is pumped and discharged into the receiving facility. Failure to accurately record every load, falsification of data or failure to transmit this manifest form to the receiving facility operator prior to discharge shall constitute revocation of the waste hauler's permit. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 8) 
Sec. 78-87. - Manifests considered confidential. 
    All manifests completed and received from the waste hauler by the city at the receiving facility shall be considered confidential and shall not be made available to the public. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 9) 
Sec. 78-88. - Monitoring and sampling of waste. 
    The receiving facility operator will provide a sample bottle to the hauler when he files his manifest prior to discharging his load. A representative sample of each load will be turned in to the receiving facility operator. In addition, the permitted waste hauler shall without prior notification allow the city to inspect any and all loads coming into the receiving facility prior to the discharge of that load into the facility. The waste hauler may be required to suspend the discharging until given permission to proceed with the discharge. The city reserves the right to refuse permission to discharge any load that is suspect for any reason deemed appropriate by the receiving facility operator. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 10) 
Sec. 78-89. - Charges. 
    A charge shall be made for the privilege of dumping acceptable wastes into the receiving facility. A record shall be maintained of such dumping, and statements shall be rendered to the waste hauler on a monthly basis. Failure on the part of the waste hauler to promptly pay waste dumping fees by the due date on the invoice shall be just cause for revocation of the waste hauler permit. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 11) 
Sec. 78-90. - Business license requirements. 
    Waste haulers with operations located in the city or in the county shall be required to maintain a current and valid business license for the respective locality. In addition, waste haulers who operate pump septic systems in the city or county shall be required to maintain a respective current and valid business license. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 15) 
Secs. 78-91-78-110. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT 

Sec. 78-111. - Residency requirement. 
    Waste hauler permits shall be issued only to hauler services that maintain a physical residence in the city or the county. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 1) 
Sec. 78-112. - Compliance with sewer use ordinance. 
    The permitted waste hauler shall at all times comply with the standards established in the city's current sewer use ordinance, set forth in chapter 94, article III. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 2) 
Sec. 78-113. - Term; renewal. 
    Waste hauler permits shall be issued for a period of one year. Permits must be renewed prior to the expiration date in order for the waste hauler to continue utilization of the receiving facility for waste discharging purposes. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 12) 
Sec. 78-114. - Fee. 
    A fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges shall be levied for the issuance of a waste hauler permit. The same fee shall apply for the annual renewal of waste hauler permits. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 13) 
Sec. 78-115. - Application for reissuance. 
    The waste hauler shall reapply for reissuance of the waste hauler permit on a form provided by the city at least 60 days prior to the then-existing expiration date. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 14) 
Sec. 78-116. - Modifications or revisions. 
(a)  The terms and conditions of the waste hauler permit may be subject to modification by the city at any time as limitations or requirements as identified by the city's ordinances or rules and regulations are modified, or as other just cause exists. 
(b)  The waste hauler permit may also be modified to incorporate special conditions resulting from the issuance of an administrative or consent order. 
(c)  The terms and conditions of the waste hauler permit may be modified as a result of new regulatory standards promulgated by the United States Environmental Protection Agency or the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(d)  Any waste hauler permit modifications which result in a new condition in the waste hauler permit shall include a reasonable time schedule for compliance, if possible. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 16) 
Sec. 78-117. - Transfer. 
    Waste hauler discharge permits are issued to a specific waste hauler for that specific operation and are not assignable to any other waste hauler or transferrable to any other location. Change of ownership and/or legal status of a waste hauler shall obligate the purchaser to submit a waste hauler permit application for consideration by the city. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 17) 
Sec. 78-118. - Revocation. 
    The permit issued to the waste hauler by the city may be revoked when, after inspection, monitoring or analysis, it is determined that the waste to be discharged into the receiving facility is in violation of federal, state, local or city laws, ordinances or regulations. Additionally, falsification or intentional misrepresentation of data or statements pertaining to the waste hauler permit application, the waste manifest or other required reporting form shall be cause for permit revocation. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 18) 
Sec. 78-119. - Cease and desist order upon revocation. 
    Upon notification of a permit revocation, the permittee shall cease and desist from discharging any waste into the receiving facility until a revised permit has been issued or until the matter has been resolved by appropriate action. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 19) 
Sec. 78-120. - Property rights. 
    The issuance of the waste hauler permit does not convey any property rights in either real or personal property or any exclusive privileges. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 20) 
Sec. 78-121. - Responsibilities and limitations. 
    A waste hauler permittee is responsible for protecting the receiving facility from any contributing waste discharges which could inhibit, interfere or otherwise be incompatible with the operations and/or maintenance of the treatment facility including the treatment, use and/or disposal of residuals. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 22) 
Sec. 78-122. - Penalty for violation of permit provisions. 
(a)  The permitted waste hauler shall be responsible for complying with all provisions established within the waste hauler permit. Any permittee who discharges or causes a discharge which damages or impairs the city's sewage collection or disposal system shall be liable to the city for any expense, loss or damage caused by such discharge, in addition to other charges, fees, fines and action as outlined in the city's sewer use ordinance, set forth in chapter 94, article III. 
(b)  Additionally, falsification or intentional misrepresentation of data or statements pertaining to the waste hauler permit application, the waste manifests or other required reporting forms shall be considered a permit violation and will be addressed as such under the guidelines for fines and actions as outlined in the city's sewer use ordinance, set forth in chapter 94, article III. 
(Ord. of 2-19-96(2), § 23) 
Chapter 82 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Animals, ch. 14; buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; businesses, ch. 22; peddlers, solicitors and canvassars, § 22-106 et seq.; cable communications, ch. 26; emergency services, ch. 46; environment, ch. 50; junked or abandoned vehicles, § 50-51 et seq.; fire protection and prevention, ch. 54; historical preservation, ch. 62; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90; subdivisions, app. A. 
State Law reference- Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; Georgia Code of Public Transportation, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-1 et seq.; authorization by any county or municipality for construction or maintenance of any private road unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 32-1-8; state, county and municipal road systems, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-1 et seq.; powers with respect to municipal street system, O.C.G.A. § 32-4-92; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; enclosure of lanes or alleys, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-11; power of city to open, close or extend public streets, alleys and sidewalks, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-3; municipal street improvements, O.C.G.A. § 36-39-1 et seq.; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, street lights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III; executions for collection of municipal assessments for paving streets and laying sewers, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-358. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 82-1. - Official map. 
    The city engineer shall make a map of the city and number on such map, each separate city lot, according to street or avenue, which will be the official map of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 21-1) 
Sec. 82-2. - Altering streets, sidewalks. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to alter any public street, sidewalk or appurtenances to the roadway including safety devices without first obtaining permission therefor from the manager. 
(Code 1975, § 21-2) 
Sec. 82-3. - Structures on sidewalks or street line. 
    It shall be unlawful for any property holder in this city to erect any fence or building along the line of any sidewalk, street or alley of this city without first agreeing with the city engineer on the boundary line, between his property and such sidewalk, street or alley. 
(Code 1975, § 21-3) 
Secs. 82-4-82-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - OBSTRUCTIONS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 

Sec. 82-31. - Prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to park or place any obstruction which constitutes a hazard or impedes the flow of traffic in any street. 
(Code 1975, § 21-17) 
Sec. 82-32. - Police authorized to remove. 
    The police of the city are hereby authorized to remove obstructions from the streets, when, in the opinion of the chief of police, the obstruction constitutes a hazard or impedes the flow of traffic. 
(Code 1975, § 21-18) 
Sec. 82-33. - Notice to owner required; right to remove. 
    The police department personnel involved in the removal of an obstruction shall make diligent search to locate the owner of the obstruction and where possible notify the owner of the obstruction being caused by their property, giving them a reasonable opportunity to remove the object, considering the nature of the object creating the obstruction and the location of the same. 
(Code 1975, § 21-19) 
Sec. 82-34. - Failure to remove declared unlawful. 
    If the owner refuses or fails to remove the obstruction within the time set by the police department personnel, he shall be guilty of a violation of this Code. 
(Code 1975, § 21-20) 
Sec. 82-35. - Removal by city; redemption by owner. 
    If the owner fails to remove the obstructing object, the police department shall remove and hold the same for a period of 60 days and the same may be claimed by the owner upon the payment of all costs and such fine or penalty as assessed by the recorder of the city by reason of the violation of this article. If the owner has not been notified by the police department to remove the obstructing object prior to its removal by the police department only removal cost shall be assessed against the owner. 
(Code 1975, § 21-21) 
Sec. 82-36. - Sale when object unclaimed. 
    If the owner of the obstructing object cannot be determined for notification prior to its removal nor within the 60-day period within which the owner may claim the same or should the owner fail to claim the same, the chief of police shall sell the same before the city hall to the highest bidder for cash after posting a notice of the same on the bulletin board at the city hall for a period of ten days specifying the object to be sold, the time of the sale and terms thereof. Proceeds of the sale shall be used to defray the cost of removal and the remainder paid into the fine and forfeiture fund of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 21-22) 
Sec. 82-37. - Disposition of objects not justifying sale. 
    If the obstructing objects, in the opinion of the chief of police, shall have no value or shall be of such small value as to not justify a public sale, he shall dispose of the same for the best price available without a public sale. 
(Code 1975, § 21-23) 
Sec. 82-38. - Records required. 
    Complete records of the removal and disposition of obstructing objects shall be maintained by the chief of police. 
(Code 1975, § 21-24) 
Sec. 82-39. - Procedural requirements declared minimum. 
    The notification, advertisement and other limitations provided for in this article are minimum requirements and the chief of police and police department personnel shall take additional action and precautions to make certain that no owner of property is deprived of the same without reasonable opportunity to comply with the requirements of this article, considering the primary objective of this article being to keep open and clear the streets and thoroughfares of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 21-25) 
Sec. 82-40. - Building materials. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, without permission from the manager, to place in a street, sidewalk or alley, any building material so as to obstruct the same. It shall be the duty of all persons obtaining such permission to place such material, and take such steps as will prevent injury to the public. 
(Code 1975, § 21-26) 
Sec. 82-41. - Street sales. 
    The streets, sidewalks, and alleys of the city embraced within what is known as the fire limits shall not be used for the sale of any merchandise of any character. The council may, from time to time make exception to this rule for a period of one day only. 
(Code 1975, § 21-27) 
Secs. 82-42-82-65. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - EXCAVATIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18. 

Sec. 82-66. - Provisions declared supplemental. 
    The provisions of this article shall be in addition and supplemental to all other provisions of this Code and the ordinances of the city. 
(Code 1975, § 21-39) 
Sec. 82-67. - Permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, except employees of the city in the course of their employment, to open, dig into, remove the surface from or excavate any street, sidewalk, alley, public way or place without first obtaining a permit therefor from the manager. 
(Code 1975, § 21-40) 
Sec. 82-68. - Regulations authorized. 
    In granting an excavation permit, the manager may impose reasonable regulations, including but not limited to: 
(1)  The manner of making the excavation. 
(2)  The location of the excavation. 
(3)  Protection of underground utility installations. 
(4)  The duration of the excavation. 
(5)  Required safety precautions, such as barricades, lighting, warning devices, etc. 
(6)  The extent and size of the excavation. 
(7)  Steps to be taken to protect nearby property owners. 
(Code 1975, § 21-41) 
Sec. 82-69. - Assets or insurance required. 
    The applicant for an excavation permit shall submit satisfactory evidence that he has sufficient assets or insurance to indemnify the city for any costs, losses or liabilities that it may incur by reason of such excavation, and to satisfy any judgments or liabilities arising out of the excavation. 
(Code 1975, § 21-42) 
Sec. 82-70. - Backfilling and resurfacing. 
    It shall be the duty of the person making any excavation under this article to fill the excavation and restore the surface to a condition at least equal to the surface prior to the excavation. If so required by the manager, the person making an excavation shall furnish a deposit, bond or other security sufficient to assure compliance with this section. Provided however, that the city may elect to fill and resurface the excavation and charge the cost thereof against the person making the excavation. 
(Code 1975, § 21-43) 
Sec. 82-71. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person violating any provision of this article, or any condition or regulation of a permit hereunder, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11, and furthermore shall be subject to having the permit revoked. 
(Code 1975, § 21-44) 
Secs. 82-72-82-95. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - PARADES[4] 
Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Cross reference- Amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; parks and recreation, ch. 70; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 82-96. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Parade is any parade, march, ceremony, demonstration, show, exhibition, pageant, or procession of any kind involving ten or more persons or five or more vehicles. 
    Parade permit is a permit as required by this article. 
    Professionally organized parade is a parade which has been organized and produced by any person or organization that has received compensation or remuneration for its services in organizing and producing such parade other than reimbursement of its actual expenses. 
    Vehicles includes any device which moves on wheels or tracks whether under its own power or otherwise. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 1-2) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 82-97. - Exceptions. 
    This article shall not apply to: 
(1)  Funeral processions, provided the police department is notified of each procession's time and route; 
(2)  Students going to and from school classes or participating in educational or school sponsored activities; provided such conduct is under the immediate direction and supervision of the proper school authorities; or 
(3)  A governmental agency acting within the scope of its functions. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 1-3) 
Sec. 82-98. - Permit review committee established. 
    There is hereby established a permit review committee composed of the chief of police and the city manager or their designated representatives. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 1-4) 
Sec. 82-99. - Public conduct during parades. 
(a)  Interference. No person shall unreasonably hamper, obstruct or impede, or interfere with any parade or parade assembly or with any person, vehicle or animal participating or used in a parade. 
(b)  Driving through parades. No driver of any vehicle shall drive between the vehicles or persons comprising a parade when the vehicles or persons are in motion and are conspicuously designated as a parade. 
(c)  Parking on parade route. The police department shall have the authority, when reasonably necessary, to prohibit or restrict the parking of vehicles along a highway or part thereof constituting a part of the route of a parade. The police department may post signs to the effect, and it shall be unlawful for any person to park or leave unattended any vehicle in violation thereof. No person shall be liable for parking on a street unposted in violations of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 1-5) 
Sec. 82-100. - Regulations for conduct of parades. 
(a)  For the purpose of controlling traffic and pedestrian congestion and of providing for the public health, safety and general welfare, the following regulations shall pertain to all parades conducted within the city: 
(1)  All parades shall be conducted along the route specified in the parade permit. 
(2)  Parades shall be conducted between the hours of 9:00 a.m. and 7:00 p.m. 
(3)  All parade participants shall assemble for the parade at the time and location designated in the parade permit and shall disperse from public property immediately after the conclusion of the parade. 
(4)  No parade participant shall drink alcoholic beverages or be under the influence of any intoxicating beverages or drugs. 
(5)  Materials used in the construction of floats in the parade shall be of fire-retardant materials and shall be subject to such requirements concerning fire safety as may be determined by the fire chief. 
(6)  Once commenced, the parade shall not stop along the parade route, but shall continue to move at a fixed rate of speed, and any willful delay or willful stopping of such parade, except when reasonably required for the safe and orderly conduct of the parade, shall constitute a violation of the permit. 
(7)  Once commenced, no additional vehicles, individuals, groups or participants shall be permitted to join the parade. 
(8)  It shall be the responsibility of the person obtaining the parade permit to police the parade route for discarded literature, publications, or other written materials distributed along the parade route by participants of the parade and literature, publications, leaflets or other written material shall be distributed in such a manner as not to unduly delay or hinder the progress of the parade. 
(9)  Speeches shall be allowed only at a location designated in the parade permit. 
(10)  In no event shall speeches, rallies, etc., be conducted in the public street, or along the sidewalks of the city. 
(11)  The permittee shall advise all participants in the parade, either orally or by written notice, of the terms and conditions of the permit prior to the commencement of the parade and shall sign an acknowledgment that the permittee and the parade participants have read, understand and will comply with the regulations specified in this article and the conditions of the permit. 
(b)  Any other reasonable regulations or restriction deemed necessary by the chief of police for the protection and safety of the parade participants, viewing public, or for the public health, safety and general welfare of the citizens of the city, may be imposed by the chief of police. However, such additional regulations or restrictions shall be specified in writing to the applicant with all reasons therefor clearly enumerated. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 1-6; Res. No. 08-2014, 5-5-14) 
Sec. 82-101. - Professionally organized parades. 
    If the parade is a professionally organized parade, the applicant or the organizer shall pay a fee for such permit as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per 100 participants or any portion thereof reasonably estimated to participate and if more actually participate, a supplemental fee as set forth in the schedule of fees and charges to cover such additional participants as though included in the original application shall be due and payable immediately following the parade. In any event, the fee shall not be less than $10.00 for a professionally organized parade. In addition thereto, the applicant or organizer shall post a bond in an amount set forth in the schedule of fees and charges per 100 participants or any portion thereof reasonably estimated to participate, the excuse of which shall be conditioned upon the reimbursement of the city for the cost of additional police reasonably used during said parade and for clean up during and immediately following the parade. The applicant and organizers shall be liable for such costs of additional police and clean up as may be actually incurred by the city. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 1-7) 
Sec. 82-102. - Deviation from prescribed streets, ways. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to conduct a parade, procession or demonstration along, upon or over any street or public way other than those set out in the permit issued as provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 1-8) 
Sec. 82-103. - Assembly area, disassembly area and parade route designated. 
(a)  The assembly area for parades regulated by this article shall be the parking area to the west of the city's municipal facility at 315 Bradley Street, West Center Street, South Cliff Street and adjacent areas. 
(b)  All parades regulated by this article shall proceed along the following route: Beginning at the intersection of South Cliff and Maple Streets proceeding northeasterly on Maple Street to its intersection with Alabama Street, continuing east across Adamson Square to Newnan Street, continuing east on Newnan Street to its intersection with South White Street and ending on South White Street in front of the city's community activities center. 
(c)  The disassembly area for all parades regulated by this article shall be South White Street in front of the community activities center, the open grassy parking area east of the center, West Avenue and adjacent areas. Alternative areas are as follows: 
(1)  South White Street, in front of the Community Activity Center and the parking lot adjacent to the Bonner Building. 
(2)  The K-Mart parking lot, only with written permission of the owner and/or lessee of the property. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 4-3; Ord. of 9-18-95) 
Sec. 82-104. - Penalty. 
    Any person violating any provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 1-9) 
Secs. 82-105-82-120. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - PERMIT[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
Editor's note- Application forms for a parade permit are on file with and available from the city clerk. 

Sec. 82-121. - Required. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, no person shall engage in, participate in, aid, form or start any parade, unless a parade permit shall have been obtained from the chief of police. Nothing in this section shall be read or understood as prohibiting or restricting any necessary initial planning activities to apply for or to obtain any permit required under this article. No more than one permit under this section shall be issued to the same person or organization more than once every 90 days. No parade permit shall be issued to any person or organization for a period of 12 months following any parade for which a permit has been issued to such person or organization and which has been conducted in violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-1) 
Sec. 82-122. - Application generally. 
    A person seeking issuance of a parade permit shall file application with the chief of police on forms provided by his office. 
(1)  Filing period. An application for a parade permit shall be filed not less than ten days or more than 120 days before the date on which it is proposed to conduct the parade. 
(2)  Contents. The application for a parade permit shall set forth the following information: 
a.  The name, address and telephone number (day and night) of the person seeking to conduct the parade, and the applicant, if different; 
b.  If the parade is proposed to be conducted for, on behalf of, or by an organization, the name, address and telephone number of the headquarters of the organization and the authorized and responsible heads of such organization; 
c.  The name, business address, residence address and telephone number of the person who will be the parade leader, chairman, or marshal and who will be responsible for its conduct; 
d.  If the parade is designed to be held by, and on behalf of or for, any person other than the applicant, the applicant for the permit shall file with the chief of police a communication in writing from the person proposing to hold the parade, authorizing the applicant to apply for the permit on his behalf; 
e.  Whether or not any person will distribute or cause to be distributed any item, either perishable or otherwise, to any bystander or onlooker; 
f.  A statement from the person making the application that such person anticipates no unusual problems concerning either police protection or traffic congestion to be experienced as a consequence of the parade, or if such statement cannot be made, the reasons therefore; 
g.  The purpose of the parade; 
h.  The date when the parade is to be conducted; 
i.  The hours when the parade will start and terminate; 
j.  The time at which units of the parade will begin to assemble at any assembly area or areas and the time the units will leave the dispersal area; 
k.  Whether parade marshals will be provided; 
l.  The parade route, specifying alternative A or B (see description and map); 
m.  The estimated number of persons to participate in the parade; 
n.  The number and type of vehicles, animals, marching units, bands, and floats to be utilized in the parade including a description of any sound amplification equipment to be used. 
o.  The location by streets of any assembly and dispersal areas for the parade; 
p.  The interval space to be maintained between units of the parade; 
q.  Any additional information which the chief of police shall find reasonably necessary to a fair determination as to whether a permit should issue. 
(3)  Late applications. The chief of police, where just cause is shown therefor, shall have the authority to consider any application hereunder which is filed less than ten days before the date the parade is proposed to be conducted. 
(4)  Fee. No fee shall be charged for such permit except as otherwise herein provided for professionally organized parades. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-2) 
Sec. 82-123. - Procedure for processing application and standard for issuance. 
    All applications for permits under the article shall be filed with the police department to be forwarded to the members of the permit review committee for investigation of the applicant and other facts, circumstances and information relating to such application. The permit review committee shall, within five business days after filing of an application, grant or refuse to issue a permit unless additional information is required. If any members of the permit review committee objects to the issuance of the permit, the chairperson shall promptly convene a meeting of the committee. If the committee does not unanimously approve the permit, the permit shall be denied. The standards for issuance of a permit are as follows: 
(1)  The conduct of the parade will not substantially interrupt the safe and orderly movement of other traffic contiguous to its route; 
(2)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of police officers of the city to properly police the line of movement and the areas contiguous thereto as to prevent normal police protection to the city; 
(3)  The conduct of the parade will not require the diversion of so great a number of ambulances as to prevent normal ambulance service to portions of the city other than that to be occupied by the proposed line of march and areas contiguous thereto; 
(4)  The concentration of persons, animals and vehicles at assembly points of the parade will not unduly interfere with proper fire and police protection of, or ambulance service to, areas contiguous to assembly areas; 
(5)  The conduct of the parade will not unreasonably interfere with the movements of fire fighting equipment en route to a fire; 
(6)  The conduct of the parade is not reasonably likely to cause: 
a.  Injury to persons or property; 
b.  Disruption of the provision of fire protection services or emergency medical services to the surrounding area; or 
c.  There to be a substantial risk that the parade would incite or produce lawless action or spectator violence which cannot be satisfactorily prevented by means of reasonable crowd control technique. 
(7)  The parade is scheduled to move from its point of origin to its point of termination expeditiously and without unreasonable delays en route; 
(8)  The parade is not to be held for the sole purpose of advertising any product, goods or event, and is not designed to be held purely for private profit; 
(9)  The parade will not unreasonably burden the streets and sidewalks or the city so as to substantially interfere with the normal use thereof by the public; 
(10)  The parade will not interfere with another parade for which a permit has been approved; 
(11)  The information contained in the application is not found to be false in any material detail; 
(12)  The purpose of the parade is not illegal or in any way prohibited by law; or 
(13)  That no alcoholic beverages will be consumed during the parade. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-3) 
Sec. 82-124. - State permit. 
    Prior to the issuance of a permit under this division, the applicant for such permit shall obtain any state permit required by law or by the regulations of the state department of transportation. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-4) 
Sec. 82-125. - Notice of granting or refusal of permit. 
    The granting or refusal of any permit under this division by the permit review committee shall be final unless appealed to the permit appeals committee in writing within three days from the date of service of written notice of the decision of the permit review committee on the application. Failure to file an appeal within such three-day period shall constitute a waiver of the right to such appeal. Such notice shall be deemed received five days after deposit, postage prepaid, in the United States mail. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-5) 
Sec. 82-126. - Appeal procedure. 
    Any person aggrieved shall have the right to appeal in writing the denial of a parade permit to the permit appeal committee as set forth in section 82-151. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-6) 
Sec. 82-127. - Reconsideration of application. 
    A permit appeals committee consisting of the city manager and city attorney shall hear appeals on all or part of an application for a permit, or any permit previously granted, either upon request of the applicant or the permit review committee after five days' written notice thereof to the applicant and the permit review committee. Within five days after hearing the appeal, the permit review committee shall issue a decision. Such appeal shall be a condition precedent to judicial review. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-7) 
Sec. 82-128. - Alternative permit. 
    The permit review committee may grant the permit conditioned on the conduct of the parade on a date, at a time, or over a route different from that requested by the applicant. An applicant desiring to accept an alternate permit shall, within two days after notice of the action, file a written notice of acceptance with the permit review committee. An alternate parade permit shall conform to the requirements of, and shall have the effect of a parade permit under this article. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-8) 
Sec. 82-129. - Notice to city and other officials. 
    Immediately upon the application for a parade permit, the chief of police shall send a copy thereof to the following: 
(1)  The city manager; 
(2)  The public utilities administrator; 
(3)  The fire chief; 
(4)  The streets and sanitation director; 
(5)  The county sheriff; 
(6)  The parks, recreation and cultural arts director; 
(7)  The permit review committee; and 
(8)  West Georgia Ambulance Service or its successor. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-9) 
Sec. 82-130. - Issuance and contents. 
    The permit review committee shall grant a written permit for a parade as provided in this division which shall state the following information: 
(1)  Assembly time; 
(2)  Starting time; 
(3)  Minimum speed; 
(4)  Maximum speed; 
(5)  Maximum interval of space to be maintained between the units of the parade; 
(6)  The portions of the streets to be traversed that may be occupied by the parade; 
(7)  The maximum length of the parade in miles or fractions thereof; 
(8)  Any other information as the city manager shall find necessary to the enforcement of this article; and 
(9)  Parade route alternative including beginning and ending point. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-10) 
Sec. 82-131. - Duties of permittee. 
(a)  A permittee under this division shall comply with all permit directions and conditions and with all applicable laws and ordinances. 
(b)  The parade leader, chairman, or other person heading or leading such activity shall carry the parade permit upon his person during the conduct of the parade. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-11) 
Sec. 82-132. - Suspension or revocation. 
(a)  The chief of police or his designated representative shall have the authority to summarily suspend or revoke a parade permit issued hereunder upon application of the standards for issuance as herein set forth under section 82-123 or the regulations as herein set forth under this section. 
(b)  Any permit for a parade issued pursuant to this article may be summarily revoked on the day of the parade by the chief of police, or his designated representatives, when by reason of inclement weather, disaster, public calamity, riot or other emergency, the chief of police, or his designated representative, determines that the safety of the public or property requires such revocation. If a permit is so revoked, the permittee shall be allowed to reapply for a new parade permit. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 2-12) 
Secs. 82-133-82-150. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - APPEALS 

Sec. 82-151. - Appeal of denial, suspension or revocation of permit. 
    An appeal from denial, suspension or revocation of a permit requested pursuant to the provisions of this article may be taken by the applicant, person, or permittee to the permit appeals committee within three days after service of notice of such action. Such appeal shall be in writing, setting forth fully the grounds upon which the appeal is based, and shall be filed with the city manager who shall forward copies to the permit appeals committee and the permit review committee. The permit review committee shall submit to the permit appeals committee a report of the case appealed. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 3-1) 
Sec. 82-152. - Appeals committee action on appeal. 
(a)  Within 30 days after the filing of an appeal with the city manager, the permit appeals committee shall consider the appeal. Written notice of the time and place the permit appeals committee will consider the appeal shall be mailed by the city manager to the applicant, person, or permittee who filed the appeal and the permit review committee at least three days before the date set for hearing unless the applicant, person, or permittee shall waive notice in writing. Within five days after the hearing, the permit appeals committee shall issue its decision. 
(b)  In any appeal, the permit appeals committee shall consider the application, the report submitted by the permit review committee and other pertinent information presented, and may grant or deny the permit subject to the conditions, terms and regulations set forth in this article. The decision of the permit appeals committee shall be final. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 3-2) 
Sec. 82-153. - Decision review by permit review committee. 
(a)  The permit appeals committee shall, on its own motion, made within 20 days after the decision of permit review committee, review the issuance, denial, suspension or revocation of any permit, or review any condition, terms or regulation attached thereto. 
(b)  If, after review, the permit appeals committee determines that the matter should be considered on appeal before such body, it shall direct the city manager to notify the applicant, person, permittee, permit review committee, and any other affected parties of the time and place of such consideration, as hereinabove provided. After such consideration, the permit appeals committee may grant or deny the permit subject to the conditions, terms and regulations set forth in the article. 
(Ord. of 6-21-93(2), § 3-3) 
Chapter 86 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; businesses, ch. 22; business occupation taxes and regulatory fees, § 22-26 et seq.; insurers, § 22-81 et seq. 
Related laws references- Homestead exemption, art. I; homestead exemption for the aged, art. II. 
State Law reference- Taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶I; limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶VIII. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 86-1. - Local sales and use tax adopted. 
    A combination city-county local sales and use tax of one percent is hereby levied by the city council. 
(Code 1975, § 22-4) 
State Law reference- Joint county and municipal sales and use tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-8-80 et seq. 
Sec. 86-2. - Freeport exemption. 
    There shall be exempt from ad valorem taxation, including all such taxes levied for educational purposes and for state purposes, 100 percent of the following types of tangible personal property: 
(1)  Inventory of goods in the process of manufacture or production which shall include all partly finished goods and raw materials held for direct use or consumption in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business in this state. This exemption shall apply only to tangible personal property which is substantially modified, altered, or changed in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing processing, or production operations in this state. 
(2)  Inventory of finished goods manufactured or produced within this state in the ordinary course of the taxpayer's manufacturing or production business when held by the original manufacturer or producer of such finished goods. This exemption shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is produced or manufactured. 
(3)  Inventory of finished goods which, on January 1, are stored in a warehouse, dock, or wharf, whether public or private, and which are destined for shipment to a final destination outside this state and inventory of finished goods which are shipped into this state from outside this state and stored for transshipment to a final destination outside this state. The exemption provided for in this paragraph shall be for a period not exceeding 12 months from the date such property is stored in this state. 
(Res. of 2-8-94) 
State Law reference- Freeport exemption, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-48.2. 
Sec. 86-3. - Date for fixing tax rate. 
    The mayor and city council shall, as soon as practical after approval of the tax digest, fix the tax rate for the calendar year. 
Secs. 86-4-86-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - HOTEL-MOTEL EXCISE TAX[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance of February 7, 2000 amended the Code by repealing former art. II, §§ 86-31-86-36, in its entirety, and adding a new art. II, §§ 86-31-86-40, to read as herein set out. Former art. II pertained to similar subject matter, and derived from a resolution of September 1, 1988, §§ 1-6. Additionally, since the adoption of the amendatory ordinance, state law has been changed as it pertains to hotel-motel excise taxation. Consequently, Act No. 824, signed by the governor on May 1, 2000 has been treated as amending this article. 
State Law reference- County and municipal excise taxes on rooms, lodgings and accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq. 

Sec. 86-31. - Tax rate. 
    There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of eight percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 86-33. The proceeds of this tax shall be used in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51(a)(3) and (b). 
(Ord. of 2-7-00; Res. No. 06-2005, 6-6-05; Res. No. 07-2017, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 86-32. - Collection of tax by operator. 
    Every operator renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exemption is provided under section 86-33. The operator shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax(es) applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the operator at the same time that the rent is collected. 
(Ord. of 2-7-00; Res. No. 07-2017, 6-5-17) 
Sec. 86-33. - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be collected from a lodger after becoming a permanent resident; or from a person who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the state or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Lodging provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. of 2-7-00) 
Sec. 86-34. - Registration of operator; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
    Every person engaging or about to engage in business as an operator of a hotel in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the date that this article becomes effective. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each operator to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of an operator. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. of 2-7-00) 
Sec. 86-35. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amount of such taxes shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month next succeeding each respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for each monthly period after the twentieth day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. An operator who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; operators required to file; contents. On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for an operator who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such operator shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The governing authority of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the operator. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. An operator granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed operators. Operators collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. of 2-7-00) 
Sec. 86-36. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any operator, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 86-35. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the operator written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the operator at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by addressee. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in the case of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of a deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(Ord. of 2-7-00) 
Sec. 86-37. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any operator fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the operator, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the operator failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 86-36(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 86-35. 
(Ord. of 2-7-00) 
Sec. 86-38. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Operator selling or quitting business. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of operator to withhold tax from purchase money. If any operator liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold purchase as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be offset by the governing authority. If the operator or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claim shall be audited. If the claim is approved by the governing authority, the excess amount paid to the city may be credited on any amounts then due and payable from the person by whom it was paid. 
(Ord. of 2-7-00) 
Sec. 86-39. - Administration of article; record keeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from operators, etc; form. Every operator renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Application for sales tax audit reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city clerk shall request in writing from the state commissioner of revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
(d)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers. records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any operator renting guest rooms and any operator liable for the tax, in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or if no return is made by the operator, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
(e)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official; and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. of 2-7-00) 
Sec. 86-40. - Violations. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $100.00 nor more than $300.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months. Each such person shall be guilty of a separate offense for each and every day during any portion of which any violation of any provision of this article is committed, continued or permitted by such person, and shall be punished accordingly. Any operator who fails to register as required herein, or to furnish any return required to be made, or who fails or refuses to furnish a supplemental return or other data required by the city clerk, or who renders a false or fraudulent return, shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished as aforesaid. 
(Ord. of 2-7-00) 
Secs. 86-41-86-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS BUSINESS LICENSE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference- Authorization to levy and collect a business license tax from depository financial institutions, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 

Sec. 86-56. - Imposed. 
    Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is hereby levied for the year 1984, and for each year thereafter, an annual business license tax upon state and national banking associations, federal savings and loan associations and state building and loan associations a business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of such institutions. Gross receipts shall mean gross receipts as defined in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this article, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this article shall be $1,000.00 per year. 
(Ord. of 11-21-83, § 1) 
Sec. 86-57. - Filing of return. 
    Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts with the city on March 1 of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Such returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based upon the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in such return. 
(Ord. of 11-21-83, § 2) 
Sec. 86-58. - Due date. 
    The due date of taxes levied by this article shall be April 1 of each year. 
(Ord. of 11-21-83, § 2) 
Secs. 86-59-86-80. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE IV. - ENTERPRISE ZONE PROGRAM[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of Sept. 16, 2002, §§ I, II, IV-X, amended the Code by reserving chapter 90, article 90. The editor has determined that said ordinance should be included herein as article IV, sections 86-81-86-89. 
State Law reference- Enterprise Zone Employment Act of 1997, O.C.G.A. § 36-88-1 et seq. 

Sec. 86-81. - Purpose and scope. 
    (a) The county board of commissioners and city council have found that there is a need for revitalization in certain areas of the county and the city. Revitalization will improve geographic areas within the county and the city, which are suffering from disinvestment, underdevelopment, and economic decline and will encourage private businesses to reinvest and rehabilitate such areas. This article should be liberally construed to accomplish these purposes. 
    (b) The eligibility requirements contained herein are the minimum necessary to consider granting an application to participate in the enterprise zone program. The fact that an area or business may meet such eligibility requirements shall not entitle any such area, business or applicant to an enterprise zone designation or to additional incentives. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, § I) 
Sec. 86-82. - Criteria and boundaries of area-wide enterprise zones. 
(a)  In order to be designated as an enterprise zone, a nominated area shall meet at least three of the four criteria specified in subsections (b), (c), (d), and (e) of the enabling legislation. Creation of an enterprise zone shall be consistent with the county and the city comprehensive plans, as amended. in determining whether an area suffers from poverty, unemployment, or general distress, the county board of commissioners and the city council shall use data from the most current United States decennial census and from other information published by the Federal Bureau of the Census, the Federal Bureau of Labor Statistics and the state department of labor. In determining whether an area suffers from underdevelopment, the county board of commissioners and city council shall use the data specified in subsection (e) of O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6. This data shall be comparable in point or period of time and methodology employed. 
(b)  Pervasive poverty shall be evidenced by showing that poverty is widespread throughout the nominated area and shall be established by using the following criteria: 
(1)  The poverty rate shall be determined from the data in table P121 contained in the Census of Population and Housing, 1990: Summary Tape File 3A, on CD-ROM (Georgia), prepared by the U.S. Bureau of Census (1992); 
(2)  For each census geographic block group within the nominated area, the ratio of income to poverty level for at least 20 percent of the residents shall be less than 1.0; 
(3)  In at least 50 percent of the census geographic block groups within the nominated area, the ratio of income to poverty level for at least 30 percent of the residents shall be less than 1.0; 
(4)  Census geographic block groups with no population shall be treated as having a poverty rate which meets the standards of paragraph (2) of this subsection but shall be treated as having a zero poverty rate for the purpose of applying paragraph (3) of this subsection; and 
(5)  All parcels of a nominated area must abut and may not contain a noncontiguous parcel, unless nonabutting parcel qualifies separately under the criteria set forth under paragraphs (2) and (3) of this subsection. 
(c)  Unemployment shall be evidenced by the use of data published by the office of labor information systems of the state department of labor indicating that the average rate of unemployment for the nominated area for the preceding calendar year is at least ten percent higher than the state average rate of unemployment or by evidence of adverse economic conditions brought about by significant job dislocation within the nominated area such as the closing of a manufacturing plant or federal facility. 
(d)  General distress shall be evidenced by adverse conditions within the nominated area other than those of pervasive poverty and unemployment. Examples of such adverse conditions include, but are not limited to, a high incidence of crime, abandoned or dilapidated structures, deteriorated infrastructure, and substantial population decline. 
(e)  Underdevelopment shall be evidenced by data indicating development activities, or lack thereof, through land disturbance permits, business license fees, building permits, development fees, or other similar data indicating that the level of development in the nominated area is at least 20 percent lower than other development activity within the county and the city. 
(f)  The county board of commissioners and city council find that based on evidence, the area contained in the enterprise zone delineated in Exhibit A satisfies at least three of the four criteria set forth in O.C.G.A. § 36-88-6 and constitutes the enterprise zone(s) of the county and the city, to be known as "West Carrollton Enterprise District". 
(g)  The designees of the county board of commissioners and the city shall report designations of enterprise zones to the state department of community affairs, providing such sufficient information to identify at a minimum the geographic boundaries of the zone(s), the specific fees and taxes to be exempted, and the beginning and ending dates of the designation period. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, § II) 
Sec. 86-83. - Definitions. 
(a)  The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article shall have the following meanings, except where the context indicates a different meaning is intended: 
    Ad valorem tax shall mean property taxes levied for state, county, or city operating purposes but does not include property taxes imposed by school districts or property taxes imposed for general obligation, or special revenue bond debt. 
    Business enterprise means any business that is engaged primarily in manufacturing, warehousing and distribution, processing, telecommunications, tourism, research and development industries, finance, insurance, and real estate activities, new residential construction, residential rehabilitation and retail and day care activities. 
    Comprehensive plan means the Carroll County Comprehensive Plan, as amended from time to time, adopted by the board of commissioners which divides the unincorporated areas of the county into land use categories and which constitutes the official policy of the county regarding long-term planning and use of land, as defined in the county zoning ordinance. 
    Enterprise zone means the geographic areas of census tracts designated in exhibit A, attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived. 
    Full-time job equivalent means a job or position with no predetermined end date, with a regular workweek of 30 hours or more, and with same benefits provided to other similar employees. 
    Low-income and moderate-income individual means a person who, at the time of hire is: 
(1)  Unemployed or unemployed for three of the six months prior to the date of hire; 
(2)  Homeless; 
(3)  A resident of public housing; 
(4)  Receiving temporary assistance to needy families or who has received temporary assistance to needy families at any time during the 18 months prior to the date or hire; 
(5)  A participant in the Job Training Partnership Act Program or who is participating in the Job Training Partnership Act Program at any time during the 18 months prior to the date of hire; 
(6)  A participant in a job opportunity or training program where basic skills are required or who has participated in such a job opportunity or training program at any time during the 18 months prior to the date of hire; 
(7)  Receiving supplemental social security income; or 
(8)  Receiving food stamps. 
    New job means employment for an individual created within an enterprise zone by a new or expanded qualified business or service enterprise at the time of the initial staffing of such new or expanded enterprise. 
    Qualified or qualifying business means an employer that meets the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 36-88-4, including a service enterprise, which increased employment by five or more new full-time job equivalents in an area designated as an enterprise zone, and which provides additional economic stimulus in such zone. The quality or quantity of such additional economic stimulus shall be determined, on a case-by-case basis, by the local governing body or bodies that have designated the enterprise zone. Additional considerations and requirements are outlined in exhibit B, attached to the ordinance from which this article is derived. Such business or service enterprise may be new, an expansion or reinvestment of an existing business or service enterprise, or a successor to such business or service enterprise. Whenever possible, ten percent of such new employees shall be low-income or moderate-income individuals. 
    Rehabilitation means the making of improvements to an existing structure such that the value of the improvements made to the structure exceeds the present appraised value of the land, as determined by the county tax assessor or the city tax assessor, on which the structure is situated by a factor of five to one. 
    Service enterprise means any entity that is engaged primarily in finance, insurance, and real estate activity or activities listed under the Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Codes 60 through 67 according to the Federal Office of Management and Budget Standard Industrial Classification Manual, 1987 Edition and retail and day care activities. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, § IV; Mo. of 9-6-05) 
Sec. 86-84. - Qualifications and incentives. 
(a)  To encourage revitalization within the designated enterprise zone, the following exemptions schedule for state, county, and city ad valorem taxes are available to qualifying business and service enterprises: 
(1)  One hundred percent of the state, county and city ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the first five years; 
(2)  Eighty percent of the state, county, and city ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next two years (sixth and seventh years); 
(3)  Sixty percent of the state, county, and city ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next year (eighth year); 
(4)  Forty percent of the state, city, and county ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the next year (ninth year); and 
(5)  Twenty percent of the state, county, and city ad valorem taxes shall be exempt for the last year (tenth year). 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-88-7(a)(1), the county board of commissioners and/or the city council may offer the following additional economic incentives if annually the board of commissioners and city council determine that such incentives are to be provided: 
(1)  Building permit fees. 
(2)  Sign permit fees. 
(3)  Business license fees. 
(4)  Rezoning fees. 
(5)  Engineering fees. 
(6)  Water and sewer tap fees. 
(7)  Other local fees authorized by the council and/or board. 
(c)  Nothing in this article shall authorize the county, the city or their designated agent to waive, amend, provide exceptions to or otherwise modify or alter any ordinance that is expressly required to implement or enforce any statutory provisions or is designed to protect persons against discrimination on the basis of race, color, creed, national origin, sex, age, or handicap. 
(d)  For a qualifying business or service enterprise located within the enterprise zone or any business designated as eligible for enterprise zone advantages and incentives, the schedule provided for above shall begin in any year during which an area has an enterprise zone designation. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed as giving any business or service enterprise or property owner a vested right to be designated as a qualifying business or service enterprise. 
(e)  If, on or after the effective date of this article, a project within the designated enterprise zone consists of rehabilitation and improvement of an existing structure and the value of said improvements exceeds the value of the accompanying tract or parcel of land by a ratio of five to one, as determined by the county tax assessor or the city tax assessor, then the exemption schedule above shall also apply to the property whether or not the rehabilitation project is carried out by a qualifying business or service enterprise. The tax exemptions pursuant to this paragraph shall commence on the first day of the year following designation of the project as a qualifying project under this paragraph. However, this designation shall not be granted until the rehabilitation project has been completed and the county tax assessor or the city tax assessor confirms its value. 
(f)  In no event shall the total value of the property tax exemptions granted within enterprise zones within the county and the city as a whole exceed ten percent of the value of the entire property tax digest of the county or the city. 
(g)  The enterprise zone designation shall run with the qualifying business or service enterprise and not with the land. Therefore, the designation shall apply only to the entity granted the designation through an application to the county and the city under this article. 
(h)  A business or service making application to receive enterprise zone tax exemptions and incentives shall have a right to appeal any denial of the application to the county board of commissioners and the city council. The request for appeal shall be filed with the director, the county attorney and the clerk of the county board of commissioners within seven days of the date of denial of the application for tax exemption. The county board of commissioners shall render a final decision on the appeal within 90 days of the filing of the appeal. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, § V) 
Sec. 86-85. - Duration. 
(a)  The area herein designated as an enterprise zone shall remain in existence for ten years from the first day of the calendar year immediately following its designation as an enterprise zone. Ad valorem tax exemptions available to a qualified business or service enterprise in the enterprise zone herein created shall remain in effect for the full ten-year schedule established above, regardless of the termination of the designation of an enterprise zone. 
(b)  Any areas designated as an enterprise zone may be redesignated as an enterprise zone if the area continues to meet the criteria for an enterprise zone contained in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, § VI) 
Sec. 86-86. - Administration. 
(a)  A joint committee comprised of two city representatives, two county representatives, and a jointly appointed chairperson shall be designated to manage the implementation and enforcement of the West Carrollton Enterprise District Program; develop and accept applications; oversee zone activities and administration and communicate with qualified business. The committee shall grant designations consistent with the purposes and intent of this article and state law. 
(b)  The committee shall have the power to administer, require and enforce compliance with the provisions of this article, and issue such administrative rules or regulations adopted hereafter, including, but not limited to, that such reports, data and information be submitted from such businesses within the enterprise zone to verify compliance with this article. 
(c)  Evidence of the creation and maintenance of all new jobs within the enterprise zone shall be submitted to the county board of commissioners and the city council by the committee annually. At the conclusion of each year, the committee will prepare a comprehensive report including, but not limited to the following enterprise zone evaluation tools: jobs created, amount of capital invested in the enterprise zone and the amount of taxes exempted. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, § VII) 
Sec. 86-87. - Application. 
(a)  An entity desiring designation as a "qualifying business or service enterprise" under this article must apply to the committee. An application fee in an amount to be determined by the committee shall be required. In addition to other information requested by the county and the city, the following items shall accompany the application: 
(1)  A description of business(es) conducted by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone; 
(2)  Documentation reflecting the number of full-time job equivalents maintained by the applicant at the subject location within the enterprise zone as of the date of application, as compared to the number of such full-time job equivalents maintained as of the effective date of this article, and the projected number of full-time job equivalents three years after the proposed investment; 
(3)  Description and documentation of any additional economic stimulus provided within the enterprise zone by the applicant; 
(4)  A legal description of the property; 
(5)  Documentation reflecting expenses or rehabilitation of the existing structure; 
(6)  Data from the county tax assessor or the city tax assessor reflecting the value of the structure both before and after rehabilitation; 
(7)  Data from the county tax assessor or the city tax assessor reflecting the value of the accompanying tract or parcel of land both before and after rehabilitation of the structure; and 
(8)  Photographic documentation of the structure both before and after rehabilitation. 
(b)  Falsification of documents, failure to develop the project or comply with any provision of this article may result in revocation of any designation granted and recapture of any and all incentives granted to any such qualifying business. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, § VIII) 
Sec. 86-88. - Business location. 
    Where a business is operated at more than one location, only the locations within the enterprise zone shall be eligible for the tax exemptions provided in this article. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, § IX) 
Sec. 86-89. - Record of exemption; contractual agreement. 
(a)  Any location for which the tax exemptions provided in this article have been granted shall maintain documentation relating to the grant of said exemptions at the address for which the exemptions were approved. 
(b)  As a condition of receiving tax exemptions provided for in this article, a qualifying business or service enterprise shall enter into a contractual agreement with the county and the city that specifies the tax exemptions and any additional incentives offered to such business or service enterprise, and the amount of capital to be invested by the business, and the square footage of improvements or units of housing to be constructed or rehabilitated. Guidelines for the recapture, revocation or reimbursement of taxes shall also be included in the terms of the contractual agreement in the event that this article or the Georgia Enterprise Zone Act is violated by the business or service enterprise. 
(Ord. of 9-16-02, § X) 
ARTICLE V. - ENERGY EXCISE TAX 

Sec. 86-90. - Short title. 
    This article shall be known as the "Carrollton Energy Excise Tax Ordinance." 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-91. - Findings and intent. 
    This article is adopted to address the interest of public finance. Georgia law authorizes counties and municipalities to impose an excise tax on the sale or use of energy but the imposition of the excise tax on the sale or use of energy in the law is contingent upon the enactment of an ordinance of the municipality in question. In order for the municipality to properly impose such excise tax the municipality must follow all of the provisions of O.C.G.A. art. 6 of ch. 13 of tit. 48, one provision of which is the enactment of this article. 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-92. - Definitions. 
    [The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning:] 
    Dealer shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-110. 
    Energy shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-110. 
    Local sales and use tax shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-110. 
    Purchaser shall have the same meaning as provided for in the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-110. 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-93. - Energy excise tax imposed. 
(a)  In accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A., art. 6 of ch. 13 of tit. 48, there is imposed within the territorial limits of the city, an excise tax on the sale or use of energy when such sale or use would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A., art. 1 of ch. 8 of Title 48 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated but for the exemption found in the O.C.G.A., § 48-8-3.2. 
(b)  The sale or use of energy when such sale or use would have constituted a taxable event for purposes of sales and use tax under O.C.G.A., art. 1 of ch. 8 of tit. 48 but for the exemption found in the O.C.G.A., § 48-8-3.2 includes, but is not limited to, the sales and use of energy that is necessary and integral to the manufacture of tangible personal property such as: 
(1)  Machinery or equipment used to convey or transport industrial materials, work in process, consumable supplies, or packaging materials at or among manufacturing plants or to convey and transport finished goods to a distribution or storage point at the manufacturing plant. Specific examples may include, but are not limited to, forklifts, conveyors, cranes, hoists, and pallet jacks; 
(2)  Machinery or equipment used to gather, arrange, sort, mix, measure, blend, heat, cool, clean, or otherwise treat, prepare, or store industrial materials for further manufacturing; 
(3)  Machinery or equipment used to control, regulate, heat, cool, or produce energy for other machinery or equipment that is necessary and integral to the manufacture of tangible personal property. Specific examples may include, but are not limited to, boilers, chillers, condensers, water towers, dehumidifiers, humidifiers, heat exchangers, generators, transformers, motor control centers, solar panels, air dryers, and air compressors; 
(4)  Testing and quality control machinery or equipment located at a manufacturing plant used to test the quality of industrial materials, work in process, or finished goods; 
(5)  Starters, switches, circuit breakers, transformers, wiring, piping, and other electrical components, including associated cable trays, conduit, and insulation, located between a motor control center and exempt machinery or equipment or between separate units of exempt machinery or equipment; 
(6)  Machinery or equipment used to maintain, clean, or repair exempt machinery or equipment; 
(7)  Machinery or equipment used to provide safety for the employees working at a manufacturing plant, including, but not limited to, safety machinery and equipment required by federal or state law, gloves, ear plugs, face masks, protective eyewear, hard hats or helmets, or breathing apparatuses, regardless of whether the items would otherwise be considered consumable supplies; 
(8)  Machinery or equipment used to condition air or water to produce conditions necessary for the manufacture of tangible personal property, including pollution control machinery or equipment and water treatment systems; 
(9)  Pollution control, sanitizing, sterilizing, or recycling machinery or equipment; 
(10)  Industrial materials bought for further processing in the manufacture of tangible personal property for sale or further processing or any part of the industrial material or by-product thereof which becomes a wasteful product contributing to pollution problems and which is used up in a recycling or burning process; 
(11)  Machinery or equipment used in quarrying and mining activities, including blasting, extraction, and crushing; and 
(12)  Energy used at a manufacturing plant. 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-94. - Energy excise tax rate and phase-in. 
(a)  The rate of the excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be phased in over a four-year period as directed by the O.C.G.A., §§ 48-13-112(a)(3) and 48-13-112(b) and as set forth below: 
(1)  For the period commencing January 1, 2013, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2013, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 25 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A., § 48-8-3.2; 
(2)  For the period commencing January 1, 2014, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2014, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 50 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A., § 48-8-3.2; 
(3)  For the period commencing January 1, 2015, and concluding at the last moment of December 31, 2015, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 75 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A., § 48-8-3.2; and 
(4)  On or after January 1, 2016, such excise tax shall be at a rate equivalent to 100 percent of the total amount of local sales and use tax in effect in such special district that would be collected on the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy but for the exemption in the O.C.G.A., § 48-8-3.2. 
(b)  In accordance with O.C.G.A., § 48-8-3.2(c)(4), if a project of regional significance under O.C.G.A., § 48-8-3(92) is started in the special district, it shall not be subject to the phase-in period contained in paragraphs (1), (2), and (3) of subsection (a) of this section, and the sale, use, storage, or consumption of energy in connection therewith shall be subject to the rate specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (a) of this section notwithstanding the January 1, 2016, limitation in that paragraph (4). 
(c)  Following such initial imposition during the phase-in time period, on or after January 1, 2016, the rate of the excise tax levied and collected by the city shall be directed by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-112(d). Such rate shall be controlled by the maximum amount of local sales and use tax in effect in the special district, but in no event more than two percent. 
(d)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district decreases from two percent to one percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be reduced at the same time such local sales and use tax rate reduction becomes effective. 
(e)  In the event the total rate of local sales and use taxes in effect in the special district increases from one percent to two percent, the rate of the excise tax under this article shall likewise be increased at the same time such local sales and use tax rate increase becomes effective. 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-95. - Energy excise tax imposition, remittance and recovery. 
(a)  The excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall be imposed at the time and be recoverable as governed by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-112(c). 
(b)  The excise tax shall be a debt of the purchaser of energy until it is paid and shall be recoverable at law in the same manner as authorized for the recovery of other debts as governed by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-112(c). 
(c)  The dealer collecting the excise tax shall remit the excise tax to the city if the city is the governing authority imposing the excise tax as governed by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-112(c). 
(d)  Every dealer subject to an excise tax under this article shall be liable for the excise tax at an applicable rate on the charges actually collected or the amount of the excise taxes collected from the purchasers, whichever is greater as governed by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-112(c). 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-96. - Exemption certificates. 
(a)  The governing authority of the city, or the collecting officer appointed under this article, shall make diligent efforts to identify all energy providers and purchasers in the city and to ascertain whether such purchasers have completed a uniform exemption certificate provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue seeking to qualify such purchaser under the exemption found in the O.C.G.A., § 48-8-32.2. Such certificate shall be utilized by such governing authority or collecting officer for the purpose of determining the applicability of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  An energy provider shall be authorized to rely upon such uniform exemption certificates provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue. The energy provider shall not be liable for failing to collect and remit the excise tax imposed under this article if a purchaser has failed to submit the uniform exemption certificate provided by the Georgia Department of Revenue to such energy provider. 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-97. - Commencement of collections and due date. 
(a)  The excise tax imposed pursuant to this article shall become effective on February 1, 2013. 
(b)  The excise tax levied pursuant to this article shall be imposed only at the time that sales and use tax on the sale and use of such energy would have been due and payable under the O.C.G.A., § 48-8-30 but for the exemption in O.C.G.A., § 48-8-3.2. 
(c)  The excise tax shall be due and payable in the same manner as would otherwise be required under O.C.G.A., art. 1 of ch. 8 of tit. 48. 
(d)  All sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the twentieth day of every month and each respective month in which such taxes are collected, and payment shall be accompanied by a return for the preceding monthly period showing the gross sales and purchases arising from all sales and purchases taxable under this article during the preceding calendar month. 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-98. - Expenditure of proceeds. 
    The proceeds of the excise tax levied and collected pursuant to this article shall not be subject to any use or expenditure requirements provided for under any of the local sales and use taxes but shall be authorized to be expended in the same manner as otherwise would have been required under such local sales and use taxes or may be expended for any lawful purpose as governed by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-112(c). Any proceeds received by the city pursuant to this article shall be deposited in the general fund of the city. 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-99. - Termination of municipal excise tax. 
(a)  If the city has levied and collected an excise tax within the corporate limits of municipality under this article because the county in which the city is located has refused or failed to enter into an intergovernmental agreement with each municipality wishing to participate in such excise tax as allowed by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-115(a)(1) and then the county determines to commence proceedings for the imposition of the excise tax as allowed by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-115(b)(2), then the excise tax levied and collected by the municipality shall cease to the extent as provided for by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-115(b)(2). 
(b)  If the county has commenced proceedings for the imposition of the excise tax as allowed by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-115(b)(2) and the excise tax levied and collected by the municipality has terminated and the municipality has chosen to participate in the county excise tax, then this article shall remain effective for the purposes of O.C.G.A., art. 6 of ch. 13 of tit. 48 and particularly for the rates required by the O.C.G.A., § 48-13-112. 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Sec. 86-100. - Administrative provisions and audit. 
(a)  The city governing authority shall be authorized to designate a collecting officer for collection and administration of the excise tax under this article. 
(b)  The collecting officer shall be authorized to provide for procedures necessary to the proper implementation of this article, including, but not limited to, periodic auditing of dealers collecting and remitting the excise tax. 
(c)  The collecting officer, or designee, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of and locations within the city of any purchaser which is required to remit the excise tax to the energy dealer under this article. 
(d)  As part by the audit report required by the O.C.G.A., § 36-81-7 the auditor shall include, in a separate schedule, a report of the revenues pertaining to the excise tax under this article. 
(Res. No. 02-2013, 1-7-13) 
Chapter 90 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Courts, ch. 38; nuisances, § 50-26 et seq.; junked or abandoned vehicles, § 50-51 et seq.; offenses and miscellaneous provisions, ch. 66; rules and regulations for Lake Carroll, § 70-46 et seq.; signs, ch. 74; streets, sidewalks and other public places, ch. 82; obstructions, § 82-31 et seq.; parades, § 82-96 et seq.; vehicles for hire, ch. 98. 
State Law reference- Preventing or disrupting lawful procession, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-34; display of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; funeral processions, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-76; operation of motorcycles and motor vehicles in parades, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-7; alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183; bicycles and play vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-290 et seq.; power of local authorities generally, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; prosecution of traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal courts over misdemeanor traffic offenses, O.C.G.A. § 40-13-21(a).; authority to provide devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 90-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-372-40-6-376, O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-2-40-6-395, known as the uniform rules of the road, and the definitions contained in O.C.G.A. § 40-1-1 are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(b)  Unless another penalty is expressly provided by state law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this section shall be punished in accordance with section 1-11. 
(Code 1975, § 14-1) 
Sec. 90-2. - Boarding, alighting from, clinging to moving vehicle. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to jump, swing, or in any manner get off a motor vehicle before the vehicle stops or to board a motor vehicle before the vehicle comes to a standstill, or for any person on a bicycle or other conveyance to cling to a moving motor vehicle. 
(Code 1975, § 14-3) 
Sec. 90-3. - Parking trucks at night limited. 
    It shall be unlawful to park any truck which has a capacity of one ton or more on any street in the city which has a width of 31 feet or less between the hours of 6:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. the next morning for a period of one hour or more. 
(Code 1975, § 14-37) 
Sec. 90-4. - Riding bicycles, skateboards, roller skates or roller blades near square prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful to ride a bicycle, skateboard, roller skates, or roller blades on the sidewalks around the public square or the sidewalks within two blocks of the public square. This section shall not apply to the police bicycle unit. 
(Code 1975, § 14-5; Res. of 6-1-98) 
Sec. 90-5. - Truck traffic. 
(a)  Prohibited areas. It shall be unlawful for any motor truck, having over two axles, motor-driven trailer to traverse any part of the area of the city bounded by: 
Northside Drive on the north, State Route 166 on the east and south; State Route 1 on the west; or on Maple Street west of State Route 1 and east of State Route 166. 
(b)  Exceptions. Nothing in this section shall prohibit any truck, whether or not accompanied by a trailer, from traversing any of the streets or areas described in subsection (a) of this section solely for the purpose of making deliveries or for the purpose of picking up or receiving goods, wares or merchandise for transportation, but this shall not include permission for trailers to enter, park or stand in the area for any other purpose not otherwise provided by ordinance. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Violations of this section are subject to the jurisdiction of the city municipal court and the fine amount established for this offense shall be $50.00 for the first violation, $100.00 for the second violation, $250.00 for the third and subsequent violations, and may include additional penalties within the jurisdiction of the municipal court judge. 
(Ord. of 2-3-97, §§ I, IV) 
Sec. 90-6. - No through streets. 
    No thoroughfare/public street marked by a sign to show that it is not a through street, shall be used by a driver of any motorized vehicle unless the driver enters the thoroughfare/public street for the purpose of stopping at a location on such thoroughfare/public street (see O.C.G.A. 32-4-92(7) et seq.) 
(Amd. of 4-2-01) 
Sec. 90-7. - Engine brakes prohibited. 
(a)  Engine brakes defined. This section applies to any form of secondary braking system commonly found on large trucks that use compression from the engine as resistance to slow the drivetrain. Such braking systems are commonly referred to as "Jacobs Engine Brakes," "Engine Brakes," or "Jake Brakes" and often cause the engine to make a loud sound audible from a distance. 
(b)  Engine brakes prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any driver of a truck or truck-tractor to activate or use the unit's engine brake within the city limits. 
(c)  Penalty for violation. Any driver of a truck or truck-tractor who activates or uses the unit's engine brake within the city limits shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Res. No. 01-2015, 4-6-15) 
Secs. 90-8-90-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - RAILROADS 

Sec. 90-31. - Duties of railroads relating to crossings. 
    It shall be unlawful for any railroad company whose road crosses any of streets in this city, to fail, neglect, or to refuse, to have suitable crossings erected, and kept in good repair at the points where they cross the streets and public roads; or for any railroad company to refuse, or neglect, or fail to put in good order, all roads turned for the benefit of such railroad; or for any railroad company to neglect, or refuse to build and keep in repair, bridges of a proper width across their respective roads rendered necessary by excavation in building such road across the street. 
(Code 1975, § 21-4) 
State Law reference- Operation of trains at crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-190 et seq. 
Sec. 90-32. - Blocking crossings. 
    It shall be unlawful for the person in charge of any railroad train to permit such train to block any street in the city for a longer time than five minutes. 
(Code 1975, § 16-12) 
State Law reference- Local powers, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-371; obstructions at railroad crossings, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-128; occupying or blocking railroad crossing, O.C.G.A. § 46-8-197. 
Sec. 90-33. - Speed. 
    It shall be unlawful for any engineer or other person to operate a train crossing any public street where traffic is not controlled by electric warning devices at any speed in excess of the legal speed of vehicles on the street being crossed. 
(Code 1975, § 16-13) 
Secs. 90-34-90-55. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TRAFFIC SCHEDULES 

Sec. 90-56. - Traffic regulation map. 
    It shall be the duty of the city engineer to keep at all times current a map or traffic schedules showing all such specific locational regulations referred to in this article. Such map or traffic schedules shall reflect, without limitation, the following: 
(1)  Speed limits. 
(2)  One-way streets. 
(3)  Prohibited turns. 
(4)  No-parking areas and zones. 
(5)  Areas and zones in which parking is limited. 
(6)  Parking meter zones. 
(Code 1975, § 14-6) 
Sec. 90-57. - Speed limit in school zones. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a vehicle at a speed in excess of 15 miles per hour in any school zone. 
(Code 1975, § 14-19) 
Sec. 90-58. - Prohibited right turns on red. 
    Right turns on a red light are prohibited at the following intersections: 
(1)  Alabama Street and Maple Street, travelling east on Maple. 
(2)  Newnan Street and Dixie Street. 
(Code 1975, § 14-21) 
Sec. 90-59. - Two-hour parking. 
(a)  Parking upon the public streets with the city shall be prohibited for any period of time exceeding two hours in any one location on the following streets: 
Adamson Square, in its entirety. 
Alabama Street, south side, from Maple to Cliff Streets. 
Barnes, east side, from Alabama Street to Presbyterian Avenue. 
Bradley Street, east side, from Adamson Square to Mill Street. 
Bradley Street, west side, from Adamson Square to West Center Street. 
City Hall Avenue, both sides, between Rome and Harris Streets. 
Harris Street, east side, from City Hall Avenue to Newnan Street. 
Maple Street, southeast side, from Alabama to Cliff Streets. 
Newnan Street, south side, from Adamson Square to Tanner Street. 
Tanner Street, east side, from Newnan Street to City Hall Avenue. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as to authorize parking in any zone hereto established as a no parking zone notwithstanding its being included within the area established as a two-hour parking zone by this section. 
(Code 1975, § 14-38) 
Sec. 90-60. - Speed zones established. 
    The following speed zones are established based on an engineering and traffic investigation as prescribed by law: 
ON SYSTEM 
State Route 1 (U.S. 27) (South Park Street, North Park Street): 
(1)  From mile point 9.66 (400 feet south of C.R. 631, Brock Street, south city limits) to mile point 10.14 (50 feet south C.S. 1087), a distance of 0.48 mile, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
(2)  From mile point 10.14 (50 feet south C.S. 1087) to mile point 10.40 (600 feet north of westbound ramps at State Route 166), a distance of 0.26 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(3)  From mile point 10.40 (600 feet north of westbound ramps at State Route 166) to mile point 12.60 (Myrtle Street, C.S. 802), a distance of 2.20 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
(4)  From mile point 12.60 (Myrtle Street, C.S. 802) to mile point 14.17 (1,300 feet south of Park Drive, C.R. 1158, city limits), a distance of 1.57 miles, the speed limit shall be 50 miles per hour. 
State Route 16 (Alabama Street): 
(1)  From mile point 11.17 (900 feet east of Tallapoosa River Bridge) to mile point 11.42 (Brumbelow Road, C.S. 950), a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
(2)  From mile point 11.42 (Brumbelow Road, C.S. 950) to mile point 12.77 (State Route 1), a distance of 1.35 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(3)  From mile point 16.19 (State Route 166) to mile point 17.58 (300 feet north of C.R. 24, Oak Mtn. Road), a distance of 1.39 miles, the speed limit shall be the statutory 55 miles per hour. 
State Route 113, from mile point 0.00 (State Route 1) to mile point 0.25 (1,375 feet south of Valley Drive, C.R. 295, north city limits), a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
State Route 166 (South Bypass, Bankhead Highway). 
(1)  From mile point 13.18 (1,375 feet southeast of Maple Street, C.R. 845) to mile point 18.92 (Bankhead Highway, C.R. 846), a distance of 5.74 miles, the speed limit shall be the statutory 55 miles per hour. 
(2)  From mile point 18.92 (Bankhead Highway, C.R. 846) to mile point 19.10 (Somerset Lane, C.S. 1031), a distance of 0.18 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(3)  From mile point 19.10 (Somerset Lane, C.S. 1031) to mile point 20.10 (Median Crossover 1,000 feet west of Old Airport Road, C.R. 424), a distance of 1.00 mile, the speed limit shall be 55 miles per hour. 
Signs shall be erected by the state department of transportation. 
OFF SYSTEM 
    Adamson Avenue (C.S. 933), from West Avenue to Bledsoe Street, a distance of 0.72 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
    Austin Avenue (C.S. 907), from Newnan Road to Dixie Street, a distance of 0.60 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
    Bankhead Highway (C.R. 846): 
(1)  From Newnan Road to Airport Road, a distance of 1.65 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(2)  From Airport Road to State Route 166, a distance of 0.14 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
    Brumbelow Road (C.S. 950), from Alabama Street (S.R. 16) to Lovvorn Road, a distance of 0.58 mile, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
    Burns Road (C.S. 944), from Bankhead Highway to Old Newnan Road, a distance of 0.92 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
    Cedar Street (C.S. 829), from Burns Road to College Street, a distance of 1.01 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
    Columbia Drive (C.R. 751), from State Route 16 (Alabama Street) to State Route 1, a distance of 2.33 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
    Dixie Street (C.S. 965), from State Route 1 to Newnan Street, a distance of 1.32 miles, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
    Hays Mill Road (C.R. 11), from State Route 166 to Maple Street, a distance of 1.14 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
    Kingsbridge Road (C.R. 833), from Beulah Church Road to North Park Street, a distance of 2.33 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
    Longview Street (C.S. 862), from South Street to Hays Mill Road, a distance of 0.65 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
Lovvorn Road (C.R. 834): 
(1)  From 600 feet east of Chapel Road to Brumbelow Road, a distance of 0.42 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  From Brumbelow Road to Avenue A, a distance of 0.25 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(3)  From Avenue A to Maple Street, a distance of 0.73 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
Maple Street (C.R. 845, 834): 
(1)  From 1,000 feet east of State Route 166 to West Georgia Drive, a distance of 1.01 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  From West Georgia Drive to South Park Street (State Route 1), a distance of 0.88 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Newnan Road (C.S. 999): 
(1)  From State Route 166 to Bass Street, a distance of 1.25 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  From Bass Street to Newnan Street, a distance of 0.46 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Newnan Street (C.R. 846): 
(1)  From North Park Street to Dixie Street, a distance of 0.37 mile, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. 
(2)  From Dixie Street to Newnan Road, a distance of 0.32 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
    North Lake Drive (C.S. 1027), from North Lakeshore Drive to Northside Drive, a distance of 0.74 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
North Lakeshore Drive (C.S. 816): 
(1)  From Stewart Street to North Lake Drive, a distance of 0.60 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(2)  From North Lake Drive to Bankhead Highway, a distance of 1.15 miles, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. 
Northside Drive (C.S. 1008, C.R. 1063): 
(1)  From State Route 166 to Stewart Street/Shady Grove Road, a distance of 1.34 miles, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
(2)  From Stewart Street/Shady Grove Road to a point 300 feet east of the Little Tallapoosa River bridge, a distance of 0.91 mile, the speed limit shall be 45 miles per hour. 
    Oak Avenue (C.S. 914), from South Street to Trojan Drive, a distance of 0.54 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
Old Newnan Road (C.R. 809): 
(1)  From Newnan Road to Borders Street, a distance of 0.25 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(2)  From Borders Street to 1,700 feet south of State Route 166, a distance of 1.86 miles, the speed limit shall be 40 miles per hour. 
Rome Street (C.S. 800): 
(1)  From North Park Street (State Route 1) to Spring Street, a distance of 0.84 mile, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
(2)  From Spring Street to Newnan Street, a distance of 0.33 mile, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour. 
    School Zone, from State Route 166 to Trojan Drive, a distance of 0.82 mile, the speed limit shall be 25 miles per hour from 30 minutes prior to commencement to 30 minutes after commencement a.m. and from 30 minutes prior to dismissal to 30 minutes after dismissal p.m. during school hours only. 
    South Street (C.S. 882), from West Georgia Drive to Maple Street, a distance of 0.61 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
    Stadium Drive (C.S. 1014), from State Route 166 to Trojan Drive, a distance of 0.82 mile, the speed limit shall be 30 miles per hour. 
    Stewart Street (C.R. 824), from Cedar Street to Northside Drive, a distance of 1.97 miles, the speed limit shall be 35 miles per hour. 
Signs shall be erected the city. 
(Ord. of 8-19-94) 
State Law reference- Alteration of speed limits by local authorities, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-183. 
Sec. 90-61. - Stopping, standing or parking prohibited in specified places. 
(a)  Except when necessary to avoid conflict with other traffic, or in compliance with law or the directions of a police officer or official traffic-control device, no person shall: 
(1)  Stop, stand, or park a vehicle: 
a.  On the roadway side of any vehicle stopped or parked at the edge of a curb of a street; 
b.  On a sidewalk; 
c.  Within an intersection; 
d.  On a crosswalk; 
e.  Between a safety zone and the adjacent curb or within 30 feet of points on the curb immediately opposite the ends of a safety zone, unless a different length is indicated by signs or markings; 
f.  Alongside or opposite any street excavation or obstruction when stopping, standing, or parking would obstruct traffic; 
g.  Upon any bridge or other elevated structure upon a highway or within a highway tunnel; 
h.  On any railroad tracks; 
i.  On any controlled-access highway; 
j.  In the area between roadways of a divided highway, including crossovers; or 
k.  At any place where official signs prohibit stopping, including but not limited to any yellow curbs, fire zones, or fire lanes within the city; or 
(2)  Stand or park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except momentarily to pick up or discharge a passenger or passengers: 
a.  In front of a public or private driveway; 
b.  Within 15 feet of a fire hydrant; 
c.  Within 20 feet of a crosswalk at an intersection or within five feet of any other crosswalk; 
d.  Within 30 feet upon the approach to any flashing signal, stop sign, yield sign, or traffic-control signal located at the side of a roadway; 
e.  Within 20 feet of the driveway entrance to any fire station or on the side of a street opposite the entrance to any fire station within 75 feet of such entrance (when properly posted); 
f.  At any place where official signs prohibit standing; or 
g.  Against the flow of traffic; or 
(3)  Park a vehicle, whether occupied or not, except temporarily for the purpose of and while actually engaged in loading or unloading property or passengers: 
a.  Within 50 feet of the nearest rail of a railroad crossing; or 
b.  At any place where official signs prohibit parking. 
(b)  No person shall move a vehicle not lawfully under his control into any prohibited area or to such a distance away from the curb as is unlawful. 
(Ord. No. 09-2014, 9-8-14) 
Chapter 94 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Buildings and building regulations, ch. 18; cable communications, ch. 26; soil erosion and sedimentation control, § 50-101 et seq.; floods, ch. 58; solid waste, ch. 78; subdivisions, app. A. 
State Law reference- Power of municipality to grant franchises or make contracts with public utilities, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(7); city's authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5; power of city or county to provide stormwater, sewerage collection and disposal systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶III. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 94-1. - Rates, charges and fees. 
    The rates, charges and fees for the use of city water or sewer service shall be as established from time to time by the city council and set forth in the schedule of fees and charges. 
(Code 1975, § 25-1) 
Sec. 94-2. - Meter required. 
    No customer shall be connected to the water and sewerage system or served by the city without a proper meter having been first installed. 
(Code 1975, § 25-2) 
Sec. 94-3. - All customers to be charged. 
    All water and sewer services shall be furnished in accordance with rates now or hereafter established, including services furnished to any county, municipal corporation or any other public board or body. 
(Code 1975, § 25-3) 
Sec. 94-4. - Septic tanks to comply with state standards and be approved by county. 
    All septic tanks constructed in the city shall comply with state department of health standards and be approved by the inspector of the county health department before the same shall be placed in service. 
(Code 1975, § 25-16) 
Sec. 94-5. - Building permits subject to septic tank approval. 
    All building permits issued by the building official, where a septic tank is required, shall be issued subject to the approval of such septic tank by the health official or inspector of the county health department. 
(Code 1975, § 25-17) 
Sec. 94-6. - Water not to be furnished to premises with improper sewage disposal. 
    No city water shall be furnished to any premises which is required to be connected to the city sewerage system unless such premises is properly connected thereto. No water shall be furnished to any premises for which a sewer connection is not required unless such premises is properly connected to a septic tank meeting the standards prescribed by the state department of health. 
(Code 1975, § 25-18) 
Secs. 94-7-94-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - BACKFLOW PREVENTION AND CROSS CONNECTIONS 

Sec. 94-31. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Auxiliary intake means any piping connection or other device whereby water may be secured from a source other than that normally used. 
    Bypass means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the water may be diverted around any part or portion of a water purification plant. 
    City manager means the office of the city manager, and as such, may include the building inspector, public utilities administrator, city clerk or other personnel designated by the city manager to act on behalf of the city. 
    Cross connection means any physical connection whereby the public water supply is connected with any other water supply system, whether public or private, either inside or outside of any building, in such a manner that a flow of water into the public water supply is possible either through the manipulation of valves or because of ineffective check or back-pressure valves, or because of any other arrangement. 
    Interconnection means any system of piping or other arrangement whereby the public water supply is connected directly with a sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir or other device which does or may contain sewage of other waste or liquid which would be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply. 
    Person means any and all persons, natural or artificial, including any individual, firm or association, and any municipal or private corporation organized or existing under the laws of this or any other state or country. 
    Public water supply means the waterworks system furnishing water to the city for general use and which supply is recognized as the public water supply by the state department of natural resources, environmental protection division. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 1) 
Cross reference- Definitions generally, § 1-2. 
Sec. 94-32. - Compliance with state and federal law. 
    The city public water supply is to comply with chapter 391-3-5-.13 of the Georgia Rules for Safe Drinking Water and P.L. 93-523 of the Federal Safe Drinking Water Act, legally adopted in accordance with this Code, which pertain to cross connections, and establish an effective, ongoing program to control these undesirable water uses. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 2) 
Sec. 94-33. - Cross connections unlawful. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to cause a cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection to be made, or allow one to exist for any purpose whatsoever. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 3) 
Sec. 94-34. - Statement to be filed with city manager in certain circumstances. 
    Any person whose premises are supplied with water from the public water supply, and who also has on the same premises a separate source of water supply or stores water in an uncovered or unsanitary storage reservoir from which the water stored therein is circulated through a piping system, shall file with the city manager a statement of the nonexistence of unapproved or unauthorized cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections. Such statement shall also contain an agreement that no cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection will be permitted upon the premises. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 4) 
Sec. 94-35. - Inspections. 
    It shall be the duty of the public water supply to cause inspections to be made of all properties served by the public water supply where cross connections with the public water supply are deemed possible. The frequency of inspections and reinspections based on potential health hazards involved shall be as established by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 5) 
Sec. 94-36. - Right of entry. 
    The city manager or authorized representative shall have the right to enter at any reasonable time any property served by a connection to the public water supply for the purpose of inspecting the piping system or systems thereof for cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections. On request, the owner, lessee or occupant of any property so served shall furnish to the inspection agency any pertinent information regarding the piping system on such property. The refusal of such information or refusal of access, when requested, shall be deemed evidence of the presence of cross connections. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 6) 
Sec. 94-37. - Time extension for compliance with article. 
    Any person who now has cross connections, auxiliary intakes, bypasses or interconnections in violation of the provisions of this article shall be allowed a reasonable time within which to comply with the provisions of this article. After a thorough investigation of existing conditions and an appraisal of the time required to complete the work, the amount of time shall be designated by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 7) 
Sec. 94-38. - Protective devices. 
(a)  Where the nature of use of the water supplied a premises by the water department is such that it is deemed: 
(1)  Impractical to provide an effective air gap separation; 
(2)  That the owner and/or occupant of the premises cannot or is not willing to demonstrate to the official in charge of the system, or his designated representative, that the water use and protective features of the plumbing are such as to propose no threat to the safety or potability of the water supply; 
(3)  That the nature and mode of operation within a premises are such that frequent alterations are made to the plumbing; 
(4)  There is a likelihood that protective measures may be subverted, altered or disconnected; 
the city manager, or his designated representative, shall require the use of an approved protective device on the service line serving the premises to assure that any contamination that may originate in the customer's premises is contained therein. The protective devices shall be a backflow prevention device, consistent with the degree of hazard approved by the city manager as to manufacture, model and size. The method of installation of backflow protective devices shall be approved by the city manager prior to installation, and shall comply with the criteria set forth by the city manager. 
(b)  The installation shall be at the expense of the owner or occupant of the premises. 
(c)  The water department shall require the owner or occupant to inspect and test the device on an annual basis, or whenever deemed necessary by the city manager or his designated representative. Water service shall not be disrupted to the device without the knowledge of the occupant of the premises. 
(d)  Where the use of water is critical to the continuance of normal operations or protection of life, property or equipment, duplicate units shall be provided to avoid the necessity of discontinuing water service to test or repair the protective device. Where only one unit is installed and the continuance of service is critical, the testing personnel shall notify, in writing, the occupant of the premises of plans to discontinue water service and arrange for a mutually acceptable time to test and/or repair the device. The water system shall require the occupant of the premises to promptly make all repairs indicated, and the expense of such repairs shall be borne by the owner or occupant of the premises. These repairs shall be made by qualified personnel acceptable to the city manager. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 8) 
Sec. 94-39. - Labeling of unsafe water outlets. 
    The potable water supply made available on the properties served by the public water supply shall be protected from possible contamination as specified in this article. Any water outlet which could be used for potable or domestic purposes and which is not supplied by the potable system must be labeled in a conspicuous manner as: 
"WATER UNSAFE FOR DRINKING." 
The minimum acceptable sign shall have black letters, one inch high, located on a red background. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 9) 
Sec. 94-40. - Penalty for violation of article. 
    Any person who neglects or refuses to comply with any of the provisions of this article shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction therefor, shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. In addition, the city manager shall discontinue the public water supply service at any premises upon which there is found to be a cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection, and service shall not be restored until such cross connection, auxiliary intake, bypass or interconnection has been discontinued. 
(Ord. of 10-19-93, § 10) 
Secs. 94-41-94-60. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference- Dumping certain wastes in storm or sanitary sewers prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-2. 

DIVISION 1. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 94-61. - Purpose and policy. 
    This article sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the City of Carrollton and enables the City of Carrollton to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). The objectives of this article are: 
(1)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
(2)  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
(3)  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
(4)  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
(5)  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
(6)  To enable the City of Carrollton to comply with its national discharge elimination system permits conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
    This article shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works. The ordinance authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 1.1) 
Sec. 94-62. - Designated city representative. 
    The city manager or his duly authorized agent shall have administrative authority over the operation and use of the POTW. 
(1)  Duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling, and testing pertinent to discharge to the POTW in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(2)  Duly authorized employees are authorized to obtain information concerning industrial processes which have a direct bearing on the kind and source of discharge to the wastewater collection system. 
(3)  The city employee authorized by the designated city representative to act as the industrial pretreatment coordinator shall have the authority to set discharge limits, specify monitoring and reporting requirements, issue discharge permits, and to issue official notices of violation. 
(4)  The city manager shall have the authority to impose administrative fines and to issue administrative orders including cease and desist orders, consent orders, show cause orders, and compliance orders. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 1.2) 
Sec. 94-63. - Rates, charges and fees. 
    The rates, charges and fees for the use of city water or sewer service shall be as established by the mayor and city council. The rate schedule is subject to change from time to time and is available for inspection at the office of the clerk of the City of Carrollton during normal business hours. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 1.3) 
Sec. 94-64. - Meter required. 
    No customer shall be connected to the water and sewerage system or served by the city without a proper meter having been first installed. No water or sewer service shall be furnished that is not metered through a metering system approved by the city. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 1.4) 
Sec. 94-65. - All customers to be charged, including government. 
    All water and sewer services shall be furnished in accordance with rates now or hereafter established, including services furnished to any county, municipal corporation or any other public board or body. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 1.5) 
Sec. 94-66. - Damaging water or wastewater facilities. 
    No person shall maliciously, willfully, or negligently break, damage, destroy, uncover, deface, or tamper with any structure, appurtenance or equipment which is a part of the water or wastewater facilities. Any person violating this provision shall be subject to immediate arrest under charge of damaging public property. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 1.6) 
Sec. 94-67. - Abbreviations. 
    The following abbreviations, when used in this article, shall have the designated meanings: 
BOD - Biochemical Oxygen Demand, 
CFR - Code of Federal Regulations 
COD - Chemical Oxygen Demand 
EPA - Environmental Protection Agency 
gpd - gallons per day 
mg/l - milligrams per liter 
NPDES - National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System 
POTW - Publicly Owned Treatment Works 
RCRA - Resource Conservation and Recovery Act 
SIC - Standard Industrial Classification 
TSS - Total Suspended Solids 
U.S.C. - United States Code 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 1.7) 
Sec. 94-68. - Definitions. 
    Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this article, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    Act or the Acts shall mean the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq. as it may be amended. 
    Administrative fine shall mean a monetary penalty assessed by the city for violations of pretreatment standards and requirements. Administrative fines are punitive in nature and need not be directly related to a specific cost borne by the city. Instead, administrative fines are intended to recapture the full or partial economic benefit of noncompliance, and to deter future violations. 
    Administrative order shall mean a formal written document which directs an industrial user to undertake or to cease specified activities. Types of administrative orders include cease and desist orders, consent orders, show cause orders, and compliance orders. 
    Approval authority shall mean the authority of Environmental Protection Division of the State of Georgia. 
    Authorized representative of the user shall mean: 
(1)  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs a similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities employing more than 250 persons or having gross annual sales or expenditures exceeding 25 million dollars (in second quarter 1980 dollars), if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
(2)  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
(3)  If the user is a federal, state, or local government facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the government facility, or their designee. 
(4)  The individuals described in subsections (1) through (3), above, may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the City of Carrollton. 
    Biochemical oxygen demand or BOD shall mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at 20 degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    Building drain shall mean that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste, and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    Building sewer shall mean the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal, also called house connection. 
    Categorical pretreatment standard or categorical standard shall means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C § 1317) which apply to specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    Cease and desist orders shall mean a written directive user requiring the user to cease illegal discharges or other ordinance violations. 
    Chemical oxygen demand shall, mean the quantity of oxygen utilized in the oxidation of organic and oxidizable inorganic material, measured by using a strong chemical oxidizing agent in an acidic medium, expressed milligrams per liter, mg/l. 
    City shall mean the City of Carrollton or the City Council of Carrollton. 
    Combined sewer shall mean a sewer intended to receive both wastewater and storm or surface water. 
    Compliance order shall mean a written directive from the city to an industrial user requiring the user to achieve or restore compliance by a specified date. 
    Composite sample shall mean the accumulation of a number of flow proportioned individual samples over a period of time, so taken as to represent the composite nature of the wastewater. 
    Consent order shall mean a written agreement between the city and an industrial user to a schedule of compliance actions/or fines, in resolving an ordinance violation. 
    Designated city representative shall mean the person who is charged with certain duties and responsibilities by this article, or a duly authorized representative. 
    Domestic wastewater shall mean wastewater derived principally from dwellings, business buildings, and institutions, exclusive of industrial wastewater. 
    Easement shall mean an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Environmental Protection Agency or EPA shall mean the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the regional water management division director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    Environmental protection division shall mean the state of environmental protection division or any duly authorized official of said state agency. 
    Existing source shall means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is there after promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the Act. 
    Floatable oil is oil, fat, or grease in a physical state such that it will separate by gravity from wastewater by treatment in an approved pretreatment facility. A wastewater shall be considered free of floatable oil if it is properly pretreated and the wastewater does not interfere with the collection system 
    Garbage shall mean the animal and vegetable waste resulting from the domestic or commercial handling, preparation, cooking, and serving of foods. 
    General pretreatment regulations shall mean "The General Pretreatment Regulations for Existing and New Sources of Pollution," published in the Federal Register, 40 CFR 403, on June 26, 1978, and any revisions to same. 
    Grab sample shall mean a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the wastestream and over a period of time not to exceed 15 minutes. 
    Grease shall mean a group of substances including fats, waxes, free fatty acids, calcium and magnesium soaps, mineral oils, and certain other non-fatty materials. 
    Grease trap shall mean a tank or vessel designed to remove floatable oil from the wastewater stream prior to discharge to the municipal system. 
    Grit shall mean the heavy suspended mineral matter present in water or wastewater such as sand, gravel, or cinders. 
    Grit trap shall mean a tank or vessel designed to interrupt the flow of wastewater so as to cause sand, grit, and similar heavy particles to be removed from the wastewater stream prior to discharge to the municipal system. 
    Indirect discharge or discharge shall mean the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
    Industrial wastes shall mean the wastewater from industrial processes, trade, or business as distinct from domestic or sanitary wastes. 
    Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit shall mean the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    Interference shall mean a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the City of Carrollton's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent State or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid Waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referenced to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    Mass emission rate shall mean the weight of material discharged during a given time interval, unless otherwise specified, the mass emission rate shall mean pounds per year of the particular constituent or combination of constituents. 
    May is permissive; "shall" is mandatory. 
    Medical waste shall mean isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    Metered water shall mean the amount of all sources of water, including wells, consumed by the sewer customer. 
    National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System Permit (NPDES permit) shall mean a permit issued pursuant to Section 402 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1342). 
    New source shall mean: 
(1)  Any building, structure, facility or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating process of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent, factors such as the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. Integrate with the existing plant, the extent to which the new facility is. 
(2)  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of section (1)b. or c. above but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
(3)  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
1.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
2.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation) or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment; or 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation, within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    Noncontact cooling water shall mean water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    Notice of violation or NOV shall mean an official communication from the city to a noncompliant industrial user that a pretreatment violation has occurred. 
    Pass through shall mean a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States, in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the City of Carrollton's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    Person shall mean any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local government entities. 
    pH shall mean a measure of the acidity or alkalinity of a solution, expressed in standard units. 
    Pollutant shall mean dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, and cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH, temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    Pretreatment shall mean the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. 
    This reduction or alteration can be obtained by physical chemical, or biological processes; by process changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment requirements shall mean any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    Pretreatment standards or standards shall mean prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
    Prohibited discharge standards or prohibited discharges shall mean absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in section 94-81 of this article. 
    Properly shredded garbage shall mean the wastes from the preparation, cooking, and dispensing of food that have been shredded to such a degree that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    Publicly owned treatment works or POTW shall mean a "treatment works" as defined by Section 212 of the Act (22 U.S.C. § 1292) which is owned by the City of Carrollton. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    Sanitary sewer shall mean a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of ground, storm, and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    Septic tank waste shall mean any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    Sewage shall mean human excrement and gray water (household showers, dish washing operations, etc.). 
    Sewer shall mean a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or drainage water. 
    Significant industrial user shall mean: 
(1)  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
(2)  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of 25,000 gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process wastestream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the City of Carrollton on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
(3)  Upon finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the City of Carrollton may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CPR 403.8(f) (6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    Sludge shall mean the accumulated solids separated from liquids during wastewater processing. 
    Slug load or slug shall mean any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in section 94-81 of this article. 
    Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code shall mean a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    Storm drain or storm sewer shall mean a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage and industrial wastes. 
    Stormwater shall mean any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    Superintendent shall mean the person designated by the City of Carrollton to supervise the operation of the POTW. 
    Suspended solids shall mean the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    Toxic pollutant shall mean any pollutant or combination of pollutants listed as toxic in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the EPA under the provision of the Clean Water Act, Section 307(a) or other Acts. 
    Unpolluted water is water of quality equal to or better than the effluent criteria in effect, or water that would not cause violation of receiving water quality standards and would not be benefited by discharge to the sanitary sewers and wastewater treatment facilities provided. 
    User or industrial user shall mean a source of indirect discharge. 
    Wastewater shall mean liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    Wastewater treatment plant or treatment plant shall mean that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
    Waste includes sewage and any and all other waste substances, liquid, solid, gaseous or radioactive, associated with human habitation, or of human or animal origin, or from any producing, manufacturing or processing operation of whatever nature, including such waste placed within containers of whatever nature prior to, and for purposes of, disposal. 
    Wastewater shall mean a combination of the water carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions, and commercial establishments, together with those ground, surface, and stormwaters as may be present. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 1.8) 
Secs. 94-69-94-80. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - GENERAL SEWER USE REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 94-81. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
(a)  General prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general provisions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
(b)  Specific prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater; 
(1)  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than 140° F (60° C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
(2)  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.5 (or more than 9.5), or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
(3)  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the POTW resulting in interference. 
(4)  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
(5)  Wastewater having a temperature greater than 150° F, or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed 104° F (40° C); 
(6)  Petroleum oil, nonbiodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
(7)  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
(8)  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the designated city representative in accordance with section 94-104 of this article; 
(9)  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
(10)  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent thereby violating the City of Carrollton's NPDES permit; 
(11)  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
(12)  Stormwater, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, deionized water, noncontact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the designated city representative. 
(13)  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
(14)  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the designated city representative in a wastewater discharge permit; 
(15)  Wastewater causing alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
(16)  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
(17)  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater than 100 mg/l or; 
    Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 2.1) 
Sec. 94-82. - Private wastewater disposal. 
(a)  Private wastewater facilities, including privies, cesspools, and septic tanks, are prohibited in all areas where public sewers are available. 
(b)  The owner(s) of all houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the City of Carrollton jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right-of-way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City of Carrollton is hereby required at the owner(s) expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of this article, within 30 days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said public sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
(c)  The type, capacities, location, and layout of all private wastewater disposal systems shall comply with all recommendations of the Department of Human Resources of the State of Georgia. Before commencement of construction of any private wastewater disposal system, except for septic tanks, the owner shall first obtain a written permit from the designated city representative. Septic tank installations are under the jurisdiction of the Carroll County Health Officer. All septic tanks constructed in the city shall be approved by the inspector of the Health Department of Carroll County before the tank is placed in service. All building permits issued by the city, where a septic tank is required shall be issued subject to the approval of said septic tank by the health official or inspector of the Health Department of Carroll County. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 2.2) 
Sec. 94-83. - Building sewers and connections. 
(a)  No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter, or disturb any public sewer or appurtenance thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the designated city representative. 
(b)  There shall be two classes of building sewer permits: (a) for residential and commercial service, and (b) for service to establishments producing industrial wastes. In either case, the owner or his agent shall make application on a special form furnished by the city. The permit application shall be supplemented by any plans, specifications, or other information considered pertinent in the judgement of the designated city representative. A permit and inspection fee for a residential or commercial building sewer permit and a permit and inspection fee for an industrial building sewer permit shall be paid to the city at the time the application is filed. 
(c)  All costs and expenses incidental to the installation and connection of the building sewer shall be borne by the owner. The owner shall indemnify the city from any loss or damage that may directly or indirectly be occasioned by the installation of the building sewer. 
(d)  A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the front building sewer may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer, but the city does not and will not assume any obligation or responsibility for damage caused by or resulting from any such single connection aforementioned. 
(e)  Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the designated city representative, to meet all requirements of this ordinance. 
(f)  The size, slope, alignment, materials of construction of a building sewer, and the methods to be used in excavating, placing of the pipe, joining, testing, and backfilling the trench, shall all conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city. In the absence of code provisions or an amplification thereof, the materials and procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the Southern Standard Plumbing Code and WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9 shall apply. 
(g)  Whenever possible, the building sewer shall be brought to the building at an elevation below the basement floor. In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such building drain shall be lifted by an approved means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(h)  No person shall make connection of roof downspout, foundation drains, areaway drains, or other sources of surface runoff or groundwater to a building drain which in turn is connected directly or indirectly to a public sanitary sewer unless such connection is approved in writing by the designated city representative for purposes of disposal of polluted surface drainage. 
(i)  The connection of the building sewer into the public sewer shall conform to the requirements of the building and plumbing code or other applicable rules and regulations of the city, or the procedures set forth in appropriate specifications of the Southern Standard Building Code and the WPCF Manual of Practice No. 9. All such connections shall be made gas tight and watertight and verified by proper testing. Any deviation from the prescribed procedures and materials must be approved by the designated city representative before installation. 
(j)  The applicant for the building sewer permit shall notify the designated city representative when the building sewer is ready for inspection and connection to the public sewer. The connection and testing shall be made under the supervision of the designated city representative. 
(k)  All excavations far building sewer installations shall be adequately guarded with barricades and lights so as to protect the public from hazard. Streets, alleys, sidewalks, parkways, and other public property disturbed in the course of the work shall be restored in a manner satisfactory to the city. 
(l)  The installation of all building sewers and connections into the public sewer shall conform with all pertinent OSHA requirements. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 2.3) 
Sec. 94-84. - National categorical pretreatment standards. 
    The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are hereby incorporated. 
(1)  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the designated city representative may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
(2)  When wastewater subject to categorical pretreatment standards is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the designated city representative shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(3)  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
(4)  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance.with 40 CFR 403.15. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 2.4) 
Sec. 94-85. - Local limits. 
    The following pollutant limits are established to protect against pass through and interference. No person shall discharge wastewater containing in excess of the following: 
Pollutant Ordinance Limits (mg/l) Antimony (2) 0.08 Arsenic 0.24 Beryllium (2) 0.05 Cadmium 0.20 Chromium, total 3.59 Copper 3.64 Cyanide 0.14 Lead 0.41 Mercury 0.06 Nickel 2.41 Selenium 1.41 (3) Silver 0.87 Thallium (2) 0.28 (3) Tin (1) Zinc 0.48 (4)  
    or any element which in the judgement of the designated city representative, will damage collection facilities or be detrimental to the treatment process. The limits set forth above may be amended if such amendment is deemed necessary to protect the facilities or life or health and/or comply with applicable state or federal regulations. 
    The above limits apply at the point where the wastewater is discharged to the POTW. All concentrations for metallic substances are for "total" metal unless indicated otherwise. The designated city representative may impose mass limitations in addition to, or in place of, the concentration-based limitations above. 
Notes: 
(1)  Regulation of Tin no longer necessary under EPA regulations. 
(2)  Antimony, Beryllium, and Thallium not previously controlled, but limited under Rules for Safe Drinking Water. 
(3)  No Selenium or Thallium has been detected in the city drinking water or in plant sludges. 
(4)  Individual industries may be permitted for up to 3.0 mg/l provided that the cumulative total industrial flow concentration of zinc does not exceed 0.7 mg/l. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 2.5; Amd. of 6-18-01; Memo. of 9-7-10) 
Sec. 94-86. - City of Carrollton right of revision. 
    The City of Carrollton reserves the right to establish, by ordinance or in wastewater discharge permits, more stringent standards or requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 2.6) 
Sec. 94-87. - Dilution. 
    No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The designated city representative may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 2.7) 
Sec. 94-88. - Conventional pollutants. 
    The conventional pollutants, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD 5 ), Total Suspended Solids (TSS), and oil and grease are controlled in order to prevent overloading of the treatment plant's ability to supply oxygen, digest and remove solids, and remove oil and grease. Ordinance limits of 100 mg/l for oil and grease have evolved from years of experience in actual operations, and are limits that have empirically been found to be effective in protecting the treatment works. 
    Industrial discharge limits for BOD 5 and TSS are derived from the total plant design capabilities with an allowance for dilution from normal domestic wastewater. The plant was designed to handle average influent BOD 5 and TSS loadings of 230 mg/l. Average domestic components of wastewater typically include 220 mg/l BOD 5 and TSS. Industrial users are estimated to contribute approximately 30 percent of the total flow (currently 1.683 MGD industrial / 5.630 total = 29.89 percent), and are allowed to discharge up to 250 mg/l BOD 5 and TSS without surcharge. A surcharge is applied to user charges for wastewater strengths in excess of 250 mg/l BOD 5 or TSS to discourage industries from discharging high strength wastes. The surcharge is a very effective mechanism for achieving voluntary compliance, and the industries in the city rarely pay surcharges. A prohibition Limit of 500 mg/l for BOD5 and TSS is in place to guard against a single industry discharging extremely high strength waste and potentially disrupting the treatment process. Fines and other sanctions are applied if prohibition limits are exceeded. Surcharge limits are derived as follows: 
Ind. BOD (Ind. Flow) + Dom. BOD (Domestic Flow) = Total BOD (Total Flow) 
Allowable Industrial BOD = Total BOD (Total Flow) - Dom BOD (Dom Flow) 
                                            Ind. Flow 
Allowable Industrial BOD = 230(7.0) - 220(0.7)(7.0) = 253 
                               0.3(7.0) 
Use: Allowable BOD 5 and TSS concentrations = 250 mg/l 
    The city wastewater treatment facilities have been designed to handle an average influent ammonia nitrogen (NH 3 N) concentration of 38 mg/l. Since land application is used for disposal of the entire plant effluent, ammonia nitrogen is not controlled by the plant operating permit. Actual experience has shown that the existing ordinance surcharge limit of 20 mg/l and prohibition limit of 50 mg/l for ammonia nitrogen have been effective in a protecting plant operations against upset. 
5 See notes following section 94-89. 
(Amd. of 6-18-01) 
Editor's note- Amd. of June 18, 2001, did not specifically amend the Code. Hence the inclusion of the provisions of said ordinance as sections 94-88, 94-89 was at the discretion of the editor. 
Sec. 94-89. - Industrial discharge limits-Water quality and plant protection. 
October 2000 
Pollutant Drinking Water Std. Maximum Concentration mg/l Maximum Spray Field Influent mg/l (1) Treatment Plant Removal Efficiency percent (2) Allowable Treatment Plant Influent Concentration, mg/l Average Res/Comm. Wastewater Concentrat. mg/l (4) Maximum Allowable Industrial Discharge mg/l Categorical BAT -Metal Finishing 40-433.16 Mo. Avg. mg./l Actual Current Ordinance Limits mg/l Drinking Water Plant Inhib (3) Most Restrictive A B C D E F G H I J K Antimony 0.006 0.024 0 (5) 0.0240 - 0.024 0.003 (6) 0.134 - - Arsenic 0.05 0.20 45 0.3636 0.1 0.1 0.007 0.589 - 0.1 Beryllium 0.004 0.016 0 (5) 0.016 - 0.016 0.002 (6) 0.090 - - Cadmium 0.005 0.02 67 0.0606 1.0 0.0606 0.008 0.337 0.29 0.1 Chromium 0.1 0.4 82 2.2222 1.0 1.0 0.025 (4) 6.138 1.71 4.0 Copper 1.0 4.0 86 28.5714 1.0 1.0 0.109 5.681 2.07 1.0 Cyanide 0.2 0.8 69 2.5806 0.1 0.1 0.082 0.181 0.65 0.1 Lead 0.015 0.06 61 0.1538 0.1 0.1 0.025 (4) 0.491 0.43 0.5 Mercury 0.002 0.008 60 0.0200 0.1 0.02 0.002 0.115 - 0.1 Nickel 0.1 0.4 42 0.6897 1.0 0.6897 0.047 4.071 2.38 1.0 Selenium 0.05 0.2 50 0.4000 - 0.400 0.025 (6) 2.373 - - Silver 0.1 0.4 75 1.6000 0.25 0.25 0.019 1.465 0.24 0.1 Thallium 0.002 0.008 0 (5) 0.008 - 0.008 0.001 (6) 0.045 - - Zinc 5.0 20.0 79 95.2381 0.3 0.3 0.212 0.729 1.48 3.0  
Notes: 
(1)  Estimated 75 percent removal of inorganic contaminants in land application process, based discussions with Georgia EPD. 
(2)  Assumes median removal efficiencies through activated sludge plant (per table 3-10, EPA Manual on the Development and Implementation of Local Discharge Limitations Under the Pretreatment Program). 
(3)  Minimum activated sludge inhibition threshold levels (per table 3-2, EPA Manual on the Development and Implementation of Local Discharge Limitations Under the Pretreatment Program. No inhibition limits published for Antimony, Beryllium, Selenium, or Thallium). 
(4)  Average residential/commercial pollutant levels per table 3, EPA Supplemental Manual on the Development and Implementation of Local Discharge Limits Under the Pretreatment Program. (Chrome and lead concentrations adjusted to 0.025 mg/l per EPD recommendations). 
(5)  Zero percent plant removal efficiency assumed as worst case. 
(6)  City drinking water concentrations are below the detection limits shown as worst case. 
(Amd. of 6-18-01) 
Editor's note- See editor's note following section 94-88. 
Secs. 94-90-94-100. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 3. - PRETREATMENT OF WASTEWATER 

Sec. 94-101. - Pretreatment facilities. 
    Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this article and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in section 94-81 of this article within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the designated city representative, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the designated city representative for review, and shall be acceptable to the designated city representative before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the City of Carrollton under the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 3.1) 
Sec. 94-102. - Additional pretreatment measures. 
(a)  Whenever deemed necessary, the designated city representative may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other condition as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The designated city. representative may require any permittee discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a sewer connection suitable for sampling, suitable structure for composite sampling and flow measurement as well as flow-control mechanisms to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for sampling or solely for flow equalization. 
(c)  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the designated city representative, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the designated city representative and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, band repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
(d)  Installation of required grease and/or grit traps shall be required prior to issuance or renewal of a city business license. Failure to properly operate or maintain a required grease or grit trap shall be justification for revocation of a business license. 
(e)  Grease traps shall be required for all restaurants, hospitals, schools, catering establishments, institutions, or similar places other than dwelling units, where food is prepared for consumption. 
(f)  Grit traps shall be required for commercial and industrial enterprises having car wash facilities, or providing vehicle wash services, with wash water discharging to the sanitary sewer system. 
(g)  Each required grit and grease trap facility shall be cleaned as often as necessary to maintain proper operation. Cleaning shall be accomplished by a currently licensed waste disposal firm at the expense of the owner. 
(h)  All materials removed from grease and grit traps shall be disposed of at state approved locations. Each, licensed waste disposal firm shall report to the city monthly on all grease trap, grit trap, and septic tank cleaning services rendered. 
(i)  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 3.2) 
Sec. 94-103. - Accidental discharge/slug control plans. 
    At least once every two years, the designated city representative shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The designated city representative may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the designated city representative may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
(1)  Description of discharge practices, including non-routine batch discharges; 
(2)  Description of stored chemicals; 
(3)  Procedures for immediately notifying the designated city representative of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by section 94-161 of this article; and 
(4)  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 3.3) 
Sec. 94-104. - Hauled wastewater. 
(a)  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the designated city representative and at such times as are established by the designated city representative. Such waste shall not violate Division 2 of this article or any other requirements established by the City of Carrollton. The designated city representative requires septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
(b)  The designated city representative shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The designated city representative may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The designated city representative also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this article. 
(c)  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the designated city representative. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the designated city representative. The designated city representative may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The designated city representative may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
(d)  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 3.4) 
Secs. 94-105-94-115. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 4. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT APPLICATION 

Sec. 94-116. - Wastewater analysis. 
    When requested by the designated city representative, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within 45 days of the request. The designated city representative is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 4.1) 
Sec. 94-117. - Wastewater discharge permit requirement. 
(a)  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the designated city representative, except that a significant industrial user that has filed a timely application pursuant to section 94-118 of this article may continue to discharge for the time period specified therein. 
(b)  The designated city representative may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this article. 
(c)  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this article and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Divisions 10 through 12 of this article. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 4.2) 
Sec. 94-118. - Wastewater discharge permitting; existing connections. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who was discharging wastewater into the POTW prior to the effective date of this article and who wishes to continue such discharges in the future, shall within 30 days after said date, apply to the designated city representative for a wastewater discharge permit in accordance with section 94-120 of this article, and shall not cause or allow discharges to the POTW to continue after 30 days of the effective date of this article except in accordance with a wastewater discharge permit issued by the designated city representative. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 4.3) 
Sec. 94-119. - Wastewater discharge permitting; new connections. 
    Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with section 94-120 of this article, must be filed at least 30 days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 4.4) 
Sec. 94-120. - Wastewater discharge permit application contents. 
    All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The designated city representative may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
(1)  All information required by section 94-156(b) of this article; 
(2)  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
(3)  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
(4)  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
(5)  Type and amount of raw materials processes (average and maximum per day); 
(6)  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
(7)  Time and duration of discharges; and 
(8)  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the designated city representative to evaluate the wastewater discharge permit application. 
    Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 4.5) 
Sec. 94-121. - Application signatories and certification. 
    All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
"I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 4.6) 
Sec. 94-122. - Wastewater discharge permit decisions. 
    The designated city representative will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within 30 days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the designated city representative will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The designated city representative may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 4.7) 
Secs. 94-123-94-135. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 5. - WASTEWATER DISCHARGE PERMIT ISSUANCE PROCESS 

Sec. 94-136. - Wastewater discharge permit duration. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period of less than five years, at the discretion of the designated city representative. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 5.1) 
Sec. 94-137. - Wastewater discharge permit contents. 
    A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the designated city representative to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
(1)  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the City of Carrollton in accordance with section 94-140 of this article, and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
(2)  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants' into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or non-routine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for the installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the designated city representative to ensure compliance with this article, and state and federal laws, rules and regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 5.2) 
Sec. 94-138. - Wastewater discharge permit appeals. 
    The designated city representative shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the designated city representative to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within 30 days of notice of its issuance. 
(1)  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
(2)  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
(3)  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
(4)  If the designated city representative fails to act within 45 days, a request for reconsideration shall be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, nor not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
(5)  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decisions must do so by filing a complaint with the appropriate court of jurisdiction within 30 days. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 5.3) 
Sec. 94-139. - Wastewater discharge permit modifications. 
    The designated city representative may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
(2)  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
(3)  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
(4)  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the City of Carrollton's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
(5)  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
(6)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
(7)  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
(8)  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
(9)  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 5.4) 
Sec. 94-140. - Wastewater discharge permit transfer. 
    Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least 30 days advance notice to the designated city representative and the designated city representative approved the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the designated city representative must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
(1)  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
(2)  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
(3)  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
    Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 5.5) 
Sec. 94-141. - Wastewater discharge permit revocation. 
    The designated city representative may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
(1)  Failure to notify the designated city representative of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
(2)  Failure to provide prior notification to the designated city representative of changed conditions pursuant to section 94-160 of this article; 
(3)  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(4)  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
(5)  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
(6)  Refusing to allow the designated city representative timely access to the facility premises and records; 
(7)  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
(8)  Failure to pay fines; 
(9)  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
(10)  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
(11)  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
(12)  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
(13)  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this article. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 5.6) 
Sec. 94-142. - Wastewater discharge permit reissuance. 
    A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with section 94-120 of this article, a minimum of 45 days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 5.7) 
Sec. 94-143. - Regulation of waste received from other jurisdictions. 
(a)  If another municipality, or user located, within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the designated city representative shall enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
(b)  Prior to entering into an agreement required by paragraph (a), above, the designated city representative shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
(1)  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
(2)  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
(3)  A copy of the municipalities pretreatment program as approved by the State of Georgia. 
(4)  Such other information as the designated city representative may deem necessary. 
(c)  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by paragraph (a), above, shall contain the following conditions: 
(1)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use ordinance which is least as stringent as this article and local limits which are, at least as stringent as those set out in section 94-84 of this article. The requirement shall specify that such ordinance and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the City of Carrollton's ordinance or local limits; 
(2)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to submit a revised user inventory on at least an annual basis; 
(3)  A requirement for the contributing municipality to provide the designated city representative with access to all information that the contributing municipality obtains as part of its pretreatment activities; 
(4)  Limits on the nature, quality, and volume of the contributing municipality's wastewater at the point where it discharges, to the POTW; 
(5)  Requirements for monitoring the contributing municipality's discharge; 
(6)  A provision ensuring the designated city representative access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the designated city representative; and 
(7)  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 5.8) 
Secs. 94-144-94-155. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 6. - REPORTING REQUIREMENTS 

Sec. 94-156. - Baseline monitoring reports. 
(a)  Within either 180 days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the designated city representative a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b), below. At least 90 days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical standard, shall submit to the designated city representative a report which contains the information listed in paragraph (b)(1)e. below. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
(b)  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below: 
(1)  Identifying information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
(2)  Environmental permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
(3)  Description of operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
(4)  Flow measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined wastestream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
(5)  Measurement of pollutants. 
a.  The categorical pretreatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
b.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the designated city representative, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. 
Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in section 94-165 of this article. 
c.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in section 94-166 of this article. 
(6)  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
(7)  Compliance schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or O&M will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or O&M. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in section 94-157 of this article. 
(8)  Signature and certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 94-121 of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.1) 
Sec. 94-157. - Compliance schedule progress reports. 
    The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by section 94-156(b)(7) of this article: 
(1)  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
(2)  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
(3)  The user shall submit a progress report to the designated city representative no later than 14 days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay; and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
(4)  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the designated city representative. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.2) 
Sec. 94-158. - Reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadline. 
    Within 90 days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the designated city representative a report containing the information described in section 94-156(b)(4)-(6) of this article. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all the users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 94-121 of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.3) 
Sec. 94-159. - Periodic compliance reports. 
(a)  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the designated city representative but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with section 94-121 of this article. 
(b)  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
(c)  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the designated city representative, using the procedures prescribed in section 94-166 of this article, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.4) 
Sec. 94-160. - Reports of changed conditions. 
    Each user must notify the designated city representative of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least 30 days before the change. 
(1)  The designated city representative may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under section 94-120 of this article. 
(2)  The designated city representative may issue a wastewater discharge permit under section 94-122 of this article or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under section 94-139 of this article in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
(3)  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of 20 percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.5) 
Sec. 94-161. - Reports of potential problems. 
(a)  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a non-routine, episodic nature, a non-customary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the designated city representative of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
(b)  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the designated city representative, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; no [nor] shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this article. 
(c)  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in paragraph (a), above. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.6) 
Sec. 94-162. - Reports from unpermitted users. 
    All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the designated city representative as the designated city representative may require. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.7) 
Sec. 94-163. - Notice of violation/repeat sampling and reporting. 
    If sampling performed by a user indicated a violation, the user must notify the designated city representative within 24 hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the designated city representative within 30 days after becoming aware of the violation. The user is not required to resample if the designated city representative monitors at the user's facility at least once a month, or if the designated city representative samples between the user's initial sampling and when' the user receives the results of this sampling. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.8) 
Sec. 94-164. - Notification of the discharge of hazardous waste. 
(a)  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). If the user discharges more than 100 kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following 12 months. All notifications must take place no later than 180 days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under section 94-160 of this article. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of sections 94-156, 94-158, and 94-159 of this article. 
(b)  Discharges are exempt from the requirements of paragraph (a) above, during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than 15 kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than 15 kilograms non-acute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
(c)  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the designated city representative, the EPA Regional Waste Management, waste division director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within 90 days of the effective date of such regulations. 
(d)  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
(e)  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this article, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.9) 
Sec. 94-165. - Analytical requirements. 
    All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136. If sampling or analytical technique's for the pollutant in question are not contained in 40 CFR Part 136, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA, unless otherwise specified inapplicable. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.10) 
Sec. 94-166. - Sample collection. 
(a)  Except as indicated in paragraph (b), below, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the designated city representative may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
(b)  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH cyanide, phenols, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.11) 
Sec. 94-167. - Timing. 
    Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.12) 
Sec. 94-168. - Record keeping. 
    Users subject to the reporting requirements of this article shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this article and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name,of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the City of Carrollton, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the designated city representative. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 6.13) 
Secs. 94-169-94-180. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 7. - COMPLIANCE MONITORING 

Sec. 94-181. - Right of entry; inspection and sampling. 
    The designated city representative shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the designated city representative ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
(1)  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the designated city representative will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
(2)  The designated city representative shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or requires installation of such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
(3)  The designated city representative may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated monthly to ensure their accuracy. 
(4)  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the designated city representatives and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
(5)  Unreasonable delays in allowing the designated city representative access to the user's premises shall be violation of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 7.1) 
Sec. 94-182. - Search warrants. 
    If the designated city representative has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this article, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the City of Carrollton designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the designated city representative may seek issuance of a search warrant from the court of jurisdiction for the City of Carrollton. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 7.2) 
Secs. 94-183-94-195. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 8. - CONFIDENTIAL INFORMATION 

Sec. 94-196. - [Generally.] 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the designated city representative inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the designated city representative, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. Wastewater constituents and characteristics and other "effluent date" as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 8) 
Secs. 94-197-94-205. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 9. - PUBLICATIONS OF USERS IN SIGNIFICANT NONCOMPLIANCE 

Sec. 94-206. - [Generally.] 
    The designated city representative shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous 12 months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
(1)  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which 66 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
(2)  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which 33 percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
(3)  Any other discharge violation that the designated city representative believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through,. including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
(4)  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the designated city representative's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
(5)  Failure to meet, within 90 days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
(6)  Failure to provide within 30 days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
(7)  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
(8)  Any other violation(s) which the designated city representative determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 9) 
Secs. 94-207-94-215. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 10. - ADMINISTRATIVE ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 94-216. - Notification of violation. 
    When the designated city representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provisions of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the designated city representative may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the designated city representative. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing is this section shall limit the authority, of the designated city representative to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without first issuing a notice of violation. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 10.1) 
Sec. 94-217. - Consent orders. 
    The designated city representative may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. Such documents shall have the same force and effect as the administrative orders issued pursuant to sections 94-219 and 94-220 of this article and shall be judicially enforceable. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 10.2) 
Sec. 94-218. - Show cause hearing. 
    The designated city representative may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the designated city representative and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that, the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 10.3) 
Sec. 94-219. - Compliance orders. 
    When the designated city representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the designated city representative may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be disconnected unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 10.4) 
Sec. 94-220. - Cease and desist orders. 
    When the designated city representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the designated city representative may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
(1)  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
(2)  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
    Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 10.5) 
Sec. 94-221. - Administrative fines. 
(a)  When the designated city representative finds that user has violated, or continues to, violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the designated city representative may fine such user in an amount not to exceed $1,000.00. Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or, other long-term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
(b)  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after 30 calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of five percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of five percent per month. A lien against the user's property will be sought for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties. 
(c)  Users desiring to dispute such fines must file a written request for the designated city representative to reconsider the fine along with full payment of the fine amount within 30 days of being notified of the fine. Where a request has merit, the designated city representative may convene a hearing on the matter. In the event the user's appeal is successful, the payment, together with any interest accruing thereto, shall be returned to the user. The designated city representative may add the costs of preparing administrative enforcement actions, such as notices and orders, to the fine. 
(d)  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 10.6) 
Sec. 94-222. - Emergency suspensions. 
    The designated city representative may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The designated city representative may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
(1)  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the designated city representative may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The designated city representative may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the designated city representative that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in section 94-223 of this article are initiated against the user. 
(2)  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the designated city representative prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under sections 94-218 or 94-223 of this article. 
    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 10.7) 
Sec. 94-223. - Termination of discharge. 
    In addition to the provisions in section 94-141 of this article, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
(1)  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
(2)  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
(3)  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
(4)  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
(5)  Violation of the pretreatment standards in Division 2 of this article. 
    Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under section 94-218 of this article why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this opinion by the designated city representative shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 10.8) 
Secs. 94-224-94-235. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 11. - JUDICIAL ENFORCEMENT REMEDIES 

Sec. 94-236. - Injunctive relief. 
    When the designated city representative finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the designated city representative may petition the court of jurisdiction through the City of Carrollton's Attorney for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this article on activities of the user. The designated city representative may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 11.1) 
Sec. 94-237. - Civil penalties. 
(a)  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the City of Carrollton for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
(b)  The designated city representative may recover reasonable attorney's fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the City of Carrollton. 
(c)  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
(d)  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 11.2) 
Sec. 94-238. - Criminal prosecution. 
(a)  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this article, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six months. 
(b)  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be guilty of a misdemeanor and be subject to a-penalty of at least $1,000.00, or be subject to imprisonment for not more than six months. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state law. 
(c)  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this article, wastewater permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required wider this article shall, upon conviction, be punished by a fine of not more than $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six months. 
(d)  In the event of a second conviction, a user shall be punished by a fine of not more the $1,000.00 per violation, per day, or imprisonment for not more than six months. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 11.3) 
Sec. 94-239. - Remedies nonexclusive. 
    The remedies provided for in this article are not exclusive. The designated city representative may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the City of Carrollton's enforcement response plan. However, the designated city representative may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the designated city representative is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 11.4) 
Secs. 94-240-94-250. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 12. - AFFIRMATIVE DEFENSES TO DISCHARGE VIOLATIONS 

Sec. 94-251. - Upset. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, "upset" means an exceptional incident in which there is unintentional and temporary noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards because of factors beyond the reasonable control of the user. An upset does not include noncompliance to the extent caused by operational error, improperly designed treatment facilities, lack of preventive maintenance, or careless or improper operation. 
(b)  An upset shall constitute an affirmative defense to an action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards if the requirements of paragraph (c), below, are met. 
(c)  A user who wishes to establish the affirmative defense of upset shall demonstrate, through properly signed, contemporaneous operating logs, or other relevant evidence that: 
(1)  An upset occurred and the user can identity the cause(s) of the upset; 
(2)  The facility was at the time being operated in a prudent and workman-like manner and in compliance with applicable operation and maintenance procedures; and 
(3)  The user has submitted the following information to the designated city representative within 24 hours of becoming aware of the upset (if this information is provided orally, a written submission must be provided within five days): 
a.  A description of the indirect discharge and cause of noncompliance; 
b.  The period of noncompliance, including dates and times or, if not corrected, the anticipated time the noncompliance is expected to continue; and 
c.  Steps being taken and/or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent recurrence of the noncompliance. 
d.  In any enforcement proceeding, the user seeking to establish the occurrence of an upset shall have the burden of proof. 
e.  Users will have the opportunity for a judicial determination on any claim of upset only in an enforcement action brought for noncompliance with categorical pretreatment standards. 
f.  Users shall control production of all discharges to the extent necessary to maintain compliance with categorical pretreatment standards upon reduction, loss, or failure of its treatment facility until the facility is restored or an alternative method of treatment is provided. This requirement applies in the situation where, among other things, the primary source of power of the treatment facility is reduced, lost, or fails. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 12.1) 
Sec. 94-252. - Prohibited discharge standards. 
    A user shall have an affirmative defense to an enforcement action brought against it for noncompliance with the general prohibitions in section 94-81(2)c. through g. of this article if it can prove that it did not know, or have reason to know, that its discharge, alone or in conjunction with discharges from other sources, would cause pass through or interference and that either: 
(1)  A local limit exists for each pollutant discharged and the user was in compliance with each limit directly prior to, and during, the pass through or interference; or 
(2)  No local limit exists, but the discharge did not change substantially in nature or constituents from the user's prior discharge when the City of Carrollton was regularly in compliance with its NPDES permit, and in the case of interference, was in compliance with applicable sludge use or disposal requirements. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 12.2) 
Sec. 94-253. - Bypass. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section: 
(1)  "Bypass" means the international diversion of waste streams from any portion of the user's treatment facility. 
(2)  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
(b)  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of paragraphs (c) and (d) of this section. 
(c)  (1) 
If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the designated city representative, at least ten days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
(2)  A user shall submit oral notice to the designated city representative of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within 24 hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The designated city representative may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within 24 hours. 
(d)  (1) 
Bypass is prohibited, and the designated city representative may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under paragraph (c) of this section. 
(2)  The designated city representative may approve a bypass, after considering its adverse effects, or if the designated city representative determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in paragraph (d)(1) of this section. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 12.2) 
Secs. 94-254-94-265. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 13. - SURCHARGES 

Sec. 94-266. - [Generally.] 
    In addition to normal rates, charges and fees, surcharges shall be levied for wastewater with strengths in excess of the permitted limits. These limits are: Chemical oxygen demand (COD) 500 (mg/l) and/or total suspended solids (TSS) of 250 (mg/l) based on flow composites. This surcharge reflects the increased operation and maintenance costs and other increased expenses incurred in the treatment of wastewater with strengths in excess of permitted limits. 
    The surcharge is calculated as follows: 
(1)  COD surcharge: 
COD Factor = (Actual COD - Allowed COD) / (Allowed) ×.65* 
COD Surcharge = (COD Factor) × (Sewer Rate) × (Units Used) 
(2)  TSS surcharge: 
TSS Factor = (Actual TSS - Allowed TSS) / (Allowed TSS) ×.35** 
TSS Surcharge = (TSS Factor) × (Sewer Rate) × (Units Used) 
*65 percent of the treatment effort goes to COD/BOD removal 
**35 percent of the treatment effort goes to TSS removal 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 13) 
Secs. 94-267-94-275. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 14. - EFFECTIVE DATE 

Sec. 94-276. - Effective date. 
    This article shall be in full force and effect immediately following its passage, approval, and publication, as provided by law. 
(Ord. of 8-4-97, § 14) 
Chapter 98 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Cross reference- Businesses, ch. 22; traffic and vehicles, ch. 90. 

ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 

Sec. 98-1. - Application of article. 
    Every person owning, controlling, operating or managing any motor-propelled vehicle, including the lessees or trustees of such person or receivers appointed by any court, used in the business of transporting persons or property for hire over any public street or highway in this city shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
Sec. 98-2. - Business license, compliance with state and federal law required. 
    No person shall engage in the business of transporting persons or property for hire without first obtaining a valid business license and being in full compliance with all state and federal laws, rules or regulations, relating to vehicles for hire or motor contract carriers as these rules, regulations and laws might apply to the transporting of persons or property for hire. 
Sec. 98-3. - Chief of police to be provided with list of drivers. 
    Each person so engaged in business in the city shall provide the chief of police with a current and updated list of all drivers whose duties involve the transporting of persons or property for hire, employed by or under contract with such person. 
Secs. 98-4-98-30. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE II. - TOWING SERVICES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Cross reference- Emergency services, ch. 46. 
State Law reference- Wrecker driver required to remove glass and parts of vehicle being towed, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-276. 

Sec. 98-31. - Conditions and prerequisite to furnishing wrecker/towing service. 
(a)  No person engaged in the wrecker/towing service business within the city shall be called upon by city police officers or other authorized employees of the city to furnish the service of towing any vehicle upon city streets unless the person shall have been placed on the approved scheduled rotation call list after having complied with the following conditions: 
(1)  Complete the full on call wrecker service application. 
(2)  Possess a valid/current city business license. 
(3)  Possess a valid state public service commission certificate and meet all federal motor carrier safety regulations and other applicable state public service requirements for operating a wrecker/towing service. 
(4)  Have an established business location within the city limits. 
(5)  Be available 24 hours a day, seven days per week and be able to respond within 20 minutes on at least 90 percent of calls made by the city police department as determined by the county 911 dispatch. 
(6)  The wrecker/towing service shall have qualified employees skilled in performing their duties and possessing a valid state driver's license of the proper class. 
(7)  The wrecker/towing service shall have available at least one wrecker in good operating condition. This means meeting the requirements of local rules, regulations, local ordinances, federal motor carrier regulations, state law and the state public service commission. 
(8)  All wreckers shall be equipped with an amber flashing light meeting the most current regulatory requirements of the state patrol and sufficient emergency equipment (as required by 49 C.F.R. § 393.95 of the federal motor carrier regulations) so as to be able to mark the scene of a wreck on both sides of the scene so as to warn all traffic on the highway of the emergency existing while the wreckers are in operation. The wreckers shall also carry brooms, shovels, and bucket (pail), and fire extinguishers, suitable for extinguishing fires in wrecked vehicles and for cleaning up the debris and glass from the area where the wreck has occurred. The fire extinguisher shall meet the requirements of 49 C.F.R. § 393.95 of the federal motor carrier regulations. All wrecker personnel must wear reflective traffic vests for their safety. 
(9)  There shall be painted in a conspicuous place, on both the right and left side of the wrecker, showing the name of the company and a telephone number. 
(10)  All persons engaged in the wrecker/towing business shall carry insurance, including liability insurance in the form of comprehensive, general and automobile liability, and the policy shall protect it from claims for bodily injury, including death, to its employees and all others, and from claims for property damage, all of which may arise out of the result of the wrecker's operation under this article. This insurance shall be sufficient to reasonably assure the contractor's solvency, in the event of any injuries, deaths or property damage with the following minimum limits: 
a.  Bodily injury in the amount of $100,000.00 per person, $300,000.00 per accident. 
b.  Property damage in the amount of $50,000.00. 
(11)  The wrecker/towing service shall provide a storage area located within the city limits for the storage and safekeeping of vehicles towed under this article and enclosed with a solid wall or substantial fence not less than six feet in height. Said storage area shall be staffed weekly during regular business hours (i.e., Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. until 5:00 p.m.). The wrecker/towing service shall maintain garage liability insurance in the same amount as required in subsection (10) of this section. 
(12)  All wrecker/towing services shall agree to permit regular inspection of wrecker/towing vehicles and storage premises by representatives of the city police department. These inspections may be conducted from time to time in conjunction with those conducted by the state public service commission. 
(b)  The police officer or other authorized officer shall determine whether or not a wrecker is needed. If a wrecker is needed, the police officer or other authorized officer shall ascertain if the owner or operator is able to make known what wrecker service the owner or operator desires to have called. If the owner or operator is able to make his preference known, the police officer or other authorized officer shall have 911 dispatch call the preferred service desired by the owner or operator of the vehicle. No police or other authorized officer may recommend to any person the wrecker service company to be called or employed. 
(c)  If the owner or operator is unable, due to injury or physical or mental impairment, to make a choice, or does not have a preference, the 911 dispatch operator will call the wrecker on the scheduled call list. 
(d)  If the 911 operator is unable to reach the wrecker service on call, or for any reason the wrecker service on call is unable to furnish the service, the wrecker service next on call shall be called. A wrecker/towing service shall not be able to designate its own backup service. 
(e)  Except in extreme emergencies, the police officer or other authorized officer shall await the arrival of the wrecker and shall in the meantime try to make the scene of the accident safe for other vehicles, using the road in the vicinity thereof, giving warnings and directing traffic. 
(f)  The police officer or other authorized officer shall make out a tow-in report, if required, which shall contain the information and details prescribed by the city. 
(g)  If an officer requests that a vehicle be towed to the police department, the wrecker operator shall have the shift sergeant or his designee sign the tow-in bill. At this point the shift sergeant or his designee will assume the responsibility for the vehicle, and indicate where the vehicle is to be placed. 
(h)  Additional wrecker/towing services meeting the requirements of this article may be added to the rotation list. 
(Rules of 12-18-95, § I; Res. No. 01-2010, Exh. A, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 98-32. - Responsibilities of wrecker firms. 
(a)  Wrecker firms shall be responsible to the owner for all damage done during towing and storage of any vehicles entrusted to them under this article. 
(b)  Wrecker services shall cooperate with all duly authorized law enforcement officers in the protection of any evidence or in any investigation arising out of a wreck or seizure of a vehicle by any officials. 
(c)  It shall be the responsibility of the wrecker service, prior to leaving the scene of any collision, to clean the scene of all debris, including all glass. 
(d)  The wrecker service shall not release any vehicle placed on hold from storage unless approved by an authorized representative of the city police department with issuance of a signed release form. 
(e)  The wrecker service shall maintain all wrecker units and all related equipment adequately, and shall be able to perform towing services in a responsible, workmanlike and safe manner. 
(f)  When responding to a wrecker call the service shall use due regard and shall not be equipped or operated as an emergency vehicle. A wrecker service shall not follow, or attempt to overtake, remain close to or use an authorized emergency vehicle to assist in violating state traffic laws or ordinances of the city unless authorized by officers on the scene as relayed by dispatch. 
(Rules of 12-18-95, § II; Res. No. 01-2010, Exh. A, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 98-33. - Established business locations. 
(a)  Each service must have a separate office and garage/storage area located within the city limits. The garage/storage area cannot be shared with any other service on the approved scheduled call list. 
(b)  Each service must have a separate telephone listing. This telephone number must be manned on a 24-hour-a-day basis. 
(c)  Each service must have a separate, valid city business license in the name of the service. 
(d)  Each service must have separate insurance coverage issued in the name of the service and meeting all limits required in this article. 
(e)  Each service must have a separate public service commission certificate required by law or by regulation. 
(f)  Wrecker/towing units and equipment required under this article must be assigned and allocated to a specific service. Wreckers/towing units may not be assigned or allocated to more than one service or shared between or among services for purposes of meeting these guidelines. 
(Rules of 12-18-95, § III; Res. No. 01-2010, Exh. A, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 98-34. - Suspension, removal from scheduled rotation call list. 
(a)  Upon written notice, the chief of police, or his designee, may suspend or remove any service assigned to the scheduled rotation call list for, but not limited to, violations of this article, violations of local ordinances, state law, public service commission regulations or other just cause. 
(b)  Removal by the chief of police, or his designee, may be appealed in writing to the city manager, or his designee, within ten working days following the effective date of the notice. 
(c)  The city manager, or his designee, shall act as a hearing officer to conduct an appeal hearing and render an impartial decision based on the testimony and/or evidence presented. 
(d)  No later than five working days following the completion of the hearing, the city manager, or his designee, shall render an impartial decision on the appeal. The decision of the city manager shall be final. 
(e)  Any grievance or complaint against the action of a city employee shall be rendered in writing. This grievance shall be returned to the traffic sergeant within five working days of the date of the incident. 
(f)  The traffic sergeant shall review the complaint for merit and upon his recommendation shall forward the complaint through the chain of command for review. 
(g)  Upon the request of the wrecker/towing service, any decision rendered by the traffic sergeant may be appealed to the chief of police. The decision of the chief of police shall be final. 
(h)  If a complaint against an employee is filed in conjunction with a disciplinary action against a wrecker/towing service, both will be handled concurrently. 
(Rules of 12-18-95, § IV) 
Sec. 98-35. - Fees for services rendered. 
    Fees for services rendered under this article shall be established by the respective wrecker/towing service. A listing of such fees shall be clearly posted at the garage/storage site and a written copy available for distribution on each wrecker unit. 
(Rules of 12-18-95, § V) 
Sec. 98-36. - Procedures for city police officers and employees. 
    A schedule shall be set up on a rotating basis of all qualified wrecker/towing services under this article, which service shall be used as hereinafter provided except in extreme emergency, where persons are trapped or pinned in or under vehicles, or in burning vehicles, or in danger of drowning by submersion, or where traffic is blocked to prevent the normal flow of vehicles, in which event, and only in which event, such police officer shall be authorized to call the nearest, most qualified service to prevent serious injury or death. 
(Rules of 12-18-95, § VI; Res. No. 01-2010, Exh. A, 4-5-10) 
Sec. 98-37. - Continuation of present service. 
    The provisions of this article requiring all wrecker and towing services on the call list to maintain a place of business in the city and a storage area within the city are waived as to all such services who held a valid business license in the city on June 8, 1988, for so long as they continue to be licensed wrecker services of the city. Any transfer or change of ownership of such service shall terminate this waiver. 
(Rules of 12-18-95, § VII) 
Sec. 98-38. - Continuation of established business location. 
    Wrecker and towing services currently on the approved call list as of June 8, 1988, who receive a waiver to the provisions provided for in section 98-37 shall be required to continue to maintain separate established business locations within the county for each respective service on the approved call list. 
(Rules of 12-18-95, § VIII) 
Sec. 98-39-98-50. - Reserved. 
ARTICLE III. - TAXICABS 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 

Sec. 98-51. - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    Applicant means an individual registering a business authorized herein. 
    Application means a form supplied by the city for the purpose of registering a business authorized herein. 
    Business means the business of operating or owning a taxicab business. 
    Certificate means a certificate issued or approved by the city authorizing the holder thereof to conduct a taxicab business within the city. 
    City means City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
    Closely held corporation means a corporation not traded or listed on any stock exchange and which has fewer than 25 shareholders. 
    Driver, operator means any person in charge of or driving or operating a taxicab, as defined herein, whether as owner, agent, employee or otherwise. 
    Employee means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form IRS W-2 but not a form IRS 1099. 
    Individual means a natural person. 
    Interest in a business means an interest held by an owner or co-owner of a registered business; by a partner of a general or limited partnership which owns or co-owns a registered business; a stockholder of five percent or more shares in any closely held corporation which owns or co-owns a registered business; or anyone sharing in the income or corpus of any trust or estate having such an interest; or a person having subscriptions, options, and/or warranty for purchase of five percent or more of a closely held corporation's stock or 50 percent or more of any corporation's stock. 
    Memorandum certificate means the card issued to a taxicab owner to display within the taxicab indicating that such taxicab has been issued a certificate. 
    Owner means a person having an interest in a business, including a stockholder, and to whom a certificate for operating a taxicab has been or is to be issued. 
    Person means any individual, firm, partnership, cooperative, nonprofit membership corporation, joint venture, association, company, corporation, agency, syndicate, estate, trust, business, trust, receiver, fiduciary or other group or combination acting as a unit, body politic or political subdivision, whether public, private, or quasi-public, or any entity. 
    Taxicab means any motor vehicle operating upon any street on call or demand, accepting or soliciting passengers indiscriminately for hire between such points along such streets as may be directed by the passengers being so transported. 
    Traffic officer means the chief of police or the officer the chief has designated to hold responsibilities as set forth in this article. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-52. - Compliance with laws, due regard for safety required. 
    All taxicabs operating within the city shall comply with all laws of the United States of America, the state and the city regulating the speed, the operation of motor vehicles and the requirements for safety equipment and devices. All passengers, whether adult, children or infants shall use the required passenger restraint devices including child restraints as necessary. Drivers shall show due regard for the safety, comfort and convenience of passengers, for the safe and careful transportation of property and for the safety of the general public. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-53. - Identification of vehicles as taxicabs. 
(a)  Information required. All motor vehicles operated as taxicabs in the city shall be marked on the outside with the following information with respect thereto: 
(1)  The name of the owner of the taxicab. 
(2)  The word "taxicab" or "taxi." 
(3)  If a fleet of more than one taxicab is operated by one company or owner, a number shall be assigned to each vehicle and prominently displayed. 
(4)  Any other information which may be deemed necessary to identify such vehicle as required by the traffic officer. 
(b)  Affixing information. The above markings or identification shall be prominently displayed on both sides of the vehicles operated as taxicabs in letters of not less than three inches in height and must be printed so that the identification may be easily read at a distance of at least 50 feet. Such information may be displayed on vehicle with paint, by stencil, by decals or with magnetic signs. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-54. - Riding on exterior of vehicle. 
    No person shall be permitted to ride on the fender, hood, roof or any other exterior portion of a taxicab. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-55. - Refusal to pay fare. 
    Any person using a taxicab in the city without paying the amount of fare or charges requested by the taxicab driver, within the limits prescribed in this article, shall be guilty of violation of this article. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Secs. 98-56-98-70. - Reserved. 
DIVISION 2. - OPERATION OF BUSINESS 

Sec. 98-71. - Certificate required. 
    No person shall operate or permit a taxicab or any other automobile owned or controlled by him to be operated as a taxicab in the city without having first obtained a certificate from the city manager or his designee authorizing such operation. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-72. - Certificate-Application. 
    All persons applying for a certificate provided for in section 98-71 shall do so in writing to the traffic officer on the form provided by him. Such applicant shall furnish all information required by such form in complete detail and shall certify under oath to the correctness of the information. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-73. - Same-Action upon application. 
    The traffic officer shall investigate the application provided for in section 98-72 and shall make a recommendation to the city manager or his designee on whether such applicant should be granted a certificate. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-74. - Same-Issuance. 
    After receiving approval of the application provided for in section 98-73 from the city manager or his designee, the certificate shall be issued by the city clerk upon payment of the required license fee. The clerk shall also issue to the applicant a memorandum certificate for each taxicab authorized by the city council. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-75. - Same-Expiration, reinstatement. 
    All certificates shall expire on December 31 of each year, including the year of issue, but may be reinstated by the city clerk for the following year, provided that there has been no revocation thereof and further provided that all license fees required to be paid have been paid and all other provisions of this article have been complied with. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-76. - Registration of vehicles-Required. 
(a)  Duty of operator. Prior to placing a taxicab in service, any operator shall register that vehicle with the traffic officer, providing a complete and true description of such vehicle to include the serial number, make, model and color. 
(b)  Duty of traffic officer. The traffic officer shall maintain a file on each operator, including the description of each vehicle registered as required by this section, and he may issue identification numbers for each registered vehicle. The officer may make inspections at any time to assure that the taxicabs in operation are registered and in full compliance with this article. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-77. - Same-Identification numbers to be affixed to vehicle. 
    Should the traffic officer issue identification numbers, these numbers shall be affixed by decal or similar means in the rear window of the vehicle on the driver's side. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-78. - Insurance of vehicle; required. 
    Every person operating a taxicab in the city or the owner of any such taxicab shall provide the traffic officer with a copy of the insurance certificate showing that such vehicle is properly insured in accordance with the laws of the state, and such insurance company shall be properly licensed to do business in the state and the city. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-79. - Cancellation of insurance, notice required. 
    The city shall be given a minimum of ten days' written notice of cancellation of vehicular insurance covering the operation of taxicabs. 
(Ord. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-80. - Suspension of unsafe vehicle from service. 
    The traffic officer or the city manager or his designee may suspend from operation any taxicab found to be unsafe, and any vehicle so suspended shall not be permitted to again operate until repaired and put in proper condition for use. Prior to returning to service, such taxicab shall be inspected and approved by the traffic officer. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-81. - Sale, trade, exchange of vehicle. 
(a)  Notice required. If any owner or operator of a taxicab in the city shall sell, trade or exchange any taxicab being operated in the city and substitute another car therefor, it shall be the duty of the seller to notify the traffic officer within 24 hours of the sale, trade or exchange of the vehicle, and such owner or operator shall provide the officer with the identification number of such vehicle under which the vehicle is identified on the insurance policy on file. 
(b)  Transfer of insurance required. It shall be the duty of such owner or operator of the car substituted to furnish the traffic officer written endorsement of the insurance company issuing the vehicular insurance policy showing that the additional vehicle is properly insured under the terms of the policy. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-82. - Rates and charges-Contents of schedule, posting required. 
    Each taxicab operator licensed in the city shall post, at a conspicuous place in his taxicabs, a schedule of rates, such schedule clearly showing distances and prices therefor. Each such operator shall furnish a similar copy of such rates so posted in his taxicabs to the traffic officer. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-83. - Same-Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any taxicab owner or operator to fail to post or publish the rates as required in section 98-82 and, by himself or through his drivers, to charge rates in excess of those published. If the rates are not posted and/or there is an excessive charge, the city manager or his designee may call for a hearing in which the owner or operator is allowed to appear and be heard and present evidence on the matter. If it is determined that this section or section 98-82 has been violated, the city manager or his designee may revoke or suspend such owner's or operator's license. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-84. - Maintenance of taxicabs, records by owners. 
    Every owner of a taxicab or taxicab company shall comply with the following regulations: 
(1)  Condition of taxicab. All taxicabs shall be maintained in a clean and safe condition at all times. 
(2)  Record of calls. He shall keep a record of all telephone calls for taxicab service for a minimum of 30 days for use, if needed, by the police department. 
(3)  List of drivers. He shall keep and maintain a list of all current drivers and operators. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Sec. 98-85. - Place of business required. 
    No taxicab shall operate in the city unless the owner thereof shall maintain a place of business from a building located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Res. No. 07-2014, 7-7-14) 
Secs. 98-86-98-110. - Reserved. 
APPENDIX B - ZONING (RESERVED)[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Resolution 09-2007, § 7, adopted Sept. 10, 2007, repealed Appendix B, Arts. I-XIX, §§ [100], [200], 300, 301, 400-405, 500, 501, 501A., 501B., 502-517, 600, 601, 700-707, 800-813, 900-905, 1000-1002, 1100-1105, 1200-1210, 1300-1317, 1400-1407, 1500-1505, 1600-1605, 1700-1707, 1801-1810, 1900-1908, in its entirety. This appendix pertained to Zoning and derived from the city's zoning ordinance as adopted by the mayor and city council on January 6, 1997; Ord. of May 5, 1997; Ord. of Aug. 4, 1997; June 1, 1998; Amd. of Nov. 13, 1998; Amd. of Feb. 1, 1999; Mar. 1, 1999; Amd. of April 5, 1999; Amd. of June 7, 1999; Amd. of July 19, 1999; Amd. of July 19, 2000; Amd. of Feb. 17, 2003; Ord. of Jan. 5, 2004, § 2; Ord. of Feb. 7, 2005, § 2. This information has been incorporated into the City of Carrollton's Code of Ordinances Unified Development Ordinance chapter. 
Cross reference- Planning commission, § 2-196 et seq.; alcoholic beverages, ch. 6; amusements and entertainments, ch. 10; adult entertainment establishments, § 10-26 et seq.; businesses, ch. 22; historical preservation, ch. 62; signs, ch. 74. 
State Law reference- The Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq. 

UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The Unified [Development Ordinance] is set out herein as adopted. The original arrangement, capitalization, numbering system, article headings, section catchlines and subcatchlines have been retained. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, a uniform system of citations to state statutes has been used. Additions made for clarity are indicated by brackets. 

ARTICLE 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
1.01.00 - TITLE 
This ordinance shall be known as and entitled the "City of Carrollton Unified Development Ordinance" and may be referred to as the "UDO." 
1.02.00 - AUTHORITY 
This UDO is enacted pursuant to the requirements and authority of Article IX, Section 2, Paragraph 5 2-4 of the Georgia Constitution and the amendments thereto. 
1.03.00 - APPLICABILITY 

1.03.01 - Generally 
A.  No buildings, structures, or land shall be used or occupied, and no building, structure, or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, enlarged, or structurally altered unless in conformity with the regulations of this UDO. 
B.  A change of use shall conform to the standards, criteria, requirements, and procedures of this UDO. 
1.03.02 - Exemptions and Exceptions 
The following general conditions or circumstances are exempt from the provisions and requirements of the UDO: 
A.  Buildings or structures that are legally under construction on the date of adoption of the UDO; 
B.  Buildings or structures for which a building permit has been issued as of the effective date of this UDO, provided that construction commences prior to the expiration of the building permit, and continues until completed; 
C.  Development pursuant to an approved development plan or subdivision plat approved prior to the effective date of this UDO, provided that development commences not later than one (1) year after the effective date of this UDO; or 
D.  The proposed use of property has been lawfully approved as of the effective date of this UDO. 
1.04.00 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
A.  These regulations are enacted to promote the proper location, height, bulk, number of stories, and size of buildings and other structures, sizes of yards, courts, and the use of other open spaces, density and distribution of population, and the use of buildings, structures, and land for trade, industry, residence, recreation, agriculture, forestry, conservation, sanitation, protection against floods, and public activities. 
B.  The purpose of these regulations is to: 
1.  Promote the health, safety, morals, convenience, order, prosperity or general welfare of the City; 
2.  Promote desirable living conditions and the sustained stability of neighborhoods; 
3.  Protect property against blight and depreciation; 
4.  Secure economy in government expenditures; 
5.  Lessen congestion on streets; 
6.  Secure safety from fire, panic and other dangers; 
7.  Provide adequate light and air and preventing the overcrowding of land; 
8.  Avoid undue concentration of population; 
9.  Facilitate the adequate provision of transportation, water, sewerage, schools, parks, and other public requirements; 
10.  Protect the value of existing properties; and 
11.  Promote the most appropriate use of land, buildings, and structures throughout the City in accordance with the Comprehensive Plan. 
1.05.00 - RELATIONSHIP TO THE COMPREHENSIVE PLAN 
The City of Carrolton Comprehensive Plan (Plan) is the official development policy and implementation guide for the City to coordinate and direct physical and economic development, related public investment, and, to provide guidance for the development of private property in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare. This UDO is designed to implement all provisions of that Plan for the development and use of land. 
1.06.00 - CITY MANAGER 
The City Manager is the chief administrative official of the City. For the purposes of this UDO, the City Manager is assigned to administer, interpret, and implement the standards, criteria, and procedures of this UDO. The City Manager may delegate such responsibilities to City staff. Throughout this UDO, the term "City Manager" is used to indicate the responsibility for specified actions, except where specified actions are reserved or specifically delegated by law to another official. In all instances, "City Manager" means the "City Manager or his or her designee." 
1.07.00 - DOCUMENTS ADOPTED BY REFERENCE 

1.07.01 - City of Carrollton Zoning Map 
The City of Carrollton Zoning Map, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this UDO. 
1.07.02 - Engineering Technical Standards Manual 
The Engineering Technical Standards Manual includes design and construction standards for the installation of infrastructure. The Engineering Technical Standards Manual is on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
1.08.00 - RULES OF INTERPRETATION 

1.08.01 - Generally 
A.  Specific provisions of this UDO shall be followed in lieu of general provisions that may be in conflict with the specific provision. 
B.  In the interpretation and application of this UDO all standards, provisions, and requirements shall be liberally construed in favor of the objectives and purposes of the City and shall not be construed to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state law. 
C.  Where provisions of this UDO conflict with other regulations, the more stringent restrictions shall be applied. 
1.08.02 - Responsibility for Interpretations 
A.  In the event that any question arises concerning the application of regulations, standards, definitions, development criteria, or any other provision of this UDO, the City Manager shall be responsible for interpretation. In the interpretation of this UDO, the City Manager shall be guided by the City of Carrollton Comprehensive Plan and applicable state law. 
B.  Responsibility for interpretation by the City Manager as set forth in this section shall be limited to standards, regulations, and requirements of this UDO, and shall not be construed to include interpretation of any technical codes adopted by reference in this UDO. Interpretation shall not be construed to override the responsibilities assigned by the Mayor and City Council to any commission, board, or official named in other sections or articles of this UDO. 
1.08.03 - Rules for Boundary Interpretations 
Interpretations regarding boundaries of zoning districts shall be made in accordance with the following: 
A.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any street shall be construed as following the centerline of the street. 
B.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following any platted lot line or other property line shall be construed as following such line. 
C.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following section lines, half-section lines, or quarter-section lines shall be construed as following such lines. 
D.  Boundaries shown as following or approximately following the shoreline of a river, stream, lake or other water body shall be construed as following such shoreline. 
1.08.04 - Rules of Construction 
A.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
B.  Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
C.  The masculine gender includes the feminine and the neutral. 
D.  The word "person" includes a firm, partnership, company, corporation, or association as well as individuals. 
E.  The word "shall" is always mandatory; the word "may" is permissive. 
F.  "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
G.  The term "written" or "in writing" shall include any representation of words, letters, or figures, whether by printing or otherwise. 
H.  The term "day" means a calendar day. 
I.  The term "month" means a calendar month. 
J.  The word "week" shall mean seven (7) days. 
K.  The word "year" shall mean a calendar year. 
1.08.05 - Computation of Time 
When a number of days is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first or last day shall not be counted; and if the last day falls on Saturday or Sunday, the person having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the person having the privilege or duty shall have through the following day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty; however, when the following day is a Saturday or Sunday, the person shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. 
1.09.00 - DEFINITIONS 
Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical words and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. The following terms are defined for purposes of this UDO. 

1.09.01 - Definitions 
Acceleration/deceleration lane. One or more paved traffic lanes traversing the frontage of a property for the purpose of allowing traffic to accelerate or decelerate outside of higher speed traffic lanes. 
Access. The ability and right to enter a property. 
Accessory structure. A structure on the same lot with, and of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. 
Accidental Discharge. A discharge prohibited by the UDO, which occurs by chance, and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
Addition (to an existing building). Any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common loadbearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter loadbearing walls is new construction. 
Adult establishment or adult entertainment establishment. A facility or use authorized in specific zoning districts where adult entertainment activities may be conducted, while balancing the competing interests of reducing criminal activity and protecting neighborhoods. Adult establishments shall include the following: 
a.  Adult bookstore: An establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section comprising 20 percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
b.  Adult business: Either: 
(1)  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article, where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
(2)  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
c.  Adult dancing establishment: A business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
d.  Adult motion picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical area for observation by patrons therein. 
e.  Adult picture theater: An enclosed building with a capacity for less than 50 persons used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
f.  Adult motion picture arcade: Any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin- or slug-operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
g.  Adult motel or hotel: A motel or hotel wherein material is presented which is distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
h.  Adult video store: Any establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
i.  Erotic dance establishment: A nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
j.  Encounter center or rap establishment: Any business, agency or person who, for any form of consideration or gratuity, provides a place where two or more persons may congregate, assemble or associate for the primary purpose of engaging in, describing or discussing specified sexual activities or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
k.  Escort bureau, introduction services: Any business, agency or person who, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or who introduces, furnishes or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement or who may consort with others about any place of public resort or within any private quarters. 
l.  Specified sexual activities: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral anal copulation, direct physical stimulation of unclothed genitals, flagellation or torture in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of excretory functions in the context of sexual relations, and any of the following sexually oriented acts or conduct: anilingus, buggery, coprophagy, coprophilia, cunnilingus, fellatio, necrophilia, pederasty, pedophilia, piquerism, sapphism, zooerasty; or 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Use of human or animal ejaculation, sodomy, oral copulation, coitus, or masturbation; or 
(4)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
(5)  Masochism, erotic or sexually oriented torture, beating or the inflicting of pain; or 
(6)  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being; or 
(7)  Human excretion, urination, menstruation, vaginal or anal irrigation. 
m.  Specified anatomical areas: Shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttocks, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Alley. A private or public thoroughfare which affords a secondary means of access to abutting property and not intended for general traffic circulation. 
Alternative tower structure. Man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light poles and similar alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or towers. 
Antenna array. Any exterior apparatus (rods, panels, discs, etc.) designed for telephonic, radio, or television communication through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. The antenna does not include the support structure. 
Aquifer. Any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
Area of shallow flooding. A designated AO zone on the City's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard. The land in the floodplain within the City subject to a one (1) percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. 
Attached wireless communication facility (attached WCF). An attached WCF is an antenna that is attached to an existing building or structure (attachment structure), which structures shall include but are not limited to utility poles, signs, water towers, with any accompanying pole or device (attachment device) which attaches the antenna to the existing building or structure and associated connection cables, and an equipment facility which may be located either inside or outside of the attachment structure. 
Base flood means the flood having a one (1) percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Basement. A building story constructed partially below the average level of the adjoining ground. 
Bed and Breakfast Facility. A bed and breakfast is defined as a structure occupied by its owners of record, wherein lodging is provided to guests for compensation. The dwelling unit in which the bed and breakfast takes place shall be the principal residence of the operators and said operators shall live in the structure when the bed and breakfast is in operation. 
Best Management Practices (BMPs). A collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Billboard. See Sign, Outdoor Advertising. 
Boarding or Rooming House. A building other than a motel or hotel, where for compensation or by prearrangement for a definite period, meals or lodging and meals are provided for five or more persons not related by blood or marriage, not to exceed 20 persons. 
Buffer, natural. A natural vegetated area with no or limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas, located adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams or other banks of state waters that contain flora native to the area. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, "The Natural Environments of Georgia." Along river corridors, habitats for endangered and threatened species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species. The buffer may be thinned or trimmed as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left to sufficiently keep shade on the tributary, stream, or other water body. 
Buffer, planted. Open spaces, landscaped areas, fences, walls, berms, or any combination thereof used to physically separate or screen one use or property from another so as to visually shield or block noise, lights, or other nuisances. In the event that insufficient existing vegetation or trees exist in the buffer zone, planting, fencing or other supplemental screening may be required, with a density, or opacity to accomplish buffering as required by this ordinance. Roads, parking areas, aboveground stormwater retention facilities, recreational facilities, or other aboveground construction shall not be permitted within the required buffer area. Public right-of-ways and utility easements shall not be considered as part of the buffer area. 
Buildable area. The portion of a lot remaining after required yards have been provided and areas subject to flooding during the 100-year storm event have been deducted. 
Building. Any structure attached to the ground which has a roof and which is designed for the shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or property of any kind, with the exception of walls and fences. 
Building Official. The person designated to enforce the rules of the building code, or his designee. 
Camping Trailer. A vehicular structure designed as a temporary dwelling for travel, recreation, and vacation uses, which is not more than 102 inches in body width, is less than 4,500 pounds in gross weight, and does not exceed 35 feet in length. 
Certificate of Appropriateness. A document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Certificate of Occupancy. A document issued by the City of Carrollton allowing the occupancy or use of a building and certifying the structure or use has been constructed and will be used in compliance with all the applicable codes and ordinances. 
Channel. A natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
Church. See Religious Facility. 
City. The City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
City Engineer. Engineer appointed by the City Manager, or the City Engineer's designee. 
City Manager. The chief administrative officer of the City, as appointed by the Mayor and City Council, and/or his authorized representative. 
Clean Water Act (CWA). The Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. § 1251 et seq.), and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
Club. A building owned, leased, or hired by an association of persons, who are bona fide members paying dues. The use of which is restricted to the members and their guests. The serving and selling of food and beverages may be permitted, provided that adequate kitchen and restroom facilities are available and that such sales are in accordance with federal, state, and local laws. 
Collocation/site sharing. Collocation/site sharing shall mean use of a common WCF or common site by two or more wireless license holders or by one wireless license holder for more than one type of communication technology and/or placement of a WCF on a structure owned or operated by a utility or other public entity. 
Condominium. A dwelling in which each resident has exclusive fee simple title and ownership in his individual dwelling unit while retaining an interest in the common facilities and areas of the building and grounds which are used by all the residents of the condominium. For the purposes of administering this UDO, condominiums shall be considered multi-family dwellings. 
Convenience Store. A small retail outlet which offers commonly needed food and staples, including gasoline and oil, normally through extended hours of operation. 
Corridor. All land within the buffer areas established adjacent to reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed and within other setbacks located elsewhere in this ordinance. 
Council. The Mayor and City Council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
Curb cut. The providing of ingress and/or egress between property and an abutting street. 
Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also know as excavation. 
Day Care Facility. Any building used routinely for the daytime care or education of five or more persons excluding the children or legal wards of the attendant adult, and including all accessory and activity areas. 
Development. Any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, or permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
Division. The Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
Dormitory. A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging are provided for more than five people not of the same family unit, for compensation and not necessarily open to the public. For the purposes of administering this UDO, dormitories shall be considered multi-family dwellings. 
Drainage Structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
DRASTIC. The standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600/2-87-035. The DRASTIC methodology is the most widely used technique for evaluating pollution susceptibility. 
Driveways. A private roadway providing access to a street or highway. 
Duplex. A building on a single lot containing two dwelling units, each of which is totally separated from the other by an unpierced wall extending from ground to roof or an unpierced ceiling and floor extending from exterior wall to exterior wall. 
Dwelling. A building or portion thereof, designed, arranged or used for residential occupancy, but not including hotels or motels. 
Dwelling, Multifamily. A building either designed, constructed, altered or used for more than two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a party wall or party floor-ceiling connecting it to at least one other dwelling unit in the building. 
Dwelling, Single-Family. A building containing one dwelling unit and that is not attached to any other dwelling unit by any means and is surrounded by open space or yards. 
Dwelling Unit. One or more rooms, including kitchen and toilet facilities, designed for the occupancy, cooking and sleeping of one or more persons living as a family. 
Eaves. The projecting lower edges of a roof overhanging the wall of a building. 
Elevated Building. A nonbasement building built to have the lowest floor elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns (posts and piers), shear walls, or breakaway walls. 
Environmentally Sensitive Areas. All those areas adjacent to and within wetland areas, groundwater recharge areas, river corridors, and reservoirs or perennial streams within a water supply watershed as described herein. 
Equipment Facility. An equipment facility is any structure used to contain ancillary equipment for a WCF, which includes cabinets, shelters, a buildout of an existing structure, pedestals, and other similar structures. 
Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan. A plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land-disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
Existing Construction. Any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which establishes the area of special flood hazard. 
Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which established the area of special flood hazard. 
Expansion to an Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. The preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Exterior Architectural Features. The architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building or other structure, including but not limited to the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the foregoing. 
Exterior Environmental Features. All those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historical character of the property. 
FAA. The Federal Aviation Administration. 
FCC. The Federal Communication Commission. 
Family. Two or more persons occupying a single dwelling unit where all members are related by blood, marriage, adoption, or are in foster care. No single dwelling unit located in R-20, R-15, R-10, R-8 (single-family residential), O-I, and R-O-I zoning districts shall have more than two unrelated individuals residing therein, nor shall any "family" have, additionally, more than two unrelated individuals residing with such family. When the single dwelling unit is located in any residential zoning district other than R-20, R-15, R-10, R-8, O-I, and R-O-I districts, one of the following is permitted: 
(1)  Family related by blood, marriage, adoption, or foster care may have two additional unrelated individuals; or 
(2)  Unrelated individuals not exceeding four. 
In all cases, household employees employed on the premises may be housed on the premises without being counted as a separate family or unrelated individuals. The term "family" does not include any organization or institutional group. 
Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Flags. Official federal, state, local, or international governmental flags and/or logo flags of political, professional, religious, educational, or corporate organizations, and provided that such are displayed on private property or by public entities as authorized by the appropriate governing authority, flags shall not be regulated by this ordinance. 
Floating Zone or Floating Zone District. A zoning technique under which the zoning district is established in the text of UDO but it is not placed on the City of Carrollton Zoning Map. The City reserves the mapping decision until a developer makes an application to have the floating zone applied to his or her property. Each floating zone, once mapped, replaces the existing zoning district with separate density and site development standards. 
Flood or Flooding. A general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from the: 
(1)  Overflow of inland waters; or 
(2)  Unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM). An official map of a community, issued by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as zone A. 
Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM). An official map of a community, on which the Federal Emergency Management Agency has delineated both the areas of special flood hazard and the risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood Insurance Study. The official report provided by the Federal Emergency Management Agency. The report contains flood profiles, as well as the flood boundary floodway map and the water surface elevation of the base flood. 
Floodplain. That area subject to periodic flooding up to the contour elevation of the 100-year recurrence interval storm event. 
Floodway. The channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than one foot. 
Floor. The top surface of an enclosed area in a building (including basement), i.e., top of slab in concrete construction or top of wood flooring in wood frame construction. The term does not include the floor of a garage used solely for parking vehicles. 
Floor area. The floor area of a dwelling is the gross horizontal area (as measured by exterior walls) of the several floors of a residential structure, exclusive of garage, carport, unfinished basement, unfinished attic and open porches. 
Food Truck. A licensed, motorized vehicle or mobile food unit that is temporarily stored on a premises where food items are sold to the general public. 
Food Truck Court. A designated area where three or more food trucks are located. The food truck court may either be the primary use of a lot or part of a larger existing development. 
Fraternity/Sorority. An organization of college students joined together by common interests for fellowship. 
Frontage. The length of the front lot line. 
Functionally dependent facility. A facility which cannot be used for its intended purpose unless it is located or carried out in close proximity to water, such as a docking or port facility necessary for the loading and unloading of cargo or passengers, shipbuilding, ship repair, or seafood processing facilities. The term does not include long-term storage, manufacture, sales, or service facilities. 
Garage. An accessory building or portion of a principal building used primarily for vehicle storage. 
Generalized Wetlands Map. The current U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory maps for the City. 
Governing Authority. The Mayor and Council of the City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Green Space. An open area that may be cultivated or maintained in a natural state for conservation, preservation, recreation, landscaping or a park and is not occupied by any structures or impervious surfaces other than trails, rest rooms, picnic structures, and other accessories. 
Ground Elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Guest House Facility. Living quarters situated within an attached or detached accessory building located on the same premises as the principal building; such quarters shall be used only by bona fide nonpaying guests or relatives of the owners or occupants of the principal building and shall not be rented or otherwise occupied as a separate dwelling. In certain zoning districts, a guest house may be permitted as the principal building on a zoning lot, but on the same conditions as state[d] above. 
Hazardous Waste. Any solid waste that by reason of its toxic, caustic, corrosive, abrasive, or otherwise injurious properties, may be detrimental to the health of any person handling or otherwise coming into contact with such material and has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency (Note: this is the same definition as used in the Georgia Hazardous Waste Management Act.). 
Height, Buildings. The vertical distance measured from the mean finished ground level at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof or parapet. 
Height, Towers. The distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the tower or other structure, even if said highest point is an antenna. 
Highest Adjacent Grade. The highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, next to the proposed walls of a building. 
Historic District. A geographically definable area designated by the Mayor and City Council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in Section 3.05.08 of this UDO. 
Historic Structure or Property. Any structure or property that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the department of interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the national register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places in states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Home Occupation. Any use conducted entirely within a dwelling by the residents thereof, which is secondary to the use of the dwelling for residential purposes. 
Hospital. Any institution providing primary health services and medical or surgical care to persons, primarily inpatients, suffering from illness, disease, injury, deformity, and other abnormal physical and mental conditions and including as an integral part of the institution related facilities, such as laboratories, outpatient facilities, training facilities, and staff residences. This does not include office facilities for the private practice of medicine or dentistry. 
Hotel. A building in which lodging or boarding and lodging is offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through an inside lobby or office supervised by a person in charge at all hours. As such, it is open to the public in contradistinction to a boardinghouse, a lodginghouse, or an apartment. 
Hotspot. An area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
Illegal Connection. Either of the following: (A) Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the City's separate storm sewer system including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any non-stormwater discharge including sewage, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the City's separate storm sewer system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or (B) Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the City's separate storm sewer system, which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
Illicit Discharge. Any direct or indirect non-stormwater discharge to the City's separate storm sewer system. 
Impervious [S]urface. A man-made structure or surface preventing the infiltration of stormwater into the ground below the structure or surface. Examples are buildings, roads, driveways, parking lots, decks, swimming pools, or patios. 
Inspection and Maintenance Agreement. A written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction or covenant on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
Junkyard. Property used for indoor or outdoor storage, keeping or abandonment, whether or not for sale or resale, of junk including scrap metal, rags, paper or other scrap materials, used lumber, salvaged house wrecking and structural steel materials and equipment; or for the dismantling, demolition or abandonment of automobiles or other vehicles or machinery or parts thereof. An automobile is considered abandoned when a current license tag is absent. 
Jurisdictional Wetland. An area that meets the definition requirements for wetlands as determined by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Kennel. An establishment in which dogs or other domesticated animals are housed, groomed, bred, boarded, trained, or sold, all for a fee or compensation. 
Land-Disturbing Activity. Any grading, scraping, excavating, filling of land; clearing of vegetation; and any construction, rebuilding or alteration of a structure. Land-disturbing activity shall not include activities such as ordinary maintenance and landscaping operations, individual home gardens, yard and grounds upkeep, repairs, additions or minor modifications to a single-family dwelling, the cutting of firewood for personal use or agricultural practices as described in Section 3.04.03, paragraph (5) of this UDO. 
Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Large Water Supply Watershed. A watershed containing 100 or more square miles of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Livestock. Domestic animals, including cows, sheep, goats, pigs, horses, poultry and the like, normally kept for use on a farm or raised for sale or profit. 
Loading Space. Off-street vehicle parking space reserved for bulk pickups and deliveries. 
Local Issuing Authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Long-[T]erm Care Facility. An institution or a part of an institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for 24 or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who are not related. A long-term care facility may be either a skilled nursing facility or an intermediate care facility for the aging or ill. 
Lot. A developed or undeveloped tract of land in one ownership, legally transferable as a single unit of land. 
Lot of record. A plot or tract of land appearing on a plat recorded in the public deed records in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Carroll County at the time of the enactment or amendment of this ordinance. 
Lot, through. A lot having frontage on two streets that are approximately parallel. 
Lot depth. The mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured generally perpendicular to the front lot line. 
Lot width. The horizontal distance between the side lines of a lot measured at the front building line. 
Manufactured Home. A factory-built, single-family home structure, transportable in one or more sections, which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. A manufactured home must meet the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards Act (42 U.S.C. § 5401 et seq.), commonly known as the HUD (U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development) Code. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Material Change in Appearance. A change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any buildings, structure, site, object, landscape feature or work of art within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change or location within a designated historic district of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features. 
Mean Sea Level. The average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of this article, the term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Miniwarehouse. See Self Service Storage. 
Mobile Home. See Manufactured Home. 
Mobile Home Lot. A parcel of land for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home. 
Mobile Home Park. A parcel of land that has been planned and improved for the placement of four or more mobile homes for permanent or semipermanent use. Pads within a mobile home park remain the property of the park owner and are rented to tenants. A mobile home park does not include the provision of space for storage, inspection or sale of unoccupied mobile homes. 
Mobile Home Subdivision. A tract of land planned and improved for the placement of four or more mobile homes for permanent use on individually owned private lots. 
Modular Home. A modular home is a factory fabricated transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site on a permanent foundation into a structure to be used for residential purposes. 
Motel. A building or group of buildings where lodging is provided for more than ten persons and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from all rooms are made through private entrances. No more than ten percent of the rooms or suites may contain kitchen or cooking facilities. 
Natural Areas. Areas in which human activities are limited and where the natural environment is protected from man-made changes. 
Natural Ground Surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation, or filling. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD). As corrected in 1929, a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
New Construction (floodplain management). Any structure for which the start of construction commenced after the effective date of the first floodplain management code, ordinance, or standard based upon specific technical base flood elevation data which establishes the area of special flood hazard. The term also includes any subsequent improvements to such structure. 
New Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision (floodplain management). A manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after the effective date of floodplain management regulations adopted by a community. 
Non-conforming Use. Any building or land lawfully occupied at the time of the adoption of this ordinance or the passage of amendments to this ordinance which does not conform, after the passage or amendment of this ordinance, with the use regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Non-structural Stormwater Management Practice or Non-Structural Practice. Any natural or planted vegetation or other non-structural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quantity and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
Nursery. A building or lot, or portion thereof, used for the commercial cultivation or growing of plants, and including all accessory buildings. 
Nursery school. See Day Care Facility. 
Nursing Home. See Long-Term Care Facility. 
Off-Site Facility. A stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of the site that it serves. 
On-Site Facility. A stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of the site that it serves. 
Open Space. Public or private permanently protected open areas that may be commonly accessible or only accessible to the owners or tenants of a development. 
Operator. The party or parties that have: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Overlay Zone. A special purpose zoning classification used to supplement, but not change the regulations of the current zoning districts (called the "underlying zone") in an effort to protect and promote public/private investment. 
Parking Space. An off-street parking space consists of space adequate for parking a vehicle with room for opening doors on both sides, maneuvering room and access to a public street. 
Perennial River. A river or section of a river that flows continuously throughout the year. 
Perennial Stream. A stream that flows throughout the whole year as indicated on United States Geological Survey (USGS) Quadrangle Map. 
Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this UDO. 
Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
Personal Care Home. A profit or nonprofit facility, home, or structure for the protective care of persons, both adult and adolescent, who need a watchful environment, but do not have an illness, injury, or disability which requires chronic or convalescent care, including medical and nursing services. Protective care and watchful oversight includes, but is not limited to, a daily awareness by management of the residents' whereabouts, the asking and reminding of residents of their appointments for medical checkups, the ability and readiness of management to intervene if a crisis arises for a resident, and supervision by management in areas of nutrition, medication, and actual provision of transient medical care, with a 24-hour responsibility for the well-being of residents of the facility. 
Planned Commercial/Office/Industrial Development. A contiguous area or subdivision of land, planned and maintained as a single entity and containing one or more structures to accommodate retail service, commercial, office, or industrial uses, or a combination of such uses, and appurtenant common areas and accessory uses incidental to the predominant uses (e.g., office park, shopping center, industrial park). 
Pollutant. Anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations, so that same may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any kind. 
Pollution. The contamination or other alteration of the physical, chemical or biological properties of air or water by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color turbidity, or odor, or the discharge of any liquid, gaseous, solid, radioactive, or other substance as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational ,or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
Pollution Susceptibility. The relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. Pollution susceptibility maps categorize the land areas of the state into areas having high, medium and low groundwater pollution potential. 
Port Facility. Any facility for the docking, loading and unloading of ships. 
Post-development. Refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
Pre-development. Refers to the time period, or the conditions that exist, on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the City. Where phased development or plan approval occurs (preliminary grading, roads and utilities, and so forth), the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-developed conditions. 
Preexisting Towers and Antenna Arrays. Any tower or antenna having a properly issued permit prior to the effective date of this ordinance. 
Principal Building. The building containing or to contain the principal use of a lot. 
Principal Use. The principal purpose for which a lot or the main building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
Private Deed Restrictions or Covenants. Private deed restrictions or covenants are imposed on land by private landowners. They bind and restrict the land in the hands of present owners and subsequent purchasers. They are enforced only by the landowners involved and not by the City or other public agency. 
Private Student Housing. A building either designed, constructed, altered or used for more than two adjoining student housing units, with each student housing unit having a party wall or party floor-ceiling connecting it to at least one other student housing unit in the building. 
Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Protected River. Any perennial river or watercourse with an average annual flow of at least 400 cubic feet per second as determined by appropriate U.S. Geological Survey documents. However, those segments of river covered by the Metropolitan River Protection Act or Coastal Marshlands Protection Act are specifically excluded from the definition of a protected river. In coastal areas, the seaward limit of any protected river shall be the inland limits of the jurisdiction of the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act. 
Public Officer. The City Manager, or his designee. 
Public Street. Any vehicular way, including improved or unimproved right-of-way, that: 
(1)  Is an existing state, county, or municipal roadway; 
(2)  Is shown upon a plat approved pursuant to law; 
(3)  Is approved by other official action; or 
(4)  Is shown on a plat duly filed and recorded. 
Public Utility or Utilities. See Utility. 
Qualified personnel. Any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Redevelopment. A land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff, or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
Recharge Area. Any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
Recreational Vehicle. A vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  Four hundred square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Regional Stormwater Management Facility or Regional Facility. Stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for onsite controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
Regulated Activity. Any activity which will, or which may reasonably be expected to, result in the discharge of dredged or fill material into waters of the U.S. excepting those activities exempted in Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act. 
Regulatory Floodplain. Any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one (1) percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan. 
Religious Facility. A structure or place in which worship, ceremonies, rituals, and education pertaining to particular system of beliefs are held. 
Reservoir Boundary. The edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
Restaurant. An establishment where food and drink are prepared, served, and consumed, mostly within the principal building. 
Retail Sales and Service. Establishments engaged in selling goods or merchandise to the general public for personal or household consumption and rendering services incidental to the sale of such goods. 
Retirement Home. See Long-Term Care Facility. 
River/Stream Bank. The rising ground, bordering a river or a stream, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
River Corridor. All the land inclusive of islands, not regulated under the Metropolitan River Protection (O.C.G.A. §[§] 12-5-440 through 12-5-457), or the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act (O.C.G.A. §[§] 12-5-280 through 12-5-293), in areas of a protected river and being within 100 feet horizontally on both sides of the river as measured from the river banks. 
Roadway Drainage Structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such materials that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice, or gravity. 
Self Service Storage. A building or group of buildings containing separate, individual, and private storage spaces of varying sizes available for lease or rent for varying periods of time. 
Senior Housing Community. One or more multifamily dwellings containing dwelling units specifically designed for and limited to residents aged 55 and older. 
Sensitive Natural Area. Any area, as defined now or hereafter by the Department of Natural Resources, which contains one or more of the following: 
(1)  Habitat, including nesting sites, occupied by rare or endangered species; 
(2)  Rare or exemplary natural communities; 
(3)  Significant landforms, hydroforms or geological features; or 
(4)  Other areas so designated by the Department of Natural Resources, which are sensitive or vulnerable to physical or biological alteration. 
Service Station. See Vehicle Repair Facility. 
Setback Line. A line that is the required minimum distance from any lot line and that establishes the area within which the principal structure may be erected or placed. 
Significant Recharge Area. Those areas mapped by the Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 19 (1998) edition. Mapping of recharge areas is based on outcrop area, lithology, soil type, thickness, slope, density or lithologic contacts, geologic structure, presence of karst, and potentiometric surfaces. Significant recharge areas are as follows in the various geologic provinces of the state. 
In the Piedmont and in the Blue Ridge, rocks have little primary porosity, with most groundwater being stored in the overlying soils. The significant recharge occurs in those with thicker soils. Field mapping indicates thick soils in the Piedmont and Blue Ridge are characterized by a density of two or more geologic contacts per four square miles (source: 1976 1:500,000 Geologic Map of Georgia) and slopes lower than eight percent. 
Sign. Any identification, description, display, illustration, or device illuminated or nonilluminated, which is visible to the general public and directs attention to a product, service, place, activity, person, institution, business, or solicitation, including any permanently installed or situated merchandise or any emblem, painting, banner, pennant, balloon, or placard designed to advertise, identify, or convey information. 
Sign Area. The rectangular area(s) enclosing the limits of writing, representation, emblem, or any figure or similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate such from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which such sign is placed; provided, however, that any open space contained within the outer limits of the display face of a sign, or between any component, panel, strip, or figure of any kind composing the display face, shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign, whether such open space be enclosed or not by a frame or border. For projecting or double-faced signs, only one (1) display face shall be measured in computing sign area when the sign faces are parallel, or where the interior angle formed by the faces is 60 degrees or less, provided that it is a common attached structure. If two faces of a double-faced sign are of unequal area, the area of the sign shall be taken as the area of the larger face. 
Sign, Canopy. A sign affixed to, superimposed upon, or painted on any roof-like structure, which is extended over a sidewalk or walkway or vehicle access area. A flush canopy sign is one that is mounted in such a manner that a continuous plane with the canopy is formed. A hanging canopy sign is one suspended from or beneath the canopy. Canopy signs shall be no less than eight (8) feet above the ground when erected over pedestrian walkways and fourteen (14) feet above areas of vehicle service access at the lowest extremity of the sign. Canopy signs shall be otherwise regulated as provided for all signs. 
Sign, Construction. A temporary sign located on the property where construction or development is taking place and which identifies the contractors, engineers, architects, and financial institutions associated with the project. 
Sign, Freestanding (Individual Non-Residential Lot or Parcel). A sign securely affixed to a substantial support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. 
Sign, Freestanding (Planned Commercial/Office/Industrial Development). A sign securely affixed to a substantial support structure which is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support that serves two or more establishments within a Planned Commercial/Office/ Industrial Development. 
Sign, Illuminated. A sign designed to give forth artificial light directly or through transparent material from a source of light within such sign, including, but not limited to exposed lamp signs or a sign illuminated by an external light directed primarily toward such a sign and so shielded that no direct rays from the light are visible elsewhere other than on the lot where said illumination occurs. 
Sign, Instructional. A sign (including thereon an advertising trademark, logo, or emblem identification) used to give direction or specific instruction to the public, such as (but not limited to) "enter," "exit," "no parking," "drive through," "restroom," and so forth. 
Sign, Mobile. A sign of temporary nature, which is attached to, mounted on, pasted on, painted or drawn on any vehicle whether motorized or drawn and which is placed, parked, or maintained at one particular location for the express purpose and intent of promoting or conveying an advertising message. 
Sign, Monument. A freestanding sign supported by an internal structural framework on a base or foundation, or a sign enclosed by other solid structure features other than support pole(s) or post(s) and where the base of the sign structure is on the ground or foundation. Monument sign base and structure shall be composed of brick, stone, or masonry backed stucco. 
Sign, Non-conforming. Any legally existing sign prior to the effective date of this ordinance, which fails to comply with the requirements of this ordinance. 
Sign, Outdoor Advertising. A sign that directs attention to a building, profession, product, service, business, activity, or entertainment not conducted, sold, or offered on the premises upon which the sign is located, except incidentally. The message carried by an outdoor advertising sign is ordinarily of no importance to the owner of the site and not subject to such owner's control. 
Sign, Prohibited. Any sign, other than a nonconforming sign, not conforming to this ordinance. 
Sign, Public Service. Any sign erected and maintained by public officials or agencies, or approved and authorized for use by state or local governmental authorities. Such signs shall be generally for traffic control or public information purposes and shall not be regulated by this ordinance. 
Sign, Real Estate. A temporary sign advertising the sale, rent, or lease of the property on which it is located. 
Sign, Roof. A sign erected upon and above a roof structure and wholly supported by the roof structure or a structure placed upon the roof. Roof signs are prohibited by this ordinance. 
Sign, Weekend Directional. An off-premises sign, which provides direction to property for sale, lease, or rent. Weekend directional signs may be erected from Friday at 3:00 PM until 11:59 PM on Sunday and direct traffic to a specific project. Weekend Directional Signs are not to be erected within the public right-of-way. 
Site Plan. The development plan for one or more lots on which is shown the existing and proposed conditions of the lot, including topography, vegetation, drainage, floodplains, wetlands, and waterways; landscaping and open spaces; walkways; means of ingress and egress; circulation; utility service; structures and buildings; signs and lighting; berms, buffers, and screening devices; surrounding development; and any other information that reasonably may be required in order that an informed decision can be made by the approving authority. 
Small Water Supply Watershed. A watershed containing less than 100 square miles or more of land within the drainage basin upstream of a governmentally owned public drinking water supply intake. 
Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan.An erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Start of Construction. For other than new construction or substantial improvements under the Coastal Barrier Resources Act (P.L. 97-348), includes substantial improvement, and means the date the building permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a building (including a manufactured home) on a site, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation or the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include the excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of accessory buildings, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or not part of the main building. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
State General Permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State Waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Stormwater Better Site Design Practices. Non-structural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for non-structural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious cover and using natural features for stormwater management. 
Stormwater Management Measure. Any stormwater management facility or structural or non-structural stormwater practice. 
Stream Buffer. A natural or enhanced vegetated area lying adjacent to a stream. 
Stream Protection Area or Protection Area. With respect to a stream, the combined areas of all required buffers and setbacks applicable to such stream. 
Street. A vehicular way for vehicular traffic which affords the principal means of access to abutting property. Streets are classified as "minor," "collector" and "major" and designated as such on the zoning map. 
Structural Erosion and Sedimentation Control Practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Structural Stormwater Control. A structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of such runoff. 
Structure. Anything constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground, with the exception of fences and walls. 
Student Housing Unit. One or more rooms, including kitchen and toilet facilities-But not to exceed four bedrooms-Designed for the occupancy, cooking and sleeping of one or more unrelated individuals enrolled in a program of study at an educational institution, college or university, trade school, training facility or similar entity. 
Subdivision. A tract of land which has been divided into two or more lots, all fronting on a public street, and offered for sale as individual lots. 
Substantial Damage. Damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial Improvement. Any combination of repairs, reconstruction, alteration, or improvements to a building, taking place during the life of a building, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the building. The market value of the building should be: 
(1)  The appraised value of the building prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement; or 
(2)  In case of damage, the value of the building prior to the damage occurring. 
This term includes structures which have incurred substantial damage, regardless of the actual repair work performed. For the purposes of this definition, substantial improvement is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include any project for improvement of a building required to comply with the existing health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which have been identified by the code enforcement official and which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions. 
Substantially Improved Existing Manufactured Home Parks or Subdivisions. Where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Support Structure (towers). Any structure designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antenna arrays, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy tower, or monopole towers. The term shall include radio and television transmission tower, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structures, and the like. 
Temporary Wireless Communication Facility (Temporary WCF). Temporary wireless communication facility shall mean a WCF to be placed in use for 90 or fewer days. 
Townhouse. A townhouse is a multi-living unit structure in which each living unit and lot is owned in fee simple and generally occupied by the owner. Individual dwelling units within a townhouse are separated by a fire wall. 
Trailer. A vehicle, designed and/or maintained for use as a temporary dwelling or sleeping place, for travel or recreational purposes, having no foundation other than wheels or jacks. 
Trailer Park. A parcel of land which is used solely for the rental or lease of lots for transient campers, trailers, motor homes or temporary parking of any other recreational vehicle. 
Trout Streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state Department of Natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown, or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Underlying Zone. The designated zoning districts which are established on the official zoning map. Regulations of these zoning districts may be supplemented when an "overlay zone" is applied to these zoning districts. 
Utility. Public, private water or sewer piping systems, water or sewer pumping stations, electric power lines, fuel pipelines, telephone lines, roads, driveways, bridges, river/lake access facilities, stormwater systems and railroads or other utilities identified by a local government. 
Variance. A relaxation of the terms of the Unified Development Ordinance where such variance will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property, and not as a result of the actions of the applicant, a literal enforcement of this ordinance would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging, or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
Vehicle Repair Facility. A building or premises where products necessary for automobile service or maintenance are sold and/or where such maintenance services are rendered. 
Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Watershed. The land area that drains into a particular stream. 
Water Supply Reservoir. A governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
Wetlands. Those areas inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and similar areas. The ecological parameters for designating wetlands include hydric soils, hydrological vegetation and hydrological conditions involving a temporary or permanent source of water to cause soil saturation. 
Wireless Communications. Wireless communications shall mean any personal wireless services as defined in the Telecommunications Act of 1996, which includes FCC-licensed commercial wireless telecommunications services, including cellular, digital communications services (DCS), personal communication services (PCS), specialized mobile radio (SMR), enhanced specialized mobile radio (EMSR), paging and similar services that currently exist or that may in the future be developed. 
Wireless Communications Facility (WCF). A WCF is any unstaffed facility for the transmission and/or reception of wireless telecommunications services, usually consisting of an antenna array, connection cables, and equipment facility, and a support structure to achieve the necessary elevation. 
Yard. An open space on a lot situated between the principal building or use on the lot and a lot line and unoccupied by any structure except as otherwise provided herein. Yard areas do not include required buffer zones. 
Yard, Front. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, extending the full width of the lot and located between the nearest street right-of-way line and the front line of the building projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, Rear. An open space on the same lot with a principal building or use, unoccupied except by an accessory building or use, extending the width of the lot and located between the rear line of the lot and [the] rear line of the building or use projected to the side lines of the lot. 
Yard, Side. An open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building or use, located between the building or use and the side line of the lot and extending from the rear line of the front yard to the front line of the rear yard. 
Zoning District. An area established in the zoning ordinance, and delineated on the zoning map, in which certain uses are permitted, and in which other uses are prohibited. 
Zoning Lot. A tract of land, or a portion of a tract, all of which lies within one zoning district, and which may be developed or used for purposes consistent with those permitted in that district, and which may be developed or used for purposes consistent with those permitted in that district. A zoning lot may or may not coincide with platted lot line. 
(Res. No. 08-2011, 8-1-11; Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17; Res. No. 16-2018, 11-5-18; Res. No. 06-2019, 2-4-19) 
ARTICLE 2 - ZONING DISTRICTS AND USES 
2.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The use of buildings, structures, and land in accordance with the City of Carrollton Comprehensive Plan shall comply with the use requirements for zoning districts set forth in this Article 2. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which it is located. 
2.01.00 - ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF ZONING DISTRICTS 

2.01.01 - City of Carrollton Zoning Map 
A.  Zoning districts for the City of Carrollton are hereby established as shown on the "City of Carrollton Zoning Map." 
B.  The City of Carrollton Zoning Map shall be identified by the signature of the Mayor, attested by the City Clerk, and shall include the date of adoption. 
C.  The City of Carrollton Zoning Map may be amended according to the procedures set forth in Article 10 of the UDO. 
2.01.02 - Residential Zoning Districts 
The following residential zoning districts are established: 
A.  ER-3, Estate Residential (3 acres). This district is intended to encourage one-family dwellings situated on large lots having an area of three (3) acres or more with provisions for on-site sewage disposal. 
B.  ER-1, Estate Residential (1 acre). This district is intended to encourage one-family dwellings situated on large lots having an area of one (1) acre or more with provisions for on-site sewage disposal. 
C.  R-20, Single-Family Residential (20,000 square feet). This district is intended to provide for single-family residential dwellings on individual lots at a moderate density of development. 
D.  R-15, Single-Family Residential (15,000 square feet). This district is intended to provide for single-family residential dwellings on individual lots at a moderate density of development. 
E.  R-10, Single-Family Residential (10,000 square feet). This district is intended to provide for single-family residential dwellings on smaller individual lots at a moderate density of development. 
F.  R-8, Single-Family Residential (8,000 square feet). This district is intended to provide for single-family residential dwellings on smaller individual lots at a moderate density of development. 
G.  R-T, Residential Townhouse (Maximum 6 units per acre). This district is intended to take advantage of the greater economy and convenience afforded by more intensive development but while retaining some of the open aspects of a semi-detached dwelling unit district. 
H.  R-M, Residential Multifamily (Maximum 6 units per acre, unless a special use permit is obtained allowing a greater density). This district is intended to provide an area for moderate-density residential development. The regulations for this district are designed to provide areas for apartment complexes and other moderate-density residential development. 
I.  R-M-10, Residential Multifamily (Maximum 10 units per acre). This district is intended to provide an area for moderate- to high-density residential development. The regulations for this district are designed to provide areas for apartment complexes and other moderate- to high-density residential development. 
J.  R-M-15, Residential Multifamily (Maximum 15 units per acre). This district is intended to provide an area for high-density residential development. The regulations for this district are designed to provide areas for apartment complexes and other high-density residential development. 
K.  M-H-P, Mobile Home Park (Maximum 10 units per acre). This district includes areas where mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions may be appropriate. 
(Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14; Res. No. 21-2016, 11-7-16; Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17; Res. No. 06-2019, 2-4-19) 
2.01.03 - Commercial, Office, and Institutional Zoning Districts 
The following commercial, office, and institutional zoning districts are established: 
A.  R-O-I, Residential Office Institutional. This district is intended to provide for limited business and professional offices while providing for the protection of adjacent residential areas by maintaining compatible architectural styles. 
B.  O-I, Office Institutional. This district is intended to allow development of business and professional activities, medical and dental facilities, and the development and maintenance of publicly owned lands and structures, parks and recreation areas, public schools, and buildings used principally for government functions. Limited retail uses normally associated with office or institutional uses, accessory structures, and essential public services are also permissible. 
C.  C-1, Central Business. The central business district is intended for those commercial uses which require a central location and provide goods and services that are used by the entire community and surrounding area. This district is concentrated in the immediate vicinity of Downtown Carrollton. 
D.  C-2, General Commercial. This district is intended to provide locations for a wide variety of retail and service uses to satisfy the common and frequent needs of residents in large sections of the City and of the traveling public. It is the intent of this district to encourage businesses to be part of planned commercial centers, neighborhood shopping centers, or community shopping centers. 
E.  C-3, Neighborhood Commercial. This district is intended to provide for permitted, but limited, commercial activities, provide for related services to business and professional offices and provide for the protection of adjacent residential areas by maintaining compatible architectural styles. 
2.01.04 - Industrial Zoning Districts 
The following industrial zoning districts are established: 
A.  M-1, Light Industry. This district provides for light industrial uses which do not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, or dust and do not produce, store, or handle hazardous wastes. Permissible uses include activities involved in warehousing, assembly, storage, and commercial services. 
B.  M-2, Heavy Industry. This district provides for the manufacturing, assembling, storage, distribution, and sales activities that are generally high intensity. For those industries which may have negative impacts or nuisance factors associated with their use, supplemental standards shall apply within the district. 
2.01.05 - Planned Development (PD) District 
The Planned Development (PD) district is intended for the development of a combination of residential, office, and limited commercial uses. This district is established to encourage creative and resourceful projects that include compatible, interrelated uses and related public facilities unified by a development plan. 
2.02.00 - ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

2.02.01 - Generally 
The purpose of overlay districts is to provide a means of modifying the site design requirements that are otherwise applicable to the underlying zoning district(s). Such design requirements are set forth in Article 4 of this UDO. When the site design standards for a base zoning district, standards for an overlay district, or supplemental standards are in conflict, the standards for the overlay district control. 
(Res. No. 05-2018, 3-5-18) 
2.02.02 - Flood Hazard Overlay (FHO) 
The Flood Hazard Overlay (FHO) includes land that is subject to periodic flooding. The district is an overlay to other zoning districts, imposing additional restrictions to those established by the underlying zoning classification. The regulations for this district are designed to prevent flood damage to persons and property, preserve drainage courses that will be adequate to carry stormwater runoff from existing and future land development, permit uses that are appropriate on floodplains in order to effectively use this land, and prohibit land uses that obstruct the flow of floodwater. Regulations regarding property located within the flood hazard overlay are located in Article 3 of this UDO. 
2.02.03 - Historic District Overlay 
A Historic District is a geographically definable area identified by the Mayor and Council as contributing to the cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City of Carrollton whose protection is essential to the promotion of health, prosperity and general welfare of the City. The Historic District includes specific design requirements and development approval procedures. Regulations regarding property located within the historic district overlay are located in Article 3 of this UDO. 
2.02.04 - Multifamily Redevelopment Overlay 
A.  Purpose. The Multifamily Redevelopment Overlay (MRO) is a geographically definable area identified by the Mayor and Council for the purpose of encouraging the redevelopment of existing, older multifamily housing projects in the City of Carrollton. The regulations of the MRO are designed to allow greater density and more flexible bulk and dimensional standards for the redevelopment of existing multifamily housing projects than is permitted for new multifamily development as an incentive for owners and developers to redevelop existing multifamily housing. 
B.  "Redevelopment" defined. For purposes of this Section, the term "redevelopment" shall mean the reuse of existing developed property, which includes the demolition and replacement of all or portions of any existing building on the site constituting seventy-five percent (75%) or more of the tax assessed value of the property, and which may incorporate the new construction of additional buildings on the same site. Such reuse, if necessary, may include changes to the access, parking, landscaping and any other features of the site in order to accommodate the reuse of the property. No property or project shall qualify for the supplemental standards set forth in Section 2.02.04(E) below unless it meets this definition of redevelopment. 
C.  Map Designation. The MRO District shall be in the form of an overlay zone and shall be established only in conjunction with one or more existing multifamily projects. When the MRO District designation is added to such property, the provisions of this Section shall apply in addition to the regulations established by this UDO for the underlying zoning district. Wherever there is conflict or inconsistency between the provisions of this Section and the underlying zoning district, the provisions of this Section shall control. Any parcel designated with this MRO District shall be designated on the City of Carrollton Zoning Map with the symbol "MRO" together with the underlying zoning designation (e.g., R-M/MRO). 
D.  Establishment. Application for the establishment of a MRO District shall be submitted to and considered by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with Section 10.02.02 of this UDO. 
E.  Standards for MRO District. Supplemental standards for the redevelopment of an existing multifamily project in the MRO District are shown in the following table: 
Development Feature Standard Maximum Residential Units per Acre 125% of the density of an existing multifamily project, as calculated on a units per acre basis Maximum Percent of Lot Covered 45% Maximum Height 75 feet  
(Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17) 
2.02.05 - Lake Carroll Village Overlay 
The Lake Carroll Village Overlay is the area specifically identified as such by the Mayor and Council on the City of Carrollton Zoning Map, which area generally comprises the properties located along Georgia Highways 61/166 from the east (commonly referred to as Bankhead Highway) and beginning at the intersection of Bankhead Highway and Cedar Street and ending at the intersection of Bankhead Highway and the Georgia Highway 166 Bypass/Northside Drive. The purpose of the Lake Carroll Village Overlay is to provide for architectural and site design standards within the corridor in order to foster and promote the development, redevelopment, and beautification of the corridor. The specific design standards for the Lake Carroll Village Overlay are set forth in Section 4.02.05 of this UDO. 
(Res. No. 05-2018, 3-5-18) 
2.02.06 - Maple Street Overlay 
The Maple Street Overlay is the area specifically identified as such by the Mayor and Council on the City of Carrollton Zoning Map, which area generally comprises the properties located along Maple Street beginning at the intersection of Maple Street and the Georgia Highway 166 Bypass and ending at the intersection of Maple Street and U.S. Highway 27. The purpose of the Maple Street Overlay is to provide for architectural and site design standards within the corridor in order to foster and promote the development, redevelopment, and beautification of the corridor. The specific design standards for the Maple Street Overlay are set forth in Section 4.02.06 of this UDO. 
(Res. No. 09-2018, 6-4-18) 
2.02A.00 - ESTABLISHMENT AND PURPOSE OF FLOATING ZONE DISTRICTS 

2.02A.01 - Generally 
    The purpose of a floating zone is to provide a means to replace a zoning district with another zoning district whose density and site design standards are intended to implement a specific zoning policy in the City of Carrollton. The floating zone is defined in the text of the UDO but is not shown on the Zoning Map unless and until an application to have the floating zone applied to a property is approved by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with this Section. 
(Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17) 
2.02A.02 - Senior Housing Floating Zone District 
A.  Intent. The Senior Housing Floating Zone (SHFZ) District is a floating zone district, unmapped at initial adoption, that is intended to facilitate construction of senior housing communities that will serve the current and long-term City needs for affordable senior citizen-oriented housing units while maintaining a high degree of quality in project design and construction. 
B.  Map Designation. The SHFZ District shall be in the form of a floating zone and shall be established on properties located only in one or more of the following zoning districts: R-20, R-15, R-10, R-T, R-M, R-M-10, R-M-15, R-O-I, O-I, and C-3. When the SHFZ District designation is approved and mapped, the properties located within the boundaries of the SHFZ District shall be subject to the provisions of this Section. 
C.  Establishment. Application for the establishment of a SHFZ District shall be submitted to and considered by the Mayor and City Council in accordance with Section 10.02.02 of this UDO, and the following criteria for establishment of a SHFZ District shall apply in addition to the rezoning criteria of Section 10.02.02.H: 
1.  Minimum parcel size: three (3) acres. 
2.  Suitability of the site in relation to safety of vehicular access, availability of public transportation, pedestrian access to off-site locations for retail services, medical care, or recreation; 
3.  Compatibility with the neighborhood in which the SHFZ District is proposed, potential for separation from nearby uses, and environmental factors; 
4.  The site will be served by both public water and public sanitary sewer facilities, which shall be adequate to accommodate the additional demand placed upon them by the proposed senior housing community; 
5.  The site is reasonably free of objectionable conditions, such as high traffic volumes, incompatible land uses, odors, noise, dust, air pollution, and other environmental constraints; 
6.  The site is located within reasonable proximity to public transportation service, or, in the alternative, shuttle bus or other transportation service shall be available to the site; and 
7.  The proposed senior housing community will include appropriate amenities, such as recreational facilities, game rooms, meeting rooms, lounges, and exercise rooms. 
D.  Limitations on occupancy. 
1.  The occupancy of senior housing communities shall be limited to: 
a.  Individuals age 55 or older; or 
b.  A household in which at least one member residing or proposing to reside in a dwelling unit has attained the age of 55 years or more on the date that such household initially occupies the dwelling unit. Such household may include an unrelated caregiver under the age of 55 if it is established that the presence of such a person is essential for the physical care of an active adult. 
2.  Persons under the age of 18 shall not be permitted to be permanent residents of senior housing communities. For the purposes of this section, a "permanent resident" shall mean any person who resides within the dwelling for more than three consecutive weeks, or has listed the residence as a dwelling for any purpose whatsoever, including, but not limited to, enrollment in public or private schools. 
3.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, each senior housing community may set aside one dwelling unit to be occupied by a superintendent or building manager, to which the limitations on occupancy set forth above shall not apply. 
E.  Design Standards for Lots. Within the SHFZ District, the general Design Standards for Lots set forth in Section 4.01.01(A)-(G) of this UDO shall apply. The specific standards for lot area, width, and density, and coverage within the SHFZ District are set forth in Table 2.02A.02(E). 
Table 2.02A.02(E). Standards for Lot Area, Width, Density and Lot Coverage within the SHFZ District. 
District Minimum Lot Area (square feet) Maximum Residential Units per Acre Minimum Lot Width (feet) Maximum Percent of Lot Covered SHFZ - 10.00 60 35  
F.  Dimensional Standards for Building Height and Location (Setbacks). Within the SHFZ District, the general Dimensional Standards for Building Height and Location (Setbacks) set forth in Section 4.01.02(A)-(D) of this UDO shall apply. The specific standards for building setback and height standards within the SHFZ District are provided in Table 2.02A.02(F). 
Table 2.02A.02(F). Standards for Building Location and Height within the SHFZ District. 
Minimum Right-of-Way Setback Minimum Setbacks from Property Lines District Major Street (feet) Collector Street (feet) All Other Streets (feet) Side Yard (feet) Rear Yard (feet) Maximum Height (feet) SHFZ 40 40 40 20 15 75  
G.  Standards for Senior Housing Communities. Except as otherwise provided herein, senior housing communities shall be subject to the site design standards set forth in Section 4.02.03(A)-(D) of this UDO. 
(Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17) 
2.03.00 - LAND USES PERMITTED IN EACH ZONING DISTRICT 

2.03.01 - Generally 
Table 2.03.03 describes those uses that are permissible in each base zoning district. Buildings, structures, or land shall be occupied or used only in conformity with all of the regulations set forth herein for the district in which they are located. The zoning districts for the City of Carrollton are shown on the "City of Carrollton Zoning Map." 
2.03.02 - How to Read the Table of Uses 
A.  Within the following table the letter "P" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district. 
B.  The letter "S" indicates that the land use is permissible, subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district, and the supplemental standards specified for the use. Supplemental standards are contained in Section 2.04.00. 
C.  A blank cell indicates the land use is prohibited. 
D.  Any land use that is not identified in Table 2.03.03 is prohibited unless it is found to be substantially similar to another use identified in the Table of Uses by the City Manager. 
1.  A requested use shall be considered substantially similar when the characteristics of the requested use are equivalent in type, intensity, degree, or impact when compared to a use named in Table 2.03.03. Such characteristics include, but are not limited to: 
a.  Typical hours of operation; 
b.  Use of outdoor storage; 
c.  Trip generation rates; 
d.  Generation of noise, light pollution, odor, smoke, electromagnetic interference, or vibration; and 
e.  Customary functions of the use. 
2.  The administrative interpretation shall be subject to appeal, as set forth in Article 10. 
E.  The letters "SU" indicate that the land use is permissible subject to compliance with the standards of the zoning district and after obtaining a Special Use Permit. Special Use Standards and procedural requirements to obtain a Special Use Permit are contained and referenced within Section 2.04.24. 
(Res. No. 11-2008, § 5, 5-5-08) 
2.03.03 - Table of Land Uses 
  
Zoning Districts: 
P - Permissible 
S - Permissible 
 Subject to 
 Supplemental 
 Standards 
SU - Special Use 
Blank - Prohibited ER-1, ER-3 R-20 R-15 R-10 R-8 M-H-P R-T R-M R-M-10 R-M-15 R-O-I O-I C-1 C-2 C-3 M-1 M-2 PD 
(Section 4.06.00) Land Uses: SEE PD STANDARDS Residential Uses Agriculture S Single Family Dwellings P P P P P P P P P P P Accessory Dwellings S SU SU Dwellings above businesses S P S 2 Duplexes P P SU SU Townhouses S S SU SU Personal Care Homes  Family: 2-6 individuals S P P P S P SU SU  Group: 7-15 individuals P P P P SU SU Multifamily dwellings P P P SU SU Mobile Home Park S Manufactured Home P SEE PD STANDARDS Modular Home P P Private Student Housing S S S Commercial Uses Bed and Breakfasts S S S S S S S S Boarding Houses P P P Hotels/Motels P P P Retail Sales and Service P P S Convenience Store w/ Gas P P P Theaters S P S Restaurants P P P Professional Office S P P P P P P Vehicle Repair P P P Auto and RV sales P/SU 1 Coin Laundry/Dry Cleaning Drop-Off P P P P P Dry Cleaning On Site P P Commercial outdoor recreation P P SEE PD STANDARDS Indoor recreation P P P P Research facilities P P P P P P Broadcasting or production studios P P Food Trucks P P Food Truck Courts SU SU SU SU P P Industrial Uses Adult Entertainment 
Establishments S S Printing/Publishing P P Bakeries S S S P P Bottling plants/Food Processing P P Feed lots or Slaughterhouses S Light Manufacturing SU/S SU/S SU/S P P Heavy Manufacturing P 24-Hour Distribution Center P Outdoor Storage S S SEE PD STANDARDS Wholesale Storage, Sales, and Distribution P P Self-Service Storage S S P Auto Wrecking S S Kennels, outdoor S S S Veterinary Clinics P P P Acid manufacture; hydrochloric, nitric, picric, sulfuric and like acids Asphalt manufacture or refining; or asphalt plant SU Automobile salvage yard or parts yard SU Chemical and pharmaceutical products manufacture or storage in bulk SU Distillation of bones, coal, petroleum, animal refuse, grain, tar and wood SEE PD STANDARDS Explosives, including but not limited to fireworks, manufacture or storage in bulk SU Fertilizer manufacture SU Glue or gelatin manufacture SU Incinerators, commercial, including but not limited to those handling garbage and medical waste SU Junk yard, salvage yard SU Landfills, including but not limited to sanitary landfills, waste transfer stations and collection operations, recycling centers involving scrap metal and/or other types of construction debris SU SEE PD STANDARDS Paint, oil, shellac, turpentine or varnish manufacture Paper and pulp mills SU Petroleum or its related products manufacture, storage in bulk or wholesaling; refining SU Refining or manufacture of tallow, grease or lard from or of animal fat SU SEE PD STANDARDS Rendering plants SU Rock or gravel distribution, storage or excavation SU Stock yards for animals or other uses; livestock sales pavilions SU Institutional Uses Day Care  Center: 19 or more children S S P P  Home: 7-18 children S S S P P P  Family: 6 or less children S S S S S S S S Parks and Open Space P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P P SEE PD STANDARDS Religious Uses and Facilities S S S S P P P P P P P P P Schools S S S S P P P P S P P P P Colleges P P P P P Hospitals P P P Long Term Care Facilities P P P P P P Cemeteries S S S S S S S S S S S S S Mortuaries P P P Semi-Public Halls, Clubs, and Lodges P P P P  
1 Auto and RV sales are a permitted use by right in the C-2 zoning district, but not in the Lake Carroll Village Overlay. In the Lake Carroll Village Overlay, auto and RV sales require a special use permit from the Mayor and City Council pursuant to Section 2.04.24(B). 
2 For certain properties zoned C-3 that are located within the Maple Street Overlay, dwellings are permitted on the first floor of a multi-use building. See Section 4.02.06.(A)(2)(e). 
(Res. No. 11-2008, § 5, 5-5-08; Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14; Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17; Res. No. 05-2018, 3-5-18; Res. No. 09-2018, 6-4-18; Res. No. 12-2018, 7-26-18; Res. No. 16-2018, 11-5-18; Res. No. 06-2019, 2-4-19; Res. No. 07-2019, 2-4-19) 
2.04.00 - SUPPLEMENTAL STANDARDS FOR SPECIFIC USES 

2.04.01 - Generally 
Specific uses permissible in each zoning district are identified in Table 2.03.03. Uses permissible subject to supplemental standards are identified by the letter "S." These uses are permissible only in compliance with the standards applicable to the zoning district and any applicable overlay district, as set forth in this section. 
2.04.02 - Agricultural Uses 
A.  Agricultural and farm operations are permissible in the ER-1 and ER-3 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning districts and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Supplemental standards for agricultural and farm operations are shown in the following table: 
Table 2.04.02(A). Standards for Agricultural and Farm Operations. 
Development Feature Standard Animals allowed Domestic animals, farm animals, and livestock; wild animals are prohibited. Minimum land area 3 acres Buildings, structures, stables, livestock barns or pens, plant nurseries, greenhouses, outdoor tracks, and exercise yards Minimum setback of 100 feet Odor and pests Management plan for odor and pest control. Fences The parcel shall be fenced.  
C.  The above notwithstanding, persons may have, control, or possess up to six (6) female chickens (i.e., hens) on properties zoned E-R, R-20, R-15, or R-10. No male chickens (i.e., roosters) are permitted. Any such hens must be enclosed in a pen, coop, or other such structure, and any such pen, coop, or other such structure shall be located at least twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest property line. The hens may not be butchered on the property, and any persons having control or possession of the hens must at all times adhere to Chapter 14 ("Animals"), Article III ("Animal Control") and Chapter 50 ("Environment"), Article II ("Nuisances") of the Code of Ordinances, City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 07-2011, 8-1-11; Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14) 
2.04.03 - Feed Lots, Agricultural Processing and Slaughterhouses 
A.  Feed lots, agricultural processing and slaughterhouses are permissible in the M-2 zoning district, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Supplemental standards for feed lots, agricultural processing, and slaughterhouses are shown in the following table: 
Table 2.04.03(A). Standards for Feed Lots, Agricultural Processing, and Slaughterhouses. 
Development Feature Standard Minimum land area 3 acres Minimum setback measured from any property used as or zoned for residential uses Minimum setback 1,000 feet Fences The parcel shall be fenced. Odor and pests Management plan for odor and pest control. Must be contained on the property.  
2.04.04 - Accessory Dwellings 
A.  Accessory dwellings are permissible in the ER-1 and ER-3 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning districts and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
1.  Permitted as an accessory use to a single family residence. 
2.  The living quarters may be situated within an attached or detached structure located on the same tract as the principal residence. 
3.  Dwelling shall be used only by bona fide nonpaying guests or relatives of the owners or occupants of the principal building and shall not be rented, leased, or otherwise occupied as an independent dwelling. 
(Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14) 
2.04.05 - Dwellings in the C-1 and C-3 Zoning Districts 
A.  Dwellings are permissible in the C-1 and C-3 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Design standards for dwellings in the C-1 and C-3 zoning districts. 
1.  A dedicated entrance, separate from the entrance to the principal use, shall be provided for access to the residential units. 
2.  A minimum of one (1) parking space shall be provided for each residential unit. 
(Ord. No. 03-2014, 3-28-14) 
2.04.06 - Personal Care Homes 
A.  Group personal care homes (providing living facilities for between 7 and 15 residents) are permissible in the following zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section: R-M and O-I. 
B.  Family personal care homes (providing living facilities for between 2 and 6 residents) are permissible in the following zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section: R-T, R-M, R-O-I and O-I. 
C.  The following site design standards are required for group personal care homes and family personal care homes: 
Table 2.04.06(C). Standards for Group Personal Care Homes and Family Personal Care Homes. 
Development Feature Standard Site location Collector or arterial Minimum setbacks: 
Side and rear yards 50 feet Fence The lot shall be fenced according to the standards in Section 5.02.03 1 Signs Prohibited in all Residential Zoning Districts Parking 2 spaces are required and may be located in the driveway or garage or in the rear yard; additional spaces shall be located in the rear yard only and shall be screened from view from adjacent properties.  
1 The City Manager may administratively waive the fence requirement. 
(Res. No. 07-2019, 2-4-19) 
2.04.07 - Mobile Home Parks 
A.  Mobile home parks and mobile home subdivisions are permissible in the M-H-P zoning district, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Permitted uses within an approved mobile home park or mobile home subdivision. 
1.  Mobile homes and modular homes. Within sixty (60) days of the siting of the mobile home on its lot, the undercarriage of the mobile home shall be concealed from view through the use of permanent, nonflammable construction materials. 
2.  One (1) convenience food store with a maximum of 1,500 square feet, including storage, as an accessory use to the mobile home park or subdivision. 
3.  One (1) launderette for use of the residents of the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision only. 
4.  Offices and/or maintenance and storage buildings, incidental to use by residents of the mobile home park or mobile home subdivision only. 
5.  Trailer parks for the temporary rental or lease of lots for transient campers, trailers, motor homes or recreational vehicles. 
C.  Mobile home parks and subdivisions design standards. 
1.  The minimum parcel size shall be ten (10) acres. 
2.  Within a mobile home park, the minimum area required for each space is 6,050 square feet. 
3.  Within a mobile home subdivision, the minimum required lot size is 8,000 square feet 
4.  The minimum width of the mobile home space or lot is forty-four (44) feet. 
5.  The maximum density is ten (10) units per acre. 
6.  Each mobile home lot or space shall be directly accessible from an approved internal paved park driveway not less than twenty-four (24) feet in width. 
7.  No direct access to mobile home lots or spaces from public streets shall be permitted. 
8.  No mobile home structure shall be located within 15 feet of any street or drive within the mobile home park or subdivision. 
9.  Mobile homes shall be separated from each other by not less than twenty (20) feet end to end and twenty-five (25) feet side to side. 
10.  No portion of any mobile home shall be within fifty (50) feet of the park or subdivision boundary. 
11.  Each mobile home space or lot shall include a paved concrete or all-weather patio area having a minimum area of 300 square feet. 
12.  Each mobile home space or lot shall have at least two (2) paved off-street parking spaces, measuring a minimum of 400 square feet total. 
13.  Each mobile home park or subdivision shall include an area for the storage of boats, travel trailers and/or other vehicles. 
14.  All utilities shall be installed underground. 
15.  Streets, pedestrian walkways and parking areas shall be adequately lighted. 
16.  Within the development, landscaped common areas for parks and recreation shall be required for and dedicated for the use of residents of the development. 
a.  These common areas shall be landscaped by the developer and maintained by the owner. 
b.  Streets, parking areas, required yards and required buffer zones shall not be counted as part of the minimum common area. 
c.  Recreational facilities shall include swimming pool, tennis court, playground equipment or athletic fields. 
d.  The amount and type of recreational facilities to be based upon the expected need for the number of units in the development. 
2.04.08 - Bed and Breakfasts 
A.  A bed and breakfast inn is allowable in the ER-1, ER-3 , R-T, R-M, C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning districts and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
1.  Must be business owner occupied and serve as the primary residence for the business owner. Business owner shall be defined as the person or persons who own the property and bed and breakfast outright; or who have entered into a lease agreement with the property owner(s) allowing for the operation of the bed and breakfast. 
2.  Each bed and breakfast unit shall have one off-street parking space, and owners shall have two parking spaces. 
3.  Only one (1) ground or wall sign, constructed of non-plastic material, non-interior illuminated of six (6) square feet maximum size is allowed. Any exterior illumination of signage shall be installed such that it does not directly illuminate any residential structures adjacent to the bed and breakfast. 
4.  Bed and breakfast units are limited to no more than ten (10) guest units. Facilities with more than ten (10) units shall be classified as "hotels/motels." 
5.  Excluding the business-owner's unit and the area of the structure it will occupy, there must be at least 400 square feet of gross interior floor space remaining per unit. 
6.  All meals served by the owner/manager must be to paying guests of the bed and breakfast; meals shall not be served to the general public. 
B.  The owner of the bed and breakfast inn shall reside in the inn. However, where an individual owns two (2) or more such facilities, owner-occupancy shall be required in one (1) inn. 
C.  Density shall not exceed the permissible residential density as set forth in Table 4.01.01 (H). Each two (2) bedrooms or lodging rooms shall be the equivalent of one (1) residential dwelling unit. Where the equivalent number of residential dwellings contains a fraction, the number shall be rounded up to the next whole number. All bedrooms shall be counted in the determination of density, whether occupied by the owner, the owner's family in residence in the bed and breakfast inn, or guests. 
D.  A private bath shall be provided for each guest room. 
E.  The building in which the bed and breakfast inn is located shall be substantially similar in design, appearance, and character to residential dwellings located within a 200-foot radius. Distance shall be measured from all property lines of the lot on which the bed and breakfast inn is located. 
F.  A bed and breakfast inn located within the Historic District shall comply with the standards for the Historic District Overlay. 
G.  Parking shall meet the following standards: 
1.  One (1) space per bedroom shall be provided off-street; and 
2.  All required parking spaces shall be located to the side or rear of the principal structure. 
(Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14) 
2.04.09 - Retail Sales and Service 
A.  Retail sales and service establishments are permissible in the C-1 and C-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district. 
B.  Retail sales and service establishments are permissible in the C-3 zoning district, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
1.  Retail uses are limited to no more than 10,000 square feet of gross floor area per retail use, with a maximum of 30,000 square feet of gross floor area per building. 
2.  Residential units located on the second story and above shall be excluded from these square footage calculations. 
2.04.10 - Theatres 
A.  Theatres are permissible in the C-2 zoning district, subject to the standards of the zoning district. 
B.  Theatres are permissible in the C-1 and C-3 zoning district, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
1.  Theaters located within C-1 and C-3 zoning districts shall be limited to a maximum of 300 total seats, including all screening areas. 
2.04.11 - Professional Offices 
A.  Professional offices are permissible in the O-I, C-1, C-2 and C-3 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district. 
B.  Professional offices are permissible in the R-O-I zoning district, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
1.  Buildings and structures to be used as professional offices in the R-O-I district shall not exceed 3,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
2.  New construction or alteration of buildings and structures shall be compatible with adjacent buildings and must have the approval of the Carrollton Planning Commission. 
3.  Additional parking requirements. 
a.  All City of Carrollton off-street parking requirements now or hereafter enacted shall apply. 
b.  All off-street parking shall be located only to the side or rear of the principal use building. 
4.  Signs. 
a.  Maximum allowable size shall be six (6) square feet. 
b.  Location. Only one sign, and it shall be freestanding, shall be located in the front of the principal structure. 
c.  Not withstanding subsections (a) and (b) above, all other requirements of the sign ordinance of the City of Carrollton, Georgia shall be met. 
2.04.12 - Adult Entertainment Establishments 
A.  Adult entertainment establishments are permissible in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  No adult entertainment establishment, business, or use shall be located within 1,000 feet, measured from the closest point of the real property on which the adult entertainment establishment is sought to be erected and operated in a straight line to the closest point of the real property of the following: 
1.  Residential uses or zones; 
2.  Religious uses and facilities, schools, government owned or operated public facilities, libraries, public parks, or hospitals; 
3.  Any other adult entertainment establishment; or 
4.  Any establishment licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
C.  If the adult entertainment establishment or the activity to which a measurement is required is a part of a tract of land occupied by other uses, the measurements shall be from the closest point of the total tract of land(s) and not the buildings(s) in which activities are located. 
2.04.13 - Bakeries 
A.  Bakeries are permissible in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district. 
B.  Bakeries are permissible in the C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
1.  Bakeries located within C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts shall be limited to a maximum of 5,000 square feet in gross floor area. 
2.04.14 - Outdoor Storage 
A.  Outdoor Storage is permissible in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Outdoor (open) storage is permissible, subject to the following standards: 
Table 2.04.14(B). Standards for Outdoor Storage at Self-Service Storage Facilities. 
Development Feature Standard Types of goods to be stored Limited to recreational vehicles and boats on trailers Dry stacking of boats when covered to provide screening from view Abandoned, wrecked, or junked vehicles are prohibited Maximum area devoted to outdoor storage 25 percent of building area of the site Screening Fully screened from view from adjacent residentially zoned districts, from adjacent office areas, and from public right-of-way Screening may be a solid fence, solid wall, other similar structure, or landscaping Fencing required Minimum of 6 feet in height Maximum of 8 feet in height Decorative wall or fence required, with brick, stone, masonry, wood, chain link, or similar material Fence location May be either in front of or behind the buffer Security Gate, equipped with alarm and keyless opening required  
2.04.15 - Self Service Storage 
A.  Self Service Storage or mini-storage facilities are permissible in the M-2 zoning district, subject to the standards of the zoning district. 
B.  Self Service Storage or mini-storage facilities are permissible in the C-2, and M-1 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
C.  The following activities or uses are prohibited on the grounds or within the buildings of mini-storage or self-storage facilities: 
1.  Wholesale sales; 
2.  Retail sales, including garage sales, or other commercial activities; 
3.  Manufacturing, fabrication, processing, or other industrial activity; 
4.  Service or repair of vehicles, engines, electronic equipment, or similar activities; 
5.  Rehearsal or practice of musical instruments; and 
6.  Residential use. 
D.  Notwithstanding the limitations described in Section 2.04.15(C) above, the following activities may be conducted: 
1.  Rental of storage bays; 
2.  Truck rental business, limited to a maximum of twenty-five (25) percent of the gross site area; 
3.  Sales of boxes or goods related directly to the operation of a self-service storage facility; and 
4.  Sales by the owner or manager of the facility of abandoned items for reclamation of rental costs. 
E.  Except as specifically provided in this section, all property stored on the site shall be entirely within enclosed buildings. 
F.  Storage of flammable liquids, highly combustible or explosive materials, or hazardous chemicals is prohibited. 
G.  As an accessory use, one (1) dwelling unit may be established for security personnel, management personnel, or the facility owner. 
H.  Traffic lane widths shall be established to provide for the adequate circulation, safety, and accessibility of trucks, cars, and individuals who utilize dead storage in such facilities; 
1.  The minimum traffic lane width shall be twenty-five (25) feet; 
2.  The maximum traffic lane width shall be forty (40) feet; 
3.  Traffic flow patterns, directional signage, and painted land markings with arrows shall also be clearly marked; 
4.  There shall be no aisle ways or other vehicular access ways located in the buffer area or within the designated rights-of-ways. 
I.  The following site design requirements shall be met: 
Table 2.04.15(I). Site Design Standards for Self-Service Storage Facilities. 
Development Feature Standard Minimum site area 2.0 acres Maximum site area 5.0 acres Minimum lot width 100 feet Access requirements Major or minor arterial Minimum setbacks for buildings or walls 

Front yard 

Side yard 


Rear yard   
75 feet 
25 feet 
25 feet Buffers 1.5 times the buffer required by Section 4.07.05. Dumpsters and trash containers Fully screened from view from adjacent properties and public right-of-way Outdoor lighting Shielded and directed to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties, as measured at the property line Loudspeakers and paging equipment Prohibited  
J.  The following design standards are required for the self-service storage buildings: 
Table 2.04.15(J). Building Design Standards for Self-Service Storage Facilities. 
Development Feature Standard Building separation (2 or more buildings on the site) 12 feet Overhead access doors Shall not be visible from residentially zoned property or public right-of-way Storage bays 
 Minimum size 
 Maximum size   
4 feet by 4 feet (16 s.f.) 
20 feet by 80 feet (1,600 s.f.) Maximum building height, including all roof-mounted air conditioning and other equipment 35 feet Exterior facade Front facade shall be consistent with color, materials, and design of buildings in the surrounding area Side and rear facades may have metal exterior walls. Roof design Type of roof, roof line, and roofing materials shall be fully consistent with buildings in the surrounding area  
2.04.16 - Junk Yards and Auto Wrecking 
A.  Junk yards and auto wrecking facilities are permissible in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  The minimum land area shall be five (5) acres for facilities that include a junk yard, but for facilities that are limited to auto wrecking only (i.e., a place where automobiles are stored on a short-term basis for recovery by their owner), the minimum land area shall be two (2) acres); provided further that the Mayor and City Council upon recommendation by the City Manager may authorize a licensed automobile salvage yard to maintain less area if all other provisions are observed and a smaller area would best serve the public interest. 
C.  The site must be enclosed by a fence which completely obscures views of the property from adjacent sidewalks and streets. 
D.  The site design standards for salvage yards and junk yards are set forth in the following table: 
Table 2.04.16(D). Standards for Salvage Yards and Junk Yards. 
Development Feature Standard Minimum setback 100 feet from any residentially zoned property Screening required  Minimum height 8 feet  Maximum height 20 feet Storage of salvaged or junk materials Materials shall not exceed the height of the fence or wall. This shall not be construed to prohibit equipment and vehicles used in the salvage operation. Maximum number of automobile bodies 40 per acre Exterior lighting Directed and shielded to avoid illumination of adjacent properties  
(Res. No. 02-2018, 2-2-18) 
2.04.17 - Kennels, Outdoor 
A.  Keeping animals shall be considered a kennel when there are six (6) or more domestic pets, not including fish, reptiles, and birds. Pigs and emus shall be considered livestock and are not domestic pets. 
B.  A kennel with an outdoor run is permissible in the following zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section: C-2, M-1, and M-2. 
C.  A kennel shall comply with the nuisance requirements pertaining to animal control as set forth in the City of Carrollton Code of Ordinances. 
D.  A kennel shall meet the design standards set forth in the following table: 
Table 2.04.17(D). Standards for Kennels. 
Development Feature Standard Animals allowed Domestic pets Minimum setback from any residential zoning district for buildings 50 feet Minimum setback from any residential zoning district for outdoor runs 100 feet Outdoor runs Drains connected to an approved sanitary facility 
Odor and pest control required 
Hours of operation limited to 7:00 a.m. until 7:00 p.m. Buffer requirements 1.5 times the buffer requirement of Section 4.07.05 plus a fence or wall on any residentially zoned property line Boarding Soundproofing required  
2.04.18 - Sanitary Landfills and Transfer Stations 
A.  Sanitary landfills and solid waste transfer stations, together with necessary buildings and machinery for landfill operations, are allowable in the M-2 zoning district, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards of this section. 
B.  Applications for approval of a new sanitary landfill or the expansion of an existing sanitary landfill shall demonstrate compliance with all State and federal laws and regulations applicable to landfills. 
C.  A waste-handling permit from the State and the City is required. 
D.  There shall be clear evidence, providing by licensed professional in soils, hydrology, or other applicable fields, that soils, groundwater levels, floodplains, and other natural resources shall not be negatively impacted by the landfill. 
E.  The site design standards required for a sanitary landfill are set forth in the following table: 
Table 2.04.18(E). Standards for Sanitary Landfills. 
Development Feature Standard Minimum land area 10 acres Buffer 3.0 times the buffer otherwise required in Section 4.07.05. Fence Solid fence on entire perimeter  Minimum height 8 feet Access Prohibited through residentially zoned areas  
2.04.19 - Day Care Facilities (Adult or Child Day Care) 
A.  The requirements of this section apply to child day care centers, group day care homes, nursery schools, preschools, family day care homes, adult day care facilities, and adult day care centers. 
B.  Day care facilities are permissible in the following zoning districts, subject to the site design standards of the district: 
1.  Day care centers with nineteen (19) or more children are permissible in the C-2 and C-3 zoning districts; and 
2.  Day care homes for at least seven (7) and not more than eighteen (18) children are permissible in the C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts. 
C.  Day care facilities are permissible in the following zoning districts, subject to the site design standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section: 
1.  Day care centers with nineteen (19) or more children are permissible in the C-1 and O-I zoning districts; 
2.  Day care homes for at least seven (7) and not more than eighteen (18) children are permissible in the ER-1, ER-3 , R-20 and O-I zoning districts. 
3.  Day care family facilities are permissible in the ER-1, ER-3, R-20, R-15, R-10, O-I, C-1, C-2 and C-3 zoning districts. 
D.  All facilities regulated in this section shall comply with State regulations and acquire applicable State licenses for operation. 
E.  Adult day care within a dwelling shall be limited to the provision of care and supervision to not more than six (6) persons. 
F.  Day care centers shall comply with the following standards: 
Table 2.04.19(F). Standards for Child Day Care Centers, Nursery Schools, and Preschools. 
Development Feature Standard Number of children Nineteen (19) or more Place of operation Freestanding structure, or Within a religious facility (see Section 2.04.20 for standards), or Within a public or private school. Outdoor play area Minimum of 200 square feet per child, based on the number of users at any one (1) time, and Fully enclosed by a security chain link fence, a minimum of four (4) feet in height, or Fully enclosed by a solid decorative fence, a minimum of four (4) feet in height Indoor play area Minimum of 35 square feet per child Access requirements Drop-off location, separated from parking, and located off-street  
G.  Day care homes and family care facilities shall comply with the following standards: 
Table 2.04.19(G). Standards for Child Day Care Homes and Day Care Family Facilities. 
Development Feature Standard Number of children  Day care home Eighteen (18) or fewer  Day care - family Six (6) or fewer Place of operation Freestanding structure, or Within a dwelling. Outdoor play area Minimum of 200 square feet per child, based on the number of users at any one (1) time, and Fully enclosed by a security chain link fence, a minimum of four (4) feet in height, or Fully enclosed by a solid decorative fence, a minimum of four (4) feet in height Indoor play area Minimum of 35 square feet per child Access requirements Drop-off location, separated from parking, and located off-street.  
H.  Adult day care centers shall comply with the following standards: 
Table 2.04.19(H). Standards for Adult Day Care Centers. 
Development Feature Standard Number of adults More than six (6). Place of operation Freestanding structure, or 
Within a religious facility (see Section 2.04.20 for standards). Recreation areas Fully enclosed by a fence, a minimum of four (4) feet in height. 
Chain link is permissible in side or rear yards; decorative fencing is required in front yards. Access Drop-off facilities shall be provided off-street and separated from parking.  
(Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14; Res. No. 07-2019, 2-4-19) 
2.04.20 - Religious Uses and Facilities 
A.  Religious Uses and facilities including churches and other places of worship, together with the accessory uses and structures are permissible in the R-T, R-M, R-O-I, O-I, C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts, subject to site design standards in this UDO. 
B.  Religious facilities, including churches and other places of worship, together with specified accessory uses and structures, are permissible in the following zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section: E-R, R-20, R-15, and R-10. 
C.  The principal use for a site developed for religious uses is worship. Worship is a form of religious practice together with its creed and ritual. 
D.  The religious use and facilities shall be located on and shall only have vehicular access from a major street or a collector street, as shown on the Zoning Map. 
E.  Uses and activities other than worship shall be considered accessory uses and shall be clearly ancillary to the primary use. Such uses and activities shall be limited to: 
1.  Religious instruction (such as "Sunday School," Bible school, or similar instruction or study typically associated with the religion); 
2.  Offices to support the establishment; 
3.  Child or adult day care, subject to the standards of Section 2.04.20(G); 
4.  Private academic school, subject to the standards of Section 2.04.20(H); 
5.  A fellowship hall, with or without a kitchen, subject to the standards of Section 2.04.20(I), (which may be known as a community center, activity hall, or life center); 
6.  Recreation facilities; 
7.  Individual meeting spaces; and 
8.  A parsonage, subject to the standards of Section 2.04.20(J). 
F.  All accessory uses are subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The accessory use shall be owned and operated only by the owner of the primary use; 
2.  The facility housing the accessory use shall meet all local, State, or federal standards; 
3.  The owner of the primary use shall obtain any licenses required to conduct the accessory use. Any approval of the accessory use shall be contingent upon receipt of all licenses; 
4.  Loudspeaker or paging systems shall be located to ensure that they cannot be heard at the property line of adjacent properties; 
5.  All outdoor activities shall occur no earlier than 8:00 a.m. and no later than 10:00 p.m.; 
6.  All exterior lighting shall be directed or shielded to avoid illumination of adjacent properties, as measured at the property line; 
7.  Outdoor play or activity areas shall be no closer than fifty (50) feet from any residential property line; 
G.  Child day care, adult day care, preschool, or child nursery uses are permissible accessory uses subject to the following standards: 
1.  The total floor area allocated to the child day care, adult day care, preschool, or nursery uses shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the total gross floor area on the site. The calculation of total floor area allocated to the uses shall be cumulative and shall include all child day care, adult day care, preschool, nursery facilities, and related mechanical and support facilities. 
2.  An off-street drop-off area for persons served by the facility shall be provided. 
H.  Private academic schools are allowable accessory uses subject to the following standards: 
1.  The total floor area allocated to the school shall not exceed twenty (20) percent of the total floor area on the site. The calculation of total floor area allocated to the school shall include all components of the school: classrooms, school library, school offices, teacher work areas, and the like, including related mechanical and support facilities. 
2.  The entrance and vehicle drop-off points for students shall not be located on a street providing primary access to residences, unless such street is classified as a collector or arterial. 
I.  A fellowship hall is an allowable accessory use, provided that the total floor area allocated to the fellowship hall, including related mechanical and support facilities, shall not exceed thirty-five (35) percent of the total floor area on the site. 
J.  One (1) residential dwelling unit is permissible to serve as a parsonage, subject to the following standards: 
1.  The minimum lot area for the dwelling unit ("parsonage lot") shall be 7,500 square feet. The parsonage lot shall be used exclusively for the dwelling unit, and shall not include any primary or other accessory use permissible on the site. 
2.  The maximum lot coverage for the parsonage lot shall be thirty-five (35) percent. 
3.  Two (2) parking spaces shall be provided within the parsonage lot. 
4.  The maximum building height on the parsonage lot shall be thirty-five (35) feet. 
5.  The parsonage lot may contain children's outdoor play equipment, in a size and quantity typical of a single-family residential use. 
6.  The parsonage lot may contain a residential swimming pool, fully enclosed by a fence, and attached to the dwelling. 
K.  A specific parking plan shall be provided. This plan shall identify the principal use and each accessory use proposed on the site. The parking plan shall indicate the hours of operation and peak times of use (parking demand) for the primary use and each accessory use on the site. The parking standards for the principal use and each accessory use shall be identified based upon UDO requirements, set forth in Section 4.03.00. The parking plan may propose reduced or shared parking. The parking plan shall indicate areas designated for overflow parking during times of extraordinary use (such as festival or holiday periods). 
L.  For religious facilities that exceed 10,000 square feet in total floor area, excluding the parsonage, if any, the minimum setback from any property line that is otherwise required shall increase five (5) feet for each 2,000 square feet, or portion thereof, over 10,000 square feet. 
M.  Modular structures may be used for the uses and activities listed in Section 2.04.20(E)(1)-(7) above but only with a Special Use Permit issued by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to Section 2.04.24(B). As used herein, the term "modular structure" shall mean a factory-fabricated, transportable building consisting of units designed to be incorporated at a building site and placed on a permanent foundation. Any such modular structure shall be built to current building codes and inspected by a registered professional engineer in the factory where it was built. At the time of application for the Special Use Permit, the applicant shall provide a certification from manufacturer stamped by a professional engineer licensed in the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. No. 07-2015, 12-14-15) 
2.04.21 - Schools 
A.  Public and private schools offering general education courses are permissible in the R-T, R-M, O-I, C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts, subject to site design standards in this UDO. 
B.  Public and private schools offering general education courses are permissible in the following zoning districts, subject to the standards of the district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section: E-R, R-20, R-15, R-10, and R-O-I. 
1.  The buildings are not less than 50 feet from any property line. 
2.  A buffer strip at least ten feet wide is provided along the side and rear property lines, planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that provide an effective visual screen. 
2.04.22 - Cemeteries 
A.  Cemeteries are permissible in the ER-1, ER-3 , R-20, R-15, R-10, R-T, R-M, O-I, C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts, subject to the site design standards of the zoning districts and the specific supplemental standards in this section. Cemeteries for internment of human remains shall comply with State law and the provisions of this section. 
B.  Cemeteries are permitted only as: 
1.  An accessory use to a religious facility, or 
2.  Located on land owned by city, state, or federal government. 
C.  A cemetery may include one (1) or more of the following: a burial park for earth interments, a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, and a columbarium. 
D.  A cemetery may include a chapel when operated in conjunction with and within the boundaries of such cemetery. 
E.  Site design requirements are as follows: 
Table 2.04.22(E). Standards for Cemeteries. 
Development Feature Standard Minimum land area  Registered cemeteries (per State law) 10 acres  Other 2 acres Minimum setbacks for structures, storage, materials, equipment, or interment lots  Front yard 40 feet  Side yard 20 feet  Rear yard 20 feet  Adjacent to a residentially zoned property 50 feet Lot dimensions  Minimum road frontage 200 feet Minimum buffer requirements  Adjacent to state bodies of water 25 feet Access for existing cemeteries Easements for access may be required in new subdivisions  
F.  Location requirements 
1.  A cemetery shall not be located in a wetland, 100-year floodplain, floodway, or flood hazard area. 
2.  All cemetery access shall be provided from an arterial street, collector street, or state highway. The entrance and exits to the cemetery shall be only from the frontage street. 
G.  Mausoleums and columbaria may be located only within the boundaries of approved cemeteries. Mausoleums and columbaria shall have facades of brick or stone. 
H.  Adequate off-street waiting space shall be provided for funeral processions so that no vehicle stands or waits in a dedicated right-of-way. 
(Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14) 
2.04.23 - Townhouses 
A.  Townhouses are permitted in the R-T and R-M zoning district, subject to the following regulations. 
1.  Minimum lot area is 1,600 square feet per townhouse. 
2.  Minimum lot width shall be twenty (20) feet for interior townhouse living units and forty (40) feet for exterior townhouse living units. 
3.  Where townhouse lots and dwelling units are designed to face upon an open or common access court rather than upon a street, this open court shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet in width and said court shall not include vehicular drives or parking areas. 
4.  Interior living units within a townhouse shall be built to side lot lines, but shall not have openings facing the side lot lines. Exterior or end living units may contain openings on the outside wall. 
5.  A maximum of eight units may be attached per building. 
2.04.24 - Special Use 
A.  Special Use: A use permitted only upon showing that such use in a specified location complies with the conditions and standards for the location or operation of such use as specified in the Unified Development Ordinance and only after authorization by the Mayor and City Council. 
B.  Special Use Permit: A permit issued by the Mayor and City Council stating that the special use meets all conditions set forth in local ordinances. 
1.  An application for a Special Use Permit shall be submitted on forms provided by the Planning and Development Department and shall be advertised in the same manner as applications for rezoning. Public hearings will be held in the same manner as applications for rezoning are conducted. All requests shall be accompanied by the application fee as established by the Mayor and City Council, as well as, plats and all data specified by the Special Use Permit application form. 
2.  Procedural requirements for obtaining a Special Use Permit are set forth in Article 10 and ultimately requires a recommendation by the Carrollton Planning Commission followed by approval from the Mayor and City Council. 
(Res. No. 11-2008, § 5, 5-5-08; Ord. No. 07-2015, 12-14-15) 
2.04.25 - Private Student Housing 
A.  Private student housing is permissible in any R-M, R-M-10, or R-M-15 zoning district located within one (1) mile of either the University of West Georgia or West Georgia Technical College campuses, subject to the site design standards established by Section 4.01.00 and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
1.  Private student housing shall be subject to the design standards for multifamily developments established by Section 4.02.03 of this UDO. 
2.  Student housing units shall be limited to a maximum occupancy of four (4) students and four (4) bedrooms per unit. 
3.  The owner of any private student housing project shall enter into an affiliate agreement with either the University of West Georgia or West Georgia Technical College on terms and conditions acceptable to the City. 
4.  Private student housing projects shall provide pedestrian access to either the University of West Georgia or West Georgia Technical College through either trails or sidewalks. 
(Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17) 
2.04.26 - Light Manufacturing in Commercial Zoning Districts 
A.  Light manufacturing is permissible in the C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts, subject to the standards of the zoning district and the supplemental standards set forth in this section. 
B.  Light manufacturing is permissible in the C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts only with a special use permit approved by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to Section 2.04.24(B) of this UDO. 
C.  The Mayor and City Council may issue a special use permit to allow light manufacturing in C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts only for existing businesses and only when emergency or exigent circumstances require the temporary relocation of said business. 
D.  Any special use permit allowing light manufacturing in C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts shall expire after twenty-four (24) months. 
E.  Any business existing or operating pursuant to a special use permit issued pursuant to this section may not create excessive noise, odor, smoke, or dust. 
(Res. No. 12-2018, 7-26-18) 
2.04.27 - Food Trucks and Food Truck Courts 
A.  Food trucks and food truck courts are permitted as of right in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
B.  Food truck courts are permissible in the C-2, C-3, O-I, and R-O-I zoning districts only with a special use permit approved by the Mayor and City Council pursuant to Section 2.04.24(B) of this UDO. 
C.  The following regulations apply to all food trucks, regardless of location: 
1.  A zoning permit is required for all food trucks. Each specific location must have a separate zoning permit. Approval by the fire marshal is required prior to the issuance of a zoning permit for a food truck. 
2.  No free-standing signage is permitted. 
3.  City trash receptacles may not be used to dispose of waste or trash on permitted food trucks. 
4.  All areas within five (5) feet of the food truck must be kept clean. 
5.  Grease and liquid waste may not be disposed of in storm drains, the sanitary sewer system, or public streets. 
6.  Food trucks, including generators, are subject to the noise ordinance. 
7.  Hours of operation are limited from 7 a.m. to 10 p.m. 
8.  No audio amplification of food trucks is permitted. 
(Res. No. 16-2018, 11-5-18) 
ARTICLE 3 - PROTECTION OF NATURAL, ENVIRONMENTAL AND HISTORIC RESOURCES 
3.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The provisions set forth in this Article 3 are intended to protect the natural features and natural and cultural resources within The City of Carrollton, and to implement policies in the Comprehensive Plan. 
3.01.00 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 09-2011, adopted Sept. 12, 2011, repealed the former Sec. 3.01.00, §§ 3.01.01-3.01.22, and enacted a new Sec. 3.01.00 as set out herein. The former Sec. 3.01.00 pertained to flood damage prevention. This Sec. 3.01.00 bore no history note. 

3.01.01 - Statutory Authorization 
    Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the City of Carrollton of Carroll County, Georgia, does ordain as follows: 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.02 - Findings of Fact 
A.  The flood hazard areas of Carrollton, Georgia are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, flood-proofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.03 - Statement of Purpose 
    It is the purpose of this ordinance to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities, which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
B.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
C.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
D.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
E.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.04 - Objectives 
    The objectives of this ordinance are: 
A.  To protect human life and health; 
B.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
C.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
D.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
E.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
F.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
G.  To insure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.05 - Lands to Which this Ordinance Applies 
    This ordinance shall apply to all Areas of Special Flood Hazard within the jurisdiction of Carrollton, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.06 - Basis for Area of Special Flood Hazard 
    The Areas of Special Flood Hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), dated 9/19/2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this ordinance. 
    For those land areas acquired by the City through annexation, the current effective FIS dated 9/19/2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for Carroll County are hereby adopted by reference. 
    Areas of Special Flood Hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
    The Repository for public inspection of the Flood Insurance Study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at: City Hall, 315 Bradley Street, Carrollton, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.07 - Establishment of Development Permit 
    A Development Permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this ordinance PRIOR to the commencement of any Development activities. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.08 - Compliance 
    No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this ordinance and other applicable regulations. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.09 - Abrogation and Greater Restrictions 
    This ordinance is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this ordinance and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.10 - Interpretation 
    In the interpretation and application of this ordinance all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the governing body; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.11 - Warning and Disclaimer of Liability 
    The degree of flood protection required by this ordinance is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by man-made or natural causes. This ordinance does not imply that land outside the Areas of Special Flood Hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This ordinance shall not create liability on the part of the City of Carrollton or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this ordinance or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.12 - Penalties for Violation 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this ordinance or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this ordinance or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $300 or imprisoned for not more than 10 days, or both, and in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the City of Carrollton from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.13 - Designation of Ordinance Administrator/Floodplain Coordinator 
    The City Manager, or his designee as Floodplain Coordinator, is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this ordinance. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.14 - Permit Procedures 
    Application for a Development Permit shall be made to the Floodplain Coordinator on forms furnished by the City PRIOR to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, and dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. 
    Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Application Stage - 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be flood-proofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed non-residential flood-proofed structure will meet the flood-proofing criteria of Section 3.01.17(B); and 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
B.  Construction Stage - For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the Administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or flood-proofing level immediately after the lowest floor or flood-proofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When flood-proofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
    Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
    The Floodplain Coordinator shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby, shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.15 - Duties and Responsibilities of the Administrator 
    Duties of the Floodplain Coordinator shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
A.  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this ordinance have been satisfied. 
B.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or State law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
C.  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
D.  When Base Flood Elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 3.01.17, then the Floodplain Coordinator shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Sections 3.01.16, 3.01.17, 3.01.18, 3.01.19, 3.01.20, 3.01.21, and 3.01.22. 
E.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with Section 3.01.14(B). 
F.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been flood-proofed, in accordance with Section 3.01.14(B). 
G.  When flood-proofing is utilized for a structure, the Floodplain Coordinator shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with Section 3.01.14(A)(c) and Section 3.01.17(B) or 3.01.19(B). 
H.  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
I.  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
J.  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six (6) months to FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the Letter of Map Revision process. Assure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
K.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the Areas of Special Flood Hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the Floodplain Coordinator shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this Ordinance. 
L.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the Floodplain Coordinator and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.16 - General Standards 
    In ALL Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions are required: 
A.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
B.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
C.  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
D.  Elevated Buildings - All New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include ANY fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater; 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
i.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
ii.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
iii.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both directions. 
b.  So as not to violate the "Lowest Floor" criteria of this ordinance, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and 
c.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
E.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
F.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable State requirements for resisting wind forces; 
G.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system; 
H.  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters; 
I.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
J.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this ordinance, shall be undertaken only if the non- conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.17 - Specific Standards 
    In ALL Areas of Special Flood Hazard the following provisions are required: 
A.  New construction and/or substantial improvements - Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 3.01.16(D), "Elevated Buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above two feet above the base flood elevation. 
B.  Non-Residential Construction - New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to two feet above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and in Section 3.01.15(F). 
C.  Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles - Where base flood elevation data are available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than two feet above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
i.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than two feet above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
ii.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. Section 3.01.16(F) above) 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
i.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days. 
ii.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
iii.  The recreational vehicle must meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of Section 3.01.17(C)(a)-(c) above. 
D.  Floodway - Located within Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 3.01.06 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  ONLY if Section 3.01.17(D)(a) above is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Sections 3.01.16, 3.01.17, 3.01.18, 3.01.19, 3.01.20, 3.01.21, and 3.01.22. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.18 - Building Standards for Streams without Established Base Flood Elevations and/or Floodway (A Zones) 
    Located within the Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 3.01.06, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), OR where base flood data have been provided but a Floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
A.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 3.01.06, then the Floodplain Coordinator shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, State, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Sections 3.01.16, 3.01.17, 3.01.18, 3.01.19, 3.01.20, 3.01.21, and 3.01.22. ONLY if data are not available from these sources, then the following provisions (B) and (C) shall apply: 
B.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (NOTE: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a Limited Detail Study has been completed). Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 3.01.16(D) "Elevated Buildings." 
a.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
    The Floodplain Coordinator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.19 - Standards for Areas of Special Flood Hazard (Zones AE) with Established Base Flood Elevations without Designated Floodways 
    Located within the Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 3.01.06, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (Zones AE), the following provisions apply: 
A.  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
B.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or flood-proofed to elevations established in accordance with Section 3.01.17. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.20 - Standards for Areas of Shallow Flooding (AO Zones) 
    Areas of Special Flood Hazard established in Section 3.01.06 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 3.01.16(D) "Elevated Buildings." 
The Floodplain Coordinator shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
B.  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be flood-proofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus two feet, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in Sections 3.01.14 (A)(c) and (B). 
C.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.21 - Standards for Subdivisions 
A.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
B.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
C.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
D.  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a Conditional Letter of Map Revision (CLOMR) or Conditional Letter of Map Amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.22 - Standards for Critical Facilities 
A.  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
B.  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.23 - Variance Procedures 
A.  The Mayor and City Council shall hear and decide appeals and requests for variances from the requirements of this ordinance, per the variance procedures set forth in Article 9 of this UDO, with the exception that the Mayor and City Council rather than the Board of Development Appeals will consider and act upon the request. 
B.  The Mayor and City Council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the Floodplain Coordinator in the enforcement or administration of this ordinance. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the Mayor and City Council may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Carroll County, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of Historic Structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a Historic Structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
E.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this ordinance are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if ANY increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
G.  In reviewing such requests, the Mayor and City Council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this ordinance and the following: 
a.  Danger that material may be swept onto other lands to the injury of others; 
b.  Danger to life and property due to flooding or erosion damage; 
c.  Susceptibility of the proposed facility and its contents to flood damage and the effect of such damage on the individual owner; 
d.  Importance of the services provided by the proposed facility to the community; 
e.  Necessity of the facility to a waterfront location, in the case of a functionally dependent facility; 
f.  Availability of alternative locations, not subject to flooding or erosion damage, for the proposed use; 
g.  Compatibility of the proposed use with existing and anticipated development; 
h.  Relationship of the proposed use to the comprehensive plan and floodplain management program for that area; 
i.  Safety of access to the property in times of flood for ordinary and emergency vehicles; 
j.  Expected heights, velocity, duration, rate of rise and sediment transport of the floodwaters and the effects of wave action, if applicable, expected at the site; and 
k.  Costs of providing governmental services during and after flood conditions including maintenance and repair of public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical, and water systems, and streets and bridges. 
H.  Conditions for Variances: 
a.  A variance shall be issued ONLY when there is: 
i.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
ii.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship, and 
iii.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
b.  The provisions of this Ordinance are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a Historic Structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
c.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
d.  The Floodplain Coordinator shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
I.  Upon consideration of the factors listed above and the purposes of this ordinance, the Mayor and City Council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this ordinance. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.24 - Definitions 
    Words and phrases used in Sections 3.01.01 through 3.01.23 shall be defined as set forth below. Words and phrases not defined below shall be as defined in Article 1 of this UDO. Unless specifically defined below or in Article 1 of this UDO, words or phrases used in this ordinance shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this ordinance its most reasonable application. 
    "Accessory Structure" means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
    "Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "New Construction". 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the Floodplain Coordinator's interpretation of any provision of this ordinance. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet, and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    "Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in Section 3.01.06. 
    "Base flood," means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Base Flood Elevation (BFE)" The elevation shown on the Flood Insurance Rate Map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    "Basement" means that portion of a building having its floor sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    "Building," means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
    "Critical Facility" means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
a.  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
b.  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
c.  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
d.  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
    "Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    *"Existing construction" means for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before 4/3/1978 [the effective date of the initial FIRM for that community]. 
    *"Existing Manufactured Home Park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before 4/3/1978 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    "Flood" or "flooding" means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
a.  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
b.  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
    "Flood Hazard Boundary Map (FHBM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    "Flood Insurance Rate Map (FIRM)" means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
    "Flood Insurance Study" means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    "Flood proofing," means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
    "Historic Structure" means any structure that is: 
a.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register: 
b.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district: 
c.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
d.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
1.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
2.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this code. 
    "Manufactured home" means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Mean Sea Level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which base flood elevations shown on a community's Flood Insurance Rate Map are referenced. 
    "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929 is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    "New construction" means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after 4/3/1978 [the effective date of the initial FIRM] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after 4/3/1978 [the effective date of the FIRST floodplain management ordinance adopted by the community] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after 4/3/1978 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by a community]. 
    "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle, which is: 
a.  Built on a single chassis; 
b.  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
c.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light duty truck; and 
d.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Start of construction" means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. (Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (NOTE: accessory structures are NOT exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    "Subdivision" means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a 5-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. NOTE: The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. This term includes structures, which have incurred "substantial damage", regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
    For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the Code Enforcement Official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project, or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    "Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions" is where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    "Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this ordinance, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this ordinance. 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this ordinance is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.01.25 - Severability 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this Ordinance is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this Ordinance. 
(Res. No. 09-2011, 9-12-11) 
3.02.00 - WATER RESOURCE DISTRICTS 

3.02.01 - Purpose 
The intent of this article is to establish minimum development standards and criteria, which will afford reasonable protection of environmentally sensitive natural resources found throughout the City. Based on the findings of the City Comprehensive Plan, it has been determined that the wise management of these resources as defined in this article is essential to maintaining the health, safety, general welfare and economic well being of the public. 
3.02.02 - Establishment of Water Resource Districts 
A.  The water resource districts shall include the following: 
1.  Groundwater recharge area district; 
2.  Wetlands district; 
3.  Water supply watershed district; and 
4.  River corridor protection district. 
B.  The boundaries of these water resource districts are shown on a set of maps designated as water resource districts and are included as part of this article which are on file with the City Manager's office located at 315 Bradley Street, Carrollton, Georgia. 
C.  These water resource districts are established measures to guide future growth and development in environmentally sensitive areas. Because these protective measures allow some latitude with land uses and because these districts are not intended to prescribe a specific land use but rather to define the range of acceptable land uses, these districts are designated as overlay districts. 
3.02.03 - Definitions 
Definitions for the following section are located in Article 1 of this UDO. 
3.02.04 - Groundwater Recharge Area District 
A.  Findings of fact. 
1.  Recharge areas are vulnerable to urban development activities as well as agricultural activities. 
2.  Pesticides, herbicides sprayed on crops, animal waste and septic tank effluents contribute to a deterioration in the groundwater quality and can threaten the health of residents relying on well water. 
3.  Development usually means an increase in the amount of land covered with impervious surfaces. 
4.  Paving land in recharge areas can alter or impair their recharge characteristics thereby decreasing groundwater supplies. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of this district is to establish criteria to protect significant groundwater recharge areas from pollution by spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, application of chemicals, injections and other development pressures. 
C.  District delineation. 
1.  The groundwater recharge area districts are hereby established which shall correspond to all lands within the jurisdiction of the City that are mapped as significant recharge areas by the state Department of Natural Resources in "Most Significant Recharge Areas of Georgia, Hydrological Atlas 18 (1989 Edition)." 
2.  In addition, each recharge area shall be determined to have a pollution susceptibility rating of high, medium, or low based on the "Ground-water Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia, Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992." 
3.  Said maps are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
4.  Standards for this district shall comply with the DNR Rule 391-3-16-.02, Criteria for the Protection of Groundwater Recharge Areas. 
3.02.05 - Protection Criteria and Permitted Uses 
A.  All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts are permitted in the groundwater recharge area protection district. 
B.  The following are additional requirements for specific uses in the groundwater recharge area protection district: 
1.  All new above-ground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of 660 gallons, shall have the secondary containment for 110 percent of the volume of such tanks or 110 percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with all federal requirements. 
2.  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within: 
a.  A high pollution susceptibility area; 
b.  A medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed 4.9 million gallons (15 acre/feet) in size; and 
c.  A low pollution susceptibility area and exceed 16.3 million gallons (50 acre/feet) in size. 
d.  As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one-foot and a vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 x 10-7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service (formerly known as the U.S. Soil Conservation Service). 
3.  All private wastewater facilities, including privies, cesspools, and septic tanks, are prohibited in all areas where public sewers are available as established in the City's sewer use ordinance, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by reference. The ordinance requires that all owners of houses, buildings, or properties used for human occupancy, employment, recreation, or other purposes situated within the City's jurisdiction and abutting on any street, alley, or right of way in which there is now located or may in the future be located a public sanitary sewer of the City is hereby required at the owner's expense to install suitable toilet facilities herein, and to connect such facilities directly with the proper public sewer in accordance with the provisions of the sewer use ordinance, within thirty (30) days after date of official notice to do so, provided that said sewer is within 100 feet of the property line. 
4.  An exception to the sewer use ordinance is made for the estate residential district (ER) established in this ordinance, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by reference. In the ER district the following use is provided: new single-family residences, except mobile homes and modular homes, shall have a minimum lot size of three (3) acres with provisions for on-site sewage disposal permitted with a permit from the county health department prior to installation. 
5.  Lots of record approved prior to the adoption of the sewer use ordinance are hereby exempt from the requirements of (3) and (4) of this section; however, if said private waste water facilities fail, these properties will be required to connect to the City's sanitary sewer system. 
6.  No construction shall proceed on any residence, within the ER district, unless the county health department first approves the proposed septic tank as meeting the requirements of the state Department of Human Resources "Manual for On-Site Sewage Management" (hereinafter DHR Manual), and subsection (3) and (4) of this section. 
7.  New facilities which handle hazardous materials of the types listed in section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976, excluding underground storage tanks, in amounts of 10,000 pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operation on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and any local fire prevention requirements. 
8.  Any new wastewater treatment basins shall have an impermeable liner. 
9.  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
3.02.06 - Wetlands District 
A.  Findings of fact. 
1.  The wetlands within the City are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil limitations. 
2.  In their natural state, wetlands serve man and nature. They provide habitat areas for fish, wildlife and vegetation; water quality maintenance and pollution control; flood control; natural resource education; scientific study; and recreation opportunities. In addition, the wise management of forested wetlands is essential to the economic well being of many communities within the state. 
3.  Nationally, a considerable number of these important natural resources have been lost or impaired by draining, dredging, filling, excavating, building, pollution and other acts. 
4.  Piece meal or cumulative losses will, over time, destroy additional wetlands. 
5.  Damaging or destroying wetlands threatens public safety and the general welfare. 
B.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this district is to promote the wise use of wetlands and protect them from alterations which will significantly affect or reduce the primary functions for water quality, floodplain and erosion control, groundwater recharge, aesthetic natural areas and wildlife habitat areas. 
2.  This ordinance is to promote wetland protection, while taking into account varying ecological, economic development, recreation and aesthetic values. 
3.  Activities that may damage wetlands should be located on upland sites to the greatest degree practical as determined through the permitting process. 
C.  District delineation. 
1.  These regulations shall apply to all lands within wetlands located within the City. 
2.  The wetland district overlay map, adopted as part of this article, shows the general location of wetlands, according to the 1987 U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service National Wetlands Inventory Maps. 
3.  These maps shall be referred to as the generalized wetlands maps and are hereby adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this article, together with all explanatory matter thereon and attached thereto. 
4.  The generalized wetlands maps do not necessarily represent the boundaries of jurisdictional wetlands within the City and cannot serve as a substitute for a delineation of wetland boundaries by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, as required by section 404 of the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
5.  No local government action under this ordinance relieves the landowner from federal or state permitting requirements. 
D.  Wetland development permit requirements. 
1.  No regulated activity will be permitted within the wetlands protection district without written permission or a permit from the City. 
2.  If the area proposed for development is located near or in close proximity to a wetland protection district boundary, as determined by the zoning administrator, a U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination shall be required. 
3.  If the Corps determines that wetlands are present on the proposed development site, the local permit or permission will not be granted until a Section 404 permit or a letter of permission is issued. 
E.  Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted by right within the wetland district to the extent they are not prohibited by any other ordinance or law and provided they do not require structures, grading, fill, draining or dredging except as provided herein. The activities listed in this section are exempted from Section 404 regulations provided they do not have impacts on a navigable waterway that would necessitate acquisition of an individual Section 404 permit. However, under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, a permit may be required in some circumstances: 
1.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the state forestry commission and as specified in the Clean Water Act. 
2.  Conservation or preservation of soil, water, vegetation, fish or other wildlife, provided the conservation or preservation does not affect waters of the state or of the United States in such a way that would require an individual Section 404 permit. 
3.  Outdoor passive recreational activities, including fishing, bird watching, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing. 
4.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
5.  Normal agriculture activities including the planting and harvesting of crops and pasturing of livestock. Such activities shall be subject to best management practices approved by the state Department of Agriculture. 
F.  Prohibited uses. 
The following uses are prohibited in a wetland district: 
1.  Receiving areas for toxic or hazardous waste or other contaminants. 
2.  Hazardous or sanitary landfills. 
3.02.07 - Water Supply Watershed District 
A.  Findings of fact. 
1.  In order to provide for the health, safety, welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the City and surrounding communities, it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be assured. 
2.  The ability of natural systems to filter stormwater runoff can be threatened by unrestricted urban and suburban development. Land-disturbing activities associated with development can increase erosion and sedimentation that threatens the storage capacity of reservoirs. 
3.  In addition, stormwater runoff, particularly from impervious surfaces, can introduce toxins, nutrients and sediment into drinking water supplies, making water treatment more complicated, expensive and rendering water resources unusable. Industrial land uses that involve the manufacture, use, transport and storage of hazardous or toxic waste materials result in the potential risk of contamination of nearby drinking water supplies. 
B.  Purpose. 
1.  The purpose of this section is to establish measures to protect the quality and quantity of the present and future water supply for the City, which will minimize the transport of pollutants and sediment to the water supply, and maintain the yield of the water supply watersheds. 
2.  This article shall apply to all existing and proposed water supply watersheds within the City. 
C.  District delineation. 
The City's water supply watershed district is hereby designated, and shall comprise the land areas, which drain to the City's water supply intake on the Little Tallapoosa River. The ridgelines of the respective watersheds and the boundary of a radius seven (7) miles upstream of the respective water supply intake define the boundary of this district. This district shall be further delineated and defined on the water resource district map of the City, which is hereby incorporated and made a part of this article by reference. The following water supply watershed districts and reservoirs are hereby defined and boundaries shall be identified on the water resource district map: 
1.  Existing large water supply watersheds. There are none at the present time. 
2.  Existing small water supply watersheds. The Little Tallapoosa River Watershed from the City's intake, encompassing a 97 square mile area. An intake for the City is located on this river. This water supply watershed contains three (3) reservoirs (see the table below) either owned in whole or in part by the City, all of which are covered in City's DNR approved reservoir management plan dated June 1992. Because the three (3) reservoirs were placed in use at different times over the past forty (40) years, use restrictions and buffer requirements vary for each reservoir. 
Table 3.02.07 (C), Little Tallapoosa River Watershed Reservoirs. 
Reservoir 
Name Purpose Jurisdiction and 
Buffers Recreational 
Restrictions Sharpe's Creek Storage impoundment to supplement raw water supply requirements during low flow, drought periods. The City controls the lake and a 100-foot easement around the lake. 

Carroll County enforces a 150-foot buffer. 

Has been in use since 1992. Recreation for residence only. 

No motors with open exhaust; however, gasoline motors are allowed with a permit from the City's parks, recreation, and cultural arts department. 

Other restrictions listed in the reservoir management plan dated June 1992. Lake Carroll Storage impoundment to supplement raw water supply requirements during low flow, drought periods as a last resort only. The City controls the lake and a small percentage of land for use as parkland and public docking. Has been in use since the mid-1960's. 

The City currently and will continue to enforce a 25-foot buffer as mandated in the erosion and sedimentation control ordinance. Recreation for residence and the general public. 

No motors with open exhaust; however, gasoline motors are allowed with a permit from the City's parks, recreation, and cultural arts department. 
Other restrictions listed in the reservoir management plan dated June 1992. Lake Buckhorn Storage impoundment to supplement raw water supply requirements during low flow, drought periods. The City controls the top 10 feet of water volume. 

This was arranged through the U.S. Dept. of Agriculture, Soil Conservation Service in the mid-1960's. 

Carroll County currently enforces a 25-foot buffer. The City does not own the reservoir land and does not exercise any regulations on the other uses of the reservoir. 

Therefore, the City has no restrictions on the recreational uses of the reservoir and does not control a buffer strip around the reservoir.  
3.  Future water supply watersheds. There are no planned large or small future water supply watersheds at the present time within the City limits of the City. 
D.  Permitted uses. 
The following regulations shall apply to the Little Tallapoosa Water Supply Watershed, which is identified on the water resource district map. All uses, which are lawful at the time of adoption of this article, shall be allowed to continue as lawful land uses until such time as the use is abandoned, as defined in this UDO for nonconforming uses. All uses allowed in the underlying zoning districts as established by this article and county ordinances, except those listed below in prohibited uses, are permitted in the water supply watershed district, subject to the following conditions and standards: 
1.  Stream corridor criteria. 
a.  The perennial stream corridors of the City's small water supply watershed, within a seven-mile radius upstream of the public drinking water supply intake and the water supply reservoirs, are protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A natural buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 100 feet on both sides of all perennial streams as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 150-foot setback on both sides of all perennial streams as measured from the stream bank. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the setback area of subsection (1)(a)(2) above. 
b.  The perennial stream corridors of the City's small water supply watershed, outside a seven-mile radius upstream of the public drinking water supply intake and the water supply reservoirs, are protected by the following criteria: 
1.  A natural buffer shall be maintained for a distance of 50 feet on both sides of all perennial streams as measured from the stream banks. 
2.  No impervious surface shall be constructed within a 75-foot setback on both sides of all perennial streams as measured from the stream bank. 
3.  Septic tanks and septic tank drainfields are prohibited in the setback area of subsection (1)(b)(2) above. 
2.  Reservoir management plan criteria. 
a.  Prohibitions or restrictions on all or some of the following recreational uses (swimming, fishing, boating, docks, and public access) are addressed in the City's DNR-approved reservoir management plan dated June 1992. These restrictions were developed to protect the water quality of the three reservoirs for drinking purposes while optimizing their recreational benefits. 
b.  Because the three reservoirs were placed in use at different times over the past forty years, use restrictions and buffer requirements vary for each reservoir. 
c.  All new reservoirs shall have a buffer for a distance of 150 feet from the reservoir boundary and shall have prohibitions or restrictions on all or some of the recreational uses listed above, to protect the water quality for drinking purposes. 
d.  At such time in the future, if the land use changes at Lake Carroll result in a more concentrated use of the lake, then the City will address imposing more restrictive recreational measures in order to continue to preserve the water quality of the reservoir. 
3.  Small water supply watershed criteria. 
The following criteria apply to all locations within the City's small water supply watershed. 
a.  New sanitary landfills are allowed only if they have synthetic liners and leachate collection systems. 
b.  New hazardous waste treatment or disposal facilities are prohibited. 
c.  The impervious surface area, including all public and private structures, utilities, or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to twenty-five (25%) percent, or existing use, whichever is greater. 
d.  New facilities, which handle hazardous materials of certain types and in certain amounts as determined by the Department of Natural Resources, shall perform their operations on impermeable surfaces having spill and leak collection systems as prescribed by the Department of Natural Resources. 
E.  Exemptions. 
The following uses are exempt from the stream corridor buffer and setback requirements if they meet the stipulated conditions: 
1.  Utilities. 
a.  Utilities shall be located as far as reasonably possible from the stream bank and shall not impair the quality of the drinking water system. 
b.  Utilities shall be installed and maintained without changing the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible. 
2.  Forestry, agricultural and mining activities. 
a.  Agricultural activities involving the planting and harvesting of crops are exempted if they conform to the best management practices established by the state Department of Agriculture and USDA. 
b.  Forestry activities must conform to the best management practices established by the state forestry commission. 
c.  Mining activities permitted by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act. 
d.  The activity shall not impair the quality of the drinking water stream. 
3.03.00 - RIVER CORRIDOR PROTECTION 

3.03.01 - Generally 
A.  Findings of fact. 
1.  River corridors are the strips of land that flank major rivers in the state. These corridors are of vital importance to the state by helping to preserve the qualities, which make a river suitable as a habitat for wildlife, a site for recreation and a source of clean drinking water. 
2.  River corridors also allow the free movement of wildlife from area to area within the state, help control erosion and river sedimentation, and help absorb floodwaters. 
B.  Purpose. 
The purpose of this article is to establish measures to guide future growth and development in the areas adjacent to the Little Tallapoosa River as defined herein. 
3.03.02 - Definitions 
Definitions for the following title are located in Article 1 of this UDO. 
3.03.03 - Establishment of the Little Tallapoosa River Corridor Protection District 
A.  The 100-foot buffer shall be measured horizontally from the uppermost part of the riverbanks, on each side of the river, usually marked by a break in slope. 
B.  Although not within the measured 100-foot wide buffer, the area between the top of bank and the edge of the river shall be treated by the local governments in the same manner as the river corridor and shall be included within the river corridor protection district. 
C.  Because stream channels move due to natural processes such as meandering, river bank erosion and jumping of channels, the river corridor shall be considered to be fixed at its position at the beginning of each review period for the City's comprehensive plan. 
D.  Any shift in the location of the protected river corridor after the review period will be shown by revision of the boundaries of the river corridor at the time of the next Comprehensive Plan review by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs. 
1.  General protection criteria. 
The standards and requirements in this article do not supercede those contained in the Metropolitan River Protection Act, the Coastal Marshlands Protection Act, and the Erosion Sedimentation Control Act. Within the Little Tallapoosa River corridor protection district the following shall be the general criteria used to protect this vital water resource: 
a.  Construction within the buffer area is prohibited except as provided herein. 
b.  A natural vegetative buffer shall be maintained at all times in the river corridor, except as otherwise provided herein. 
c.  The natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity. 
d.  Septic tank and septic tank drain fields are prohibited in the river corridor, except as expressly provided in general protection criteria, Section 3.02.05 of this article. 
e.  Single-family dwellings including the usual appurtenances are permitted in the buffer area subject to the following conditions: 
1.  The dwelling shall be in compliance with all local zoning regulations. 
2.  The dwelling shall be located on a tract of land, zoned estate residential ER, containing at least three acres. For purposes of these standards, the size of the tract of land shall not include any area that lies within the protected river, (for tracts of land that include portions of a protected river, the area between the river banks can not be counted towards the three acre minimum size). 
3.  There shall be only one such dwelling on each three-acre or larger tract of land. 
4.  A septic tank or tanks serving such dwelling may be located within the buffer area. However, septic tank drainfields shall not be located within the buffer area. All septic tank systems within the river corridor area shall be designed as closed system. Whereby, no drainage from the septic system drainfield leaches into the buffer area. 
f.  Industrial and commercial land uses existing in the river corridor prior to the promulgation of this ordinance are exempt from the criteria contained herein, provided that: 
1.  These uses do not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
2.  These uses meet all state and federal environmental rules and regulations. 
g.  The construction of road crossings and utility crossings is permitted in the river corridor, provided such construction meets all requirements of the Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act of 1975 as amended, and all applicable local ordinances on soil erosion and sedimentation control. 
2.  Permitted uses. 
The following uses are permitted in the river corridor, provided that such uses do not impair the long-term functions of the protected river or river corridor: 
a.  Timber production and harvesting, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Forestry activity shall be consistent with the best management practices established by the state forestry commission; and 
2.  Forestry activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Clean Water Act, as amended. 
b.  Wildlife and fisheries management activities consistent with the purposes of O.C.G.A.§ 12-2-8. 
c.  Wastewater treatment and water treatment. 
d.  Recreational usage consistent either with the maintenance of a natural vegetative buffer or with river-dependent recreation. For example, a boat ramp would but a hard-surface tennis court would not be consistent with this criterion. A parking lot would not be consistent with this criterion. Non-concrete nature paths and natural walking paths or walkways within the river corridor would be consistent with this criterion. 
e.  Natural water quality treatment or purification. 
f.  Agricultural production and management subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with best management practices established by the state soil and water conservation commission; and 
2.  Agricultural activity shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water as defined by the Clean Water Act, as amended; and 
3.  Agricultural activity shall be consistent with all state and federal laws and all regulations promulgated by the state Department of Agriculture. 
g.  Other uses permitted by the DNR or under Section 404 of the Clean Water Act. 
3.  Prohibited uses within the river corridor: 
a.  Handling areas for the receiving and storage of hazardous waste. 
b.  Hazardous waste or solid waste landfills. 
4.  Exemptions. 
The following uses are exempted from the river corridor protection plan: 
a.  Land uses existing prior to the promulgation of the City river corridor protection district. For the purposes of this ordinance, a pre-existing use is defined as any land-disturbing activity, including all human endeavors directly associated with such use or activity, which, prior to the promulgation of this ordinance falls within one of the following categories: 
1.  The use is completed; 
2.  The use is under construction; 
3.  The use is fully approved by the governing authority; 
4.  The materials have been submitted for approval by the governing body for the purposed use; or 
5.  The use is legally zoned and expenditures in excess of $2,500.00 have been made in preparation for construction in accordance with such zoning. 
b.  Mining activities, if permitted by the Department of Natural Resources pursuant to the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968, as amended. 
c.  Utilities, if such utilities cannot feasibly be located outside the buffer area (feasibility shall be decided conservatively by the City), provided that: 
1.  The utilities shall be located as far from the river bank as reasonably possible; 
2.  Installation and maintenance of the utilities shall be such as to protect the integrity of the buffer area as well as is reasonably possible; and 
3.  Utilities shall not impair the drinking quality of the river water. 
d.  Specific forestry and agricultural activities except as discussed in the permitted uses subsections 2(a) and 2(f) above. 
3.03.04 - Administration and Enforcement 
A.  Site plans. 
Application for a local development permit within the: groundwater recharge area, wetlands, water supply watershed or river corridor protection districts shall include a site plan, drawn as specified in the City developer's guide, with the following information: 
1.  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross-sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations, horizontal and vertical scale shall be shown on the cross-sectional drawings. 
2.  A map of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site shall be provided. This boundary may be included on other maps provided by the applicant. 
3.  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of 200 feet. 
4.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body. 
5.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within 200 feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent. 
6.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials. 
7.  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology. 
B.  Activities to comply with the site plan. 
All development activities or site work conducted after approval of the site plan shall conform to the specifications of said site plan. Significant changes to the site plan that would alter the amount of impervious surface within the development, result in a considerable increase in the amount of excavation, fill or removal of the overall appearance of the development as proposed, can be amended only with the approval of the City Engineer, or his designee. Minor changes, such as the realignment of streets or minor alterations to drainage structures and other infrastructure to meet unexpected conditions are not exempted from this requirement. 
C.  Exemptions to the site plan requirements. 
The following activities and developments are exempt from the requirement for detailed site plans, but must meet all conditions associated with obtaining a building permit: 
1.  Single-family detached homes constructed on a single lot within an existing subdivision. 
2.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development. 
3.  Construction of minor structures or buildings, such as sheds or additions to a single-family residence. 
D.  Review procedures. 
The application shall be made to the City Manager, or his designee, and will be reviewed within fifteen (15) days. At the time of the application, the applicant shall pay a site plan review fee. This fee may be used to retain expert consultants who will provide services pertaining to functional assessment, mitigation and wetland boundary determinations, as deemed necessary by the City Engineer. The review period shall include the preparation of findings including: approval, approval with conditions or disapproval by written notification of the findings of the City Manager and/or the City Engineer. Decisions of the City Engineer may be appealed to the Mayor and City Council. 
E.  Duration of permit validity. 
1.  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
2.  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire twelve (12) months after the date the work has ceased. 
3.  Written notice of pending expiration of the development permit shall be issued by the building official. 
F.  Penalties. 
1.  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure at the discretion of the Mayor and City Council or their designee. 
2.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation, or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practical, at the discretion of the Mayor and City Council or their designee. 
3.  If the City Manager discovers a violation of this ordinance that also constitutes a violation of any provisions of the Clean Water Act as amended, the City shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the landowner. 
G.  Suspension and revocation. 
The City Manager and/or City Engineer may suspend or revoke a permit if he or she finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit. Any appeals of said suspension or revocation shall be addressed by the Board of Development Appeals as specified in this UDO. 
3.04.00 - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
Editor's note- Res. No. 01-2014, adopted Feb. 3, 2014, repealed the former Sec. 3.04.00, §§ 3.04.01-3.04.10, and enacted a new Sec. 3.04 as set out herein. The former Sec. 3.04.00 pertained to similar subject matter. This Sec. 3.04.00 bore no history note. 

3.04.01 - Title 
    This ordinance will be known as "The City of Carrollton Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.04.02 - Definitions 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this ordinance, unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    Best Management Practices (BMPs). These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
    Board. The Board of Natural Resources. 
    Buffer. The area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    Certified Personnel. A person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    Commission. The Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission (GSWCC). 
    CPESC. Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control with current certification by Certified Profession in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc., a corporation registered in North Carolina, which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    Cut. A portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to the excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
    Department. The Georgia Department of Natural Resources (DNR). 
    Design Professional. A professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology, or land surveying; or a person that is a Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control (CPESC) with a current certification by Certified Professional in Erosion and Sediment Control Inc. 
    Director. The Director of the Environmental Protection Division or an authorized representative. 
    District. The West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Division. The Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Department of Natural Resources. 
    Drainage Structure. A device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for storm water management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    Erosion. The process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan. A plan required by the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, O.C.G.A. ch. 12-7, that includes, as minimum protections at least as stringent as the State General Permit, best management practices and the requirements in section 3.04.04 of this ordinance. 
    Fill. A portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground surface or an excavation. 
    Final Stabilization. All soil disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, 100% of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of 70% or greater, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures (such as the use of rip rap, gabions, permanent mulches or geotextiles) have been used. Permanent vegetation shall consist of: planted trees, shrubs, perennial vines; a crop of perennial vegetation appropriate for the time of year and region; or a crop of annual vegetation and a seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region. Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    Finished Grade. The final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    Grading. Altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    Ground Elevation. The original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
    Land-Disturbing Activity. Any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land but not including agricultural practices as described in section 3.04.03(5). 
    Larger Common Plan of Development or Sale. A contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this paragraph, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    Local Issuing Authority. The governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
    Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA). A state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
    Natural Ground Surface. The ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    Nephelometric Turbidity Units (NTU). Numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed or suspended particles are present. 
    NOI. A Notice of Intent form provided by EPD for coverage under the State General Permit. 
    NOT. A Notice of Termination form provided by EPD to terminate coverage under the State General Permit. 
    Operator. The party or parties that have: (A) operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or (B) day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with an erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    Outfall. The location where storm water in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    Permit. The authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this ordinance. 
    Person. Any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of the State of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Phase or Phased. Sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    Project. The entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Properly Designed. Designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by the Commission up until the date of NOI submittal. 
    Roadway Drainage Structure. A device such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled roadway consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    Sediment. Solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by wind, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    Sedimentation. The process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    Soil and Water Conservation District Approved Plan. An erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan approved in writing by the West Georgia Soil and Water Conservation District. 
    Stabilization. The process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    State General Permit. The National Pollution Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) general permit or permits for storm water runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
    State Waters. Any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
    Structural Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Practices. Practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures and sediment traps, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Trout Streams. All streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Wildlife Resources Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20, in the rules and regulations for Water Quality Control, Chapter 391-3-6 at www.gaepd.org. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    Vegetative Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures. Measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover, 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
    Such measures can be found in the publication Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    Watercourse. Any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    Wetlands. Those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.04.03 - Exemptions 
    This article shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
1.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "The Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968"; 
2.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
3.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
4.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one (1) acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre and not otherwise exempted under this paragraph; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 3.04.04 and this paragraph. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this paragraph, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to [O.C.G.A. ch. 5, art. 2, the] Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the Director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of subsection (B) of section 3.04.04 and the buffer zones provided by this paragraph shall be enforced by the Local Issuing Authority; 
5.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, "definitions", to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including but not limited to cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including but not limited to chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
6.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in subsections 3.04.04(C)(15) and (16) of this article, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three (3) years after completion of such forestry practices; 
7.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS) of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
8.  Any project involving 10,000 square feet or less; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one (1) acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this paragraph, "State Waters" excludes channels and drainage ways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves 10,000 square feet or less, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainage way, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the City from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by paragraphs 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9 or 10 of this section; 
9.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the Department of Transportation or the State Road and Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the Department of Transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the City, the City shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
10.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Public Service Commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the City shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
11.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.04.04 - Minimum Requirements for Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Using Best Management Practices 
A.  General Provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities if requirements of the ordinance and the NPDES General Permit are not met. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. Soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (B) and (C) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion, sedimentation and pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity in accordance with requirements of this article and the NPDES General Permit. 
B.  Minimum Requirements/BMPs. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in sections (B) and (C) of this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the City Engineer or to any other allegation of noncompliance with paragraph (2) of this subsection or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of storm water issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act". As used in this subsection the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
2.  A discharge of storm water runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a Local Issuing Authority or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the Director. This paragraph shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five (5) acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by the City or of any state general permit issued by the Division pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The City Engineer may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the Board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The Local Issuing Authority may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in C.15. and 16., in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
C.  Additional Requirements. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. for the purpose of governing land- disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
2.  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practicable erosion potential; 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in run-off water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this paragraph, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (B)(2) of this section; 
15.  Except as provided in paragraph (16) of this subsection, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the City Engineer determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the City Engineer pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term 'ephemeral stream' means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground-water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 5, pt. 6, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the City Engineer as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (1) Stream crossings for water lines; or (2) Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
16.  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as "trout streams" pursuant to O.C.G.A. tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2, the "Georgia Water Quality Control Act", except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the Board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The City Engineer may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed: provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his or her own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (1) Stream crossings for water lines; or (2) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
D.  Nothing contained in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. shall prevent any City from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsection (B) and (C) of this section. 
E.  The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.04.05 - Application/Permit Process 
A.  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall design and review before submittal the general development plans. The City shall review the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall consult the zoning ordinance, storm water management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this ordinance, and any other ordinances, rules, regulations or permits, which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City of Carrollton, GA, without first obtaining a permit from the City to perform such activity and providing a copy of Notice of Intent submitted to EPD, as applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the City Engineer and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (C) of this section. Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans, together with supporting data, must demonstrate affirmatively that the land disturbing activity proposed will be carried out in such a manner that the provisions of subsection (B) and (C) of this section will be met. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by five copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan in accordance with EPD Rule 391-3-7-.10. Additional copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans may also be submitted directly to EPD, as specified by the City Engineer. 
3.  The City of Carrollton assesses local permitting fees and also state-mandated fees. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. Except as otherwise provided for herein, fees for an application for a permit on a per-acre of land disturbed basis, as required by this article, shall be as established by the City of Carrollton from time to time by resolution of the City Council. In addition to the local permitting fees, state-mandated fees shall also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), and regulations adopted thereunder by EPD, in the amount of $80.00 per disturbed acre, to be divided as follows: $40.00 per acre to the City and $40.00 per acre to the EPD. In the case of a subdivision or other larger common plan of development or sale, "per disturbed acre" includes all acreage to be disturbed in the entire development. Fees for the City shall be submitted to the City including primary and secondary permittees. Fees for the state shall be submitted to the state on EPD forms available at http://www.gaepd.org. However, any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division. 
4.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the City shall refer the application and plan to the District for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan. The District shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of the District to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the District review shall be forwarded to the City. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the District, and any variances required by Section 3.04.04 (C)(15) and (16) has been obtained, all fees have been paid, and bonding, if required as per this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the City and the District enter into an agreement which allows the City to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the District. 
5.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this ordinance section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing the application under consideration, the City may deny the permit application. 
6.  The City shall require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this section or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the City may call the bond to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. The City Manager may release a portion of the letter of credit, for the land-disturbing amount, after final stabilization is complete and all permanent vegetation and stabilization measures are in place. If the permit holder believes they are not in violation of this article such that the surety should not be drawn against, the permit holder may appeal any notice to comply to the City of Carrollton. Appeal shall be made by filing a written notice of appeal within five days of any notice to comply with the City Manager stating the basis for the appeal. The City Council shall consider the appeal at the next scheduled public meeting. Except in emergency situations, the surety shall not be drawn against until the appeal is considered. The decision of the City Council shall be final. 
C.  Plan Requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in sections 3.04.04 (B) and (C) of this article, or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and storm water management facilities, local ordinances and State laws. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature and seal of the certified design professional. Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspections or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on his or her level of involvement with the process, as developed by the Commission and in consultation with the Division and the Stakeholder Advisory Board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
2.  Data Required for Site Plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Plan Review Checklist established by the Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the City of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary and all applicable fees have been paid prior to permit issuance. The permit shall include conditions under which the activity may be undertaken. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the City unless the erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan has been approved by the District and the City has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this ordinance, any variances required by sections 3.04.04 (C)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per section 3.04.05 (6) are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  Any land-disturbing activities by a local issuing authority shall be subject to the same requirements of this ordinance, and any other ordinances relating to land development, as are applied to private persons and the division shall enforce such requirements upon the local issuing authority. 
4.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
5.  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the City, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
6.  The City may reject a permit application if the applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act permit requirements within three years prior to the date of the application, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(f)(1). 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.04.06 - Inspection and Enforcement 
A.  The City Engineer or his or her designee will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the City shall regulate primary, secondary and tertiary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
B.  The City must amend its ordinances to the extent appropriate within twelve (12) months of any amendments to the Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975. 
C.  The City shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this ordinance, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
D.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the City, the Commission, the District, or Division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
E.  The District or the Commission or both shall semi-annually review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The District or the Commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control program. The District or the Commission shall notify the Division and request investigation by the Division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
F.  The Division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as Local Issuing Authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the Division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 90 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a Local Issuing Authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 90 days after notification by the division, the division shall revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a Local Issuing Authority. 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.04.07 - Penalties and Incentives 
A.  Failure to Obtain a Permit for Land-disturbing Activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this ordinance without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the City. 
B.  Stop-Work Orders. 
1.  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this ordinance, the Director or the City shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the Director or the City shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the Director or the City shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning; 
2.  For a third and each subsequent violation, the Director or the City shall issue an immediate stop-work order; and; 
3.  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the City or by the Director or his or her Designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the City or by the Director or his or her Designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond Forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this ordinance and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 3.04.05. The City of Carrollton may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary Penalties. Any person who violates any provisions of this ordinance, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this ordinance, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the Director issued as provided in this ordinance shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this ordinance, notwithstanding any provisions in any City charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this ordinance under county ordinances approved under this ordinance shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.04.08 - Education and Certification 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the Commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel on site may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(1), then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19(b)(4) and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.04.09 - Administrative Appeal and Judicial Review 
A.  Administrative Remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the City upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion, sediment and pollution control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any article; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the City Manager within thirty (30) days after receipt by the City Engineer of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial Review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the Carrollton City Council, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal denovo to the Municipal Court of City of Carrollton, Georgia. 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.04.10 - Effectivity, Validity and Liability 
A.  Effectively. This article shall become effective on the 3rd day of February, 2014. 
B.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase, or provision of this ordinance shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this ordinance. 
C.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this ordinance, nor the compliance with provisions of this ordinance shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the City or District for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this ordinance or the terms of the permit. 
3.  No provision of this ordinance shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any Waters of the State as defined thereby. 
(Res. No. 01-2014, 2-3-14) 
3.05.00 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

3.05.01 - Purpose 
In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the City is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; in order to stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promote and stimulate business; in order to enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law; and in order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; the mayor and City council hereby declare it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, landscape features and works of art having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
3.05.02 - Definitions 
Definitions for the following section are located in Article 1. 
3.05.03 - Penalty for Violation of Chapter 
Violations of any provision of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Section 1-11 of Chapter 1 of the City of Carrollton Code of Ordinances. 
3.05.04 - Public Hearing 
Prior to any recommended historic district or property being subjected to the terms and conditions of this chapter, the Mayor and City Council shall hold a public hearing after notice of the same appears in the legal organ of the county at least three times prior to the date of such hearing and after all property owners within the proposed designation are given written notice by first-class mail and such notice shall be deemed sufficient when deposited in the U.S. post office. Such notice shall be mailed no less than ten days and not more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of such hearing. 
3.05.05 - Disposition 
If after considering the recommendation of the Historic Preservation Commission, and all interested parties, and taking into consideration the criteria for designation as outlined in this chapter, the Mayor and City Council may, by ordinance, subject the district or properties to the terms and conditions of this chapter as long as the following information is made a part of the record of the Mayor and City Council's actions regarding designations of such districts or properties: 
A.  Description of each individual property, or 
B.  Description of each district and a list of the properties in the district, and 
C.  Name the owners of each individual property, or 
D.  Name the owners of each property within a district, and 
E.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained for material changes in appearance. 
3.05.06 - Reserved 
3.05.07 - Resubmittal 
Any recommendation rejected by the Mayor and City Council may not be resubmitted for consideration until the passage of twelve (12) months. 
3.05.08 - Notification of Designation 
Upon the designation of any historic district or property by the action of the Mayor and City Council, all property owners within the affected district or property must be notified by first-class mail (deemed sufficient when deposited in the U.S. post office) within 30 days following the adoption of such district or property and to inform them that a certificate of appropriateness is needed in order to make material changes in appearance. 
3.05.09 - Affirmation of Existing Building and Zoning Codes 
Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to exempt property owners from complying with this UDO and with existing City or county building and zoning codes, nor to prevent any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances, or regulations. 
3.05.10 - Failure to Provide Maintenance or Repair 
Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The Historic Preservation Commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
A.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors, and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, the deterioration of exterior architectural features, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
B.  If the Historic Preservation Commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
C.  If the condition is not remedied in thirty (30) days, the owner shall be punished as provided in section 3.05.03 and, at the direction of the City Council, the Historic Preservation Commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
3.05.11 - Approval of Alterations or New Construction within a Historic District[- Certificate of Appropriateness] 
After the designation of a historic property or of a historic district as authorized in this chapter, no material change, including the partial or total demolition or grading, in the appearance of such historic property, or of a structure, site, object or work of art within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
3.05.12 - Approval of New Construction within Designated Districts 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness to new structures constructed within designated historic districts, if these structures conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and landscaping to the character of the district specified in the design criteria developed by the commission. 
3.05.13 - Guidelines and Criteria for Issuance 
When considering applications for certificates of appropriateness to existing buildings, the Secretary of the Interior's Standards for Historic Preservation Projects, including the secretary's Standards for Rehabilitation may be used as a guideline along with any other criteria herein detailed. 
3.05.14 - Submission of Plans to Historic Preservation Commission 
An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans or other documentation as may be required by the commission. Applications involving demolition or relocation shall be accompanied by post-demolition or relocation plans for the site. 
3.05.15 - Acceptable Commission Reaction to Applications 
A.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design, arrangement, texture, and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style, and pertinent features of the other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
B.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall deny a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance would have substantial adverse effects on the aesthetic, historic or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. 
3.05.16 - Public Hearings on Applications, Notices, Right to be Heard 
At least seven (7) days prior to review of a certificate of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission shall take such action as may reasonably be required to inform the owners of any property likely to be affected by reason of the application, and shall give applicant and such owners an opportunity to be heard. In cases where the Historic Preservation Commission deems it necessary it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. 
3.05.17 - Interior Alterations 
In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the Historic Preservation Commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
3.05.18 - Technical Advice 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
3.05.19 - Deadline for Approval or Rejection of Application 
A.  The Historic Preservation Commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within forty-five (45) days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a structure, site, object, or work of art located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the Historic Preservation Commission. 
B.  Failure of the Historic Preservation Commission to act within such forty-five (45) days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
3.05.20 - Necessary Actions to be Taken by Historic Preservation Commission upon Rejection of Application 
A.  If the Historic Preservation Commission rejects an application for a certificate of appropriateness, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The Historic Preservation Commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modification to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
B.  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the Historic Preservation Commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
3.05.21 - Undue Hardship 
Where, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the Historic Preservation Commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict adherence to such provisions, or to interpret the meaning of such provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications, or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of such provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
3.05.22 - Freeze on Demolition or Alteration 
Pending the formal designation and after the required public information hearing, the Historic Preservation Commission may issue a freeze or moratorium on the demolition or alteration of any district or property being considered and may subject such district or property to the provisions of this article, however limited to a period of six (6) months, which may be extended by affirmative action of the Historic Preservation Commission for a one (1) time extension of six (6) months. 
3.05.23 - Demolition or Relocation 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall not grant certificates of appropriateness for demolition or relocation without reviewing at the same time the post demolition or post relocation plans for the site. Upon receipt of an application for a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation, the commission shall use the criteria described in section 3.05.15 to determine whether to deny the application or issue a certificate of appropriateness for demolition or relocation. 
3.05.24 - Appeals 
Any aggrieved party may appeal any adverse decision of the commission to the county superior court without exercising any further administrative remedies. 
3.05.25 - Ordinary Maintenance or Repair 
Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof, does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
3.05.26 - Designation of Historic Districts 
A.  Criteria for Selection. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, landscape features and works of art or a combination thereof, which conforms to the criteria for evaluation of the National Register of Historic Places as follows: 
1.  The quality of significance in American history, architecture, archaeology, engineering and culture is present in districts, sites, buildings, structures, and objects that possess integrity of location, design, setting, materials, workmanship, feeling, and association, and: 
a.  That are associated with events that have made a significant contribution to the broad patterns of our history; or 
b.  That are associated with the lives of persons significant in our past; or 
c.  That embody the distinctive characteristics of a type, period, or method of construction or that represent the work of a master, or that possess high artistic values, or that represent a significant and distinguishable entity whose components may lack individual distinction; or 
d.  That have yielded, or may be likely to yield, information important in prehistory or history. 
2.  Ordinarily cemeteries, birthplaces, or graves of historical figures, properties owned by religious institutions or used for religious purposes, structures that have been moved from their original locations, reconstructed historic buildings, properties primarily commemorative in nature, and properties that have achieved significance within the past 50 years shall not be considered eligible for the national register. However, such properties will qualify if they are integral parts of districts that do meet the criteria or if they fall within the following categories: 
a.  A religious property deriving primary significance from architectural or artistic distinction or historical importance; 
b.  A building or structure removed from its original location but which is significant primarily for architectural value, or which is the surviving structure most importantly associated with a historic person or event; 
c.  A birthplace or grave of a historical figure of outstanding importance if there is no other appropriate site or building directly associated with his productive life; 
d.  A cemetery which derives its primary significance from graves of persons of transcendent importance, from age, from distinctive design features, or from association with historic events; 
e.  A reconstructed building when accurately executed in a suitable environment and presented in a dignified manner as part of a restoration master plan, and when no other building or structure with the same association has survived; 
f.  A property primarily commemorative in intent if design, age, tradition, or symbolic value has invested it with its own historical significance; or 
g.  A property achieving significance within the past 50 years if it is of exceptional importance. 
B.  Boundaries. Boundaries of a historic district shall be shown on the official Zoning Map of the City. 
C.  Classification of properties. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
1.  Historic (contributes to the district); 
2.  Nonhistoric (does not contribute but does not detract from the district); 
3.  Intrusive (detracts from the district). 
3.05.27 - Designation of Historic Properties 
A.  Criteria for Selection. A historic property is a building, structure, site, object, work of art; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation and conforms to the criteria for evaluation of the National Register of Historic Places as set forth in section 3.05.26 (A) above. 
B.  Location of record. The site of such historic project shall be shown on the official zoning map of the City. 
3.05.28 - Form of Submission for Recommendation of Designation 
A.  Any submission for recommendation to the City for designation of a historic district or property shall be in such form and documented to the extent as now or hereafter required for submission of such district or property to the state historic preservation office for consideration and recommendation for the same to be placed on the National Registry of Historic Places. 
B.  This report must be submitted to the historic preservation section of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, 30 days prior to the public hearing on the designation, for their comments. 
3.05.29 - Advertisement for Public Information Hearing 
As a part of the review process for designation of historic districts or property, the Historic Preservation Commission shall hold a public information hearing which shall be advertised in the legal organ of the county, at least two weeks prior to the hearing and a conspicuous notice shall be placed on or about the property or district under consideration, notifying the public of the request and the time and place of the hearing. 
ARTICLE 4 - DESIGN STANDARDS 
4.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The purpose and intent of this article is to regulate the manner in which land in the City of Carrollton is used and developed, to minimize adverse effects on surrounding property owners or the general public, and ensure that high quality development is maintained throughout the City. 
4.01.00 - SITE DESIGN STANDARDS FOR BASE ZONING DISTRICTS 

4.01.01 - Design Standards for Lots 
A.  Use, occupation, erection and demolition. 
No building or structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, demolished, moved or altered except in conformity with the regulations of this ordinance. 
B.  Height and density. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed or altered to: 
1.  Exceed the height limits. 
2.  House a greater number of families per acre or occupy a smaller lot area per family than are herein allowed. 
3.  Have narrower or smaller front, rear or side yards than are required. 
C.  Reduction in Lot Size. 
No lot shall be reduced in size so that lot width or depth, size of yards, lot area per family or any other requirement of this ordinance is not maintained. This limitation shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
D.  Yards and Other Spaces. 
No part of a yard or the off-street parking or loading spaces that are required in connection with any building or use for the purpose of complying with the regulations of this ordinance shall be included as part of the yard of or the off-street parking or loading spaces required for another building, except as specifically provided herein. 
E.  Minimum Lot Size for Residential Septic Tank Use. 
1.  Regardless of the zoning classification, any lot which is served by an individual septic tank shall maintain at least 43,560 square feet of lot area, or as recommended by the Carroll County Health Department, whichever is greater. 
2.  With respect to existing platted lots, the Carroll County Health Department will evaluate each individual request for a permit on a case-by-case basis. 
3.  This restriction on lot size does not apply to residential development served by community sewer systems. 
F.  Only One Principal Building or Use on One Lot. 
Within single-family residential districts, no more than one (1) principal building or structure or use and its customary accessory buildings and uses shall be permitted on any lot. In all other districts, multiple uses per lot are permitted provided that each use is a permitted use within the base zoning district, and provided that yard and other requirements of this ordinance shall be met for each structure as though it were on an individual lot. 
G.  Street Frontage Requirement. 
No building or structure shall hereafter be erected on a lot that does not abut for at least forty (40) contiguous feet upon a single open street except that this restriction will not apply in the central business district. 
H.  Standards for lot area, width, and density, and coverage are set forth in Table 4.01.01(H). 
Table 4.01.01(H). Standards for Lot Area, Width, Density and Lot Coverage. 
District Minimum 
Lot Area 
(square 
feet) Maximum 
Residential 
Units 
per Acre 1 Minimum 
Lot 
Width 
(feet) Maximum 
Percent 
of Lot 
Covered ER-1 43,560 1.0 100 35 ER-3 130,680 1.0 100 35 R-20 20,000 2.18 100 35 R-15 15,000 2.90 60 35 R-10 10,000 4.35 60 35 R-8 8,000 5.45 60 35 R-T - 6.00 60 35 R-M - 6.00 - 35 R-M-10 - 10.00 - 35 R-M-15 - 15.00 - 45 M-H-P 10 acres 10.00 - 40 R-O-I 10,000 4.35 60 40 O-I 10,000 4.35 60 50 C-1 - 12.00 2 60 100 C-2 - 6.00/15.00 2 - 75 C-3 - 6.00/10.00 3 - 55 M-1 - - - 75 M-2 - - - 75 P-D SEE PD DEVELOPMENT STANDARDS SECTION 4.06.00  
1 For purposes of calculating the maximum residential units per acre (i.e., density) of a project, only developable property may be included in the calculation. Floodplains shown on a Flood Insurance Rate Map, wetlands, submerged land, or other portions of the property that cannot be developed will not be included in the calculation. 
2 Residential units in C-2 are limited to six (6) units per acre, unless the property is located within the Lake Carroll Village Overlay, in which case the allowable residential density is fifteen (15) units per acre. 
3 Residential units in C-3 are limited to six (6) units per acre, unless the property is located within the Maple Street Overlay, and meets the criteria set forth in Section 4.02.06(A)(2)(e), in which case the allowable residential density is ten (10) units per acre. 
(Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14; Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17; Res. No. 01-2018, 2-2-18; Res. No. 05-2018, 3-5-18; Res. No. 09-2018, 6-4-18; Res. No. 06-2019, 2-4-19; Res. No. 08-2019, 2-4-19) 
4.01.02 - Dimensional Standards for Building Height and Location (Setbacks) 
A.  Measurement of setbacks. 
1.  Front setbacks shall be measured from the right of way line of the abutting street to the wall of the building or structure. 
2.  Side and rear setbacks shall be measured from the property line to the wall of the building or structure. 
B.  Encroachments into required setbacks. 
1.  Architectural features, such as steps, porches, and fire escapes, may project not more than three (3) feet beyond a required setback line, except where such projections would obstruct driveways which are used or may be used for access of service and/or emergency vehicles. 
2.  The following building features may project into a minimum side yard up to eighteen (18) inches: eaves, gutters, sills, cornices and chimneys. 
3.  In the case of automobile service stations, motels, and similar uses which serve the motoring public, canopies shall be allowed over a driveway or walkway within the front yard not to extend from the principal building to a point any closer than fifteen (15) feet from the street right-of-way line. Such canopies shall provide a minimum twelve (12) feet vertical clearance. 
C.  Lots with multiple frontage. 
On lots having frontage on more than one (1) street, the minimum front yard shall be provided for each street. 
D.  Maintenance of setbacks. 
1.  No open space or yard established through standards for setbacks shall be encroached upon or reduced in any manner except in conformity to the yard, setback, off-street parking, and accessory buildings standards of this UDO. Shrubbery, driveways, retaining walls, fences, curbs, and planted buffer strips shall not be construed to be an encroachment of yards. 
2.  No part of any required yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space shall be considered to be part of a required yard, other open space, or off-street parking or loading space for any other building or structure or use. 
E.  Building setback and height standards are provided in Table 4.01.02(E). 
Table 4.01.02(E). Standards for Building Location and Height. 
Minimum Right-of-Way Setback Minimum Setbacks 
from Property Lines District Major 
Street 
(feet) Collector 
Street 
(feet) All 
Other 
Streets 
(feet) Side Yard 
(feet) Rear Yard 
(feet) Maximum 
Height 
(feet) ER-1 60 50 40 15 20 40 ER-3 60 50 40 15 20 40 R-20 60 50 40 15 20 40 R-15 40 40 20 10 20 40 R-10 40 40 20 5, 15 total 1 20 35 R-8 40 40 20 5, 15 total 1 20 35 R-T 40 40 20 0, 20 2 15 40 R-M 40 40 40, 20 3 0, 20 2 15 75 R-M-10 40 40 40 20 15 75 R-M-15 50 50 50 20 20 75 M-H-P 40 40 40 20 20 35 R-O-I 40 40 20 10 20 40 O-I 10 10 10 10 20 100 C-1 0 0 0 0 0 100 C-2 40 4 30 4 20 4 15 5 15 5 75/150 6 C-3 10 7 10 7 10 7 15 8 15 8 75 M-1 50 40 40 20 20 150 M-2 60 40 40 20 20 150  
1. ;hg;Minimum side setback is five (5) feet from the side property line, with the least sum of both sides fifteen (15) feet. 
2. ;hg;The minimum side setback for attached townhomes in both the R-T and R-M zoning districts and for detached single-family residential dwellings in the R-M zoning district is waived, while the minimum side setback to the project property shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. These provisions notwithstanding, the city engineer may require side yards sufficient to allow access to the rear yard for utility access, maintenance, and repair. 
3. ;hg;The minimum right-of-way setback on all other streets for detached single-family residential dwellings in the R-M zoning district shall be a minimum of twenty (20) feet. 
4. Not applicable in the Lake Carroll Village Overlay. 
5. The City Manager is authorized to reduce the minimum setbacks from property lines within the Lake Carroll Village Overlay to the extent necessary or advisable to foster and promote the development, redevelopment, and beautification of the overlay district. 
6. Maximum height in C-2 is [one hundred fifty] 150 feet, but not in the Lake Carroll Village Overlay. Maximum height in the Lake Carroll Village Overlay is [seventy-five] 75 feet, unless a special use permit is obtained from the Mayor and City Council pursuant to Section 2.04.24(B) to exceed the height limit. 
7 Not applicable in the Maple Street Overlay. 
8 The City Manager is authorized to reduce the minimum setbacks from property lines within the Maple Street Overlay to the extent necessary or advisable to foster and promote the development, redevelopment, and beautification of the overlay district. 
F.  The height limitations of this UDO shall not apply to church spires, steeples, belfries, flag poles, monuments, cupolas, domes, ornamental towers nor to observation towers not intended for human occupancy, water towers, transmission towers, radio or television towers or aerials, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, derricks, parapet walls extending not more than four feet above the roof line of the building or to necessary mechanical roof appurtenances. 
(Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14; Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17; Res. No. 05-2018, 3-5-18; Res. No. 09-2018, 6-4-18; Res. No. 06-2019, 2-4-19) 
4.02.00 - DESIGN STANDARDS 

4.02.01 - Design Standards for Single-Family Dwellings and Townhouses. 
A.  General. 
1.  This section applies to all single-family residential structures and townhouses, whether constructed on-site or partially or wholly constructed off-site. 
2.  Structures subject to these standards shall meet the standards for the zoning district in which the structure is proposed for location. 
B.  Additional standards to ensure appearance consistent with the surrounding neighborhood are required as follows: 
1.  The minimum width of the building shall exceed sixteen (16) feet. 
2.  The minimum roof pitch shall be 4:12. 
3.  The minimum roof overhang shall be twelve (12) inches, exclusive of porches and patios. 
4.  All homes shall be situated on the lot so that the conventional front of the home faces the front yard. 
5.  The minimum floor area shall be nine hundred (900) square feet of heated space. 
6.  The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, or other materials of like appearance. For structures for which building permits are issued after May 1, 2017, vinyl lap siding may be used on the wall(s) but only if it is forty-four (44) mils or greater and only on the rear and side walls of the structure and on no more than thirty (30) percent of any wall facing a public street. Vinyl lap siding may otherwise be used on the cornices, soffits, or other decorative features of the structure. Vinyl lap siding may be used to replace or repair existing vinyl lap siding on any structure having vinyl lap siding that was built prior to May 1, 2017. Vinyl lap siding may also be used on accessory structures where the principal structure has vinyl lap siding. 
7.  Buildings shall utilize at least two (2) of the following design features to provide visual relief along the front of the residence. 
a.  Dormers. 
b.  Gables. 
c.  Recessed entries. 
d.  Covered front porches. 
e.  Cupolas. 
f.  Pillars or posts. 
g.  Bay window (minimum 24-inch projection). 
8.  The garage shall not occupy more than [forty] (40) percent of the total building frontage. This measurement does not apply to garages facing an alley. 
9.  Walls which face a street other than an alley must contain at least [twenty] 20 percent of the wall space in windows and doors. Windows shall be provided with trim. Windows shall not be flush with exterior wall treatment. Windows shall be provided with architectural surround at the jamb. 
10.  The dwelling shall be attached to a permanent foundation system, including the supporting, blocking, leveling, securing, and anchoring the home and connecting multiple and expandable sections of the home. 
11.  Roof materials shall be wood shakes, asphalt composition, wood shingles, standing seam metal, concrete, clay tile, fiberglass tiles, slate, or built-up gravel materials. 
12.  The area beneath the home shall be enclosed by brick, concrete, wood, rock, or other materials specifically manufactured for this purpose and shall enclose the space between the floor joists and the ground level, except for the required minimum ventilation and access. Said access shall remain closed when not being used for that purpose. 
13.  For manufactured homes, all tongues, wheels, axles, transporting lights, and other towing apparatus shall be removed from the site prior to occupancy. 
14.  At each exterior door, there shall be a landing that is a minimum of thirty-six (36) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. Such landing shall be permanently affixed to the ground and shall be constructed of materials similar to other housing in the surrounding area, where porches, landings, or stoops are constructed. 
C.  Additional standards to ensure the connection of townhouse developments to the Carrollton Greenbelt and to foster non-motorized transportation and recreation are required as follows: 
1.  Connection to Carrollton Greenbelt. All townhouse developments within one thousand (1,000) feet of the Carrollton Greenbelt shall connect to the Carrollton Greenbelt with a path of the same dimensions, materials, and specifications as the Carrollton Greenbelt. All townhouse developments beyond one thousand (1,000) feet of the Carrollton Greenbelt shall install a path one thousand (1,000) feet in the direction of the nearest Carrollton Greenbelt location, which path shall be of the same dimensions, materials, and specifications as the Carrollton Greenbelt. For townhouse developments beyond one thousand (1,000) feet of the Carrollton Greenbelt, the City may, in its discretion, complete the path in order to connect it to the Carrollton Greenbelt. 
2.  Playgrounds. All townhouse developments shall provide a playground that meets the same standards and specifications as City-owned playgrounds and which must be approved by the Carrollton Parks and Recreation Commission. 
3.  Sidewalks. All townhouse developments shall provide sidewalks that meet City standards and specifications within the development, and said sidewalks must connect to sidewalks outside of the development. 
(Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17; Res. No. 01-2018, 2-2-18; Res. No. 03-2019, 1-7-19; Res. No. 04-2019, 1-7-19) 
4.02.02 - Design Standards for Non-Residential and Mixed Use Development within C-1, C-2, C-3, R-O-I, and O-I. 
A.  Architectural Standards. 
1.  Orientation. Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward the street. Lots with double frontage or through lots shall provide orientation and public entrances on facades along both street frontages. 
2.  Buildings. 
a.  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes, and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from rain and sun. 
b.  Any wall adjacent to the street shall have thirty (30) percent in windows, display areas, and entrances. For tenant spaces greater than 50,000 square feet, there shall be at least two public entrances. 
c.  Building frontages greater than 100 feet in length shall have offsets and other distinctive changes in building facades. 
d.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface and finish giving emphasis to entrances. 
3.  Building materials. Permitted materials for building facades include, without limitation, brick, natural decay resistant wood siding, rock, stone, decorative concrete block or concrete walls with textured surface materials, and hardi-board. Facade colors shall be earthtone or neutral. Building trim and accents may feature brighter colors, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of any building facade. Vinyl lap siding may not be used. 
4.  Roofs. 
a.  Roofs shall at a minimum have parapets concealing flat roofs and rooftop equipment which are visible from adjoining streets or properties. 
b.  On buildings greater than 50,000 square feet, parapets and facades shall be designed to give the appearance of three or more roof slope planes. 
5.  Maximum square footage. No single retail space shall exceed 150,000 gross square feet. 
6.  Minimum residential unit size. In mixed use buildings, residential units shall be a minimum of 800 square feet. 
B.  Site Design Standards. 
1.  Landscaping. 
a.  A landscape strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided between the right-of-way and any buildings, plazas, or parking areas. Properties located within the C-1 zoning district are exempt from this provision. 
b.  Streetscape trees shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.07.00 along public right-of-way adjacent to the property. 
c.  On buildings larger than 50,000 square feet, a minimum of seven (7) percent of the total parking area shall be located within the parking area in the form of landscape islands and peninsulas. 
d.  Landscaping and buffering shall be completed in accordance with Section 4.07.00. 
2.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
a.  In order to encourage pedestrian-oriented developments, buildings sited within 40 feet of the street shall provide primary public access from the public sidewalk along the street. 
b.  Sidewalks, no less than six (6) feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abuts a street. 
c.  Pedestrian connections shall be made from the sidewalk to the entrance of the building. 
d.  A pedestrian circulation plan shall be provided in developments with a building greater than 50,000 square feet. 
3.  Parking. 
a.  Location. Parking areas shall not be located between the building and the street within the C-1, C-3, and R-O-I zoning district. One parking isle is permitted between the building and the street in the C-2 and O-I zoning district. In the C-1 zoning district, if adequate public parking is available within 200 feet of the project, Staff may waive parking requirements. In the C-1 zoning district, on-street parking shall be permitted in designated areas only. 
b.  Parking lots with 50 or more spaces shall be divided into separate areas and divided by landscape areas or walkways at least ten (10) feet in width or by a building or groups of buildings. Parking lots shall be landscaped and buffered in accordance with Section 4.07.00. 
c.  Bicycle parking facilities. Bicycle parking facilities shall be provided in parking lots greater than fifty (50) spaces serving buildings that are open to the public. 
d.  Interparcel connectivity. An internal driveway accessing adjacent commercial properties, whether developed or undeveloped, shall be provided unless the City Manager determines the connection is not feasible given the topography. 
e.  For buildings larger than 50,000 square feet, no more than seventy-five (75) percent of the total number of required parking spaces shall be located between the building and the street. 
4.  Solid Waste Storage Areas. Solid waste receptacles, shipping pallets, bundled cardboard and similar waste materials stored for collection shall be enclosed on all sides and screened from view from adjoining residential properties or streets with a solid enclosure (at least six feet high) with a gate and shall be constructed of wood, masonry, or other compatible material. The enclosure shall measure a minimum of 13 feet by 10 feet with an opening measuring no less than 13 feet. A ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot concrete pad at least 6 inches thick shall be provided for the garbage truck loading/unloading area. 
5.  Outdoor Storage and Loading Areas. 
a.  Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and property lines. If visible from adjacent property, screening structures shall be made of similar materials as the principal structure. 
b.  Non-enclosed areas for the storage and sale of inventory shall be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, and design of the screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used in the principal structure. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to the exposed roofing colors of the buildings. 
6.  Community Spaces. For developments involving gross floor area in excess of 50,000 square feet, one square foot of plaza or community space shall be provided for every ten (10) square feet of gross floor area. Plazas and community spaces must incorporate three (3) of the following four (4) elements: 
a.  Sitting spaces. At least one sitting space for each 250 square feet shall be included in the plaza. Ledge benches shall have a minimum depth of thirty-six (36) inches. 
b.  Trees in accordance with the City of Carrollton Tree Species List at a minimum of one tree per 800 square feet. 
c.  Water features or public art. 
d.  Outdoor eating areas. 
7.  Lighting. Artificial lighting shall be so arranged and constructed as to not produce direct illumination on adjacent properties. 
(Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17) 
4.02.03 - Design Standards for Multifamily Developments 
A.  Architectural Standards. 
1.  Orientation. Multifamily buildings within 100 feet of a public street shall have their primary orientation toward the street. 
2.  Buildings. 
a.  All buildings shall incorporate front entry porches oriented toward the street. 
b.  Any wall adjacent to the street shall have a minimum of [twenty-five] (25) percent of the wall facing the street in functional doors and windows. 
c.  Building frontages greater than 100 feet in length shall have offsets and other distinctive changes in building facades. 
3.  Building materials. The exterior siding material shall consist of wood, masonry, concrete, stucco, masonite, or other materials of like appearance. Vinyl lap siding may not be used on multi-family buildings. Facade colors shall be earthtone or neutral. Building trim and accent colors areas may feature brighter colors, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of any building facade. 
4.  Minimum residential unit size. In mixed use buildings, residential units shall be a minimum of 800 square feet. 
5.  Long-term maintenance requirements. All multi-family developments shall be required to provide periodic inspections by a licensed architect or professional engineer confirming all major construction components conform to all applicable codes and regulations. Upon completion of the project and prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, the architect or engineer must certify that the project has been built in accordance with all applicable codes, laws, ordinances, regulatory standards, etc. In addition to meeting all other applicable criteria for the issuance of a certificate of occupancy, all developments subject to this subsection shall be required to enter into a "long-term maintenance compliance agreement" with the City as a condition for receiving a certificate of occupancy. The agreement form is made a part of this section by reference. Said agreement shall require that the owner submit to a comprehensive maintenance compliance inspection every two [(2)] years conducted by the City Building Official, his agents, or designee. At its discretion, the City may also ask other agencies with prescribed jurisdictional authority to participate in the inspection. The owner shall have the right to be represented at the inspection. The purpose of the inspection shall be to determine the development's compliance with all applicable codes, laws, ordinances, regulatory standards, guidelines, etc. Any violations, deficiencies, or noncompliance determined by the inspection must be corrected by the owner consistent with the applicable provisions of the City's housing and/or building codes. Violations, deficiencies, or non-compliance determined by other agencies must be corrected as directed by the respective agency. The agreement required herein shall be recorded with the deed for the property and shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the development. The agreement must be transferred to and assumed by all subsequent owners as a condition of any sale. Nothing in this section shall preclude the building official, any other city representative, or any other agency so authorized, from conducting additional inspections and ordering other corrective actions at any time as may be provided for by code, law, ordinance, regulatory standards, guidelines, etc. 
B.  Site Design Standards. 
1.  Location. The parcel shall have primary ingress and egress from a major or collector street, as identified on the Zoning Map. 
2.  Landscaping. 
a.  A landscape strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided between the right-of-way and any buildings, plazas, or parking areas. 
b.  Streetscape trees shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.07.00 along public rights-of-way adjacent to the property. 
c.  Parking areas shall be shaded by large broadleaf canopied trees in accordance with Section 4.07.00. 
[d.]  Landscaping and buffering shall be completed in accordance with Section 4.07.00. 
3.  Open Space Requirements. 
[a.]  An area equal to at least ten (10) percent of the total lot area shall be dedicated to open space for recreation for use by tenants of the development. 
[b.]  Areas covered by shrubs, pine straw, park mulch and other ground covers which do not provide for suitable human use may not be counted toward this requirement. 
[c.]  Common areas with decks, patios, and similar areas are eligible for open space criteria. 
[d.]  Greenspace shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.05.00. 
4.  Connection to Carrollton Greenbelt. All multifamily developments within one thousand (1,000) feet of the Carrollton Greenbelt shall connect to the Carrollton Greenbelt with a path of the same dimensions, materials, and specifications as the Carrollton Greenbelt. All multifamily developments beyond one thousand (1,000) feet of the Carrollton Greenbelt shall install a path one thousand (1,000) feet in the direction of the nearest Carrollton Greenbelt location, which path shall be of the same dimensions, materials, and specifications as the Carrollton Greenbelt. For multifamily developments beyond one thousand (1,000) feet of the Carrollton Greenbelt, the City may, in its discretion, complete the path in order to connect it to the Carrollton Greenbelt. 
5.  Playgrounds. All multifamily developments shall provide a playground that meets the same standards and specifications as City-owned playgrounds and which must be approved by the Carrollton Parks and Recreation Commission. 
6.  Sidewalks. All multifamily developments shall provide sidewalks that meet City standards and specifications within the development, and said sidewalks must connect to sidewalks outside of the development. 
C.  Solid Waste Storage Areas. Solid waste receptacles shall be enclosed on all sides and screened from view from adjoining residential properties or streets with a solid enclosure (at least six feet high) with a gate and shall be constructed of wood, masonry, or other compatible material. The enclosure shall measure a minimum of 13 feet by 10 feet with an opening measuring no less than 13 feet. A ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot concrete pad at least 6 inches thick shall be provided for the garbage truck loading/unloading area. 
D.  Lighting. All developments shall be designed and constructed with street lights. Lighting shall be so arranged and constructed as to not produce direct illumination on adjacent properties. 
E.  Density. The density of any multifamily development within the R-M zoning district shall not exceed six (6) units per acre, unless a special use permit pursuant to Section 2.04.24(B) is obtained from the Mayor and City Council allowing a greater density. 
F.  "Unit" defined. For purposes of multifamily development, each unit shall have a kitchen and no unit shall exceed four (4) bedrooms. 
(Res. No. 21-2016, 11-7-16; Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17; Res. No. 01-2018, 2-2-18; Res. No. 08-2019, 2-4-19) 
4.02.04 - Design Standards for Industrial Development 
The following standards shall apply to development within the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
A.  Architectural Standards. 
1.  Orientation. Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward the street. 
2.  Buildings or portions of buildings that are not put to industrial uses and instead are put to commercial uses or that are open to the general public (e.g., lobbies, reception areas, etc.) are subject to the following standards. 
a.  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes, and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from rain and sun. 
b.  Any wall adjacent to the street shall have a minimum of thirty (30) percent in windows, display areas, and entrances. Building frontages greater than [one hundred] 100 feet in length shall have offsets and other distinctive changes in building facades. 
c.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface and finish giving emphasis to entrances. 
3.  Building materials. The following standards apply to buildings that are open to the public. 
a.  Building facades for buildings visible from the front or side yard adjacent to a street may not be clad in metal siding, plain concrete block, or plain concrete walls. 
b.  Permitted materials for these facades include, without limitation, brick, natural decay resistant wood siding, rock, stone, decorative concrete block or concrete walls with textured surface materials, and hardi-board. Vinyl lap siding may not be used. 
c.  Facade colors shall be earthtone or neutral. Building trim and accent colors areas may feature brighter colors, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of any building facade. 
d.  These requirements may be waived if the building is not accessed by the public, such as warehouses and industrial buildings without attached offices. 
B.  Site Design Standards. 
1.  Landscaping. 
[a.]  A landscape strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided between the right-of-way and any buildings, plazas, or parking areas. 
[b.]  Streetscape trees shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.07.00 along public right-of-way adjacent to the property. 
[c.]  Landscaping and buffering shall be completed in accordance with Section 4.07.00. 
2.  Pedestrian Circulation. The following standards apply to buildings that are open to the public. 
a.  Sidewalks, no less than six (6) feet in width shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abuts a street. 
b.  Pedestrian connections shall be made from the sidewalk to the entrance of the building. 
4.  Parking lots. 
a.  Location. Parking areas may be located between the building and the street. 
b.  Parking areas shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 4.07.00. Landscaping may be waived within parking areas designed for tractor trailer parking or loading and unloading of materials. 
5.  Solid Waste Storage Areas. Solid waste receptacles, shipping pallets, bundled cardboard and similar waste materials stored for collection shall be enclosed on all sides and screened from view from adjoining residential properties or streets with a solid enclosure (at least six feet high) with a gate and shall be constructed of wood, masonry, or other compatible material. The enclosure shall measure a minimum of 13 feet by 10 feet with an opening measuring no less than 13 feet. A ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot concrete pad at least 6 inches thick shall be provided for the garbage truck loading/unloading area. 
6.  Outdoor storage and loading areas. 
a.  Outdoor storage areas and loading facilities shall be screened and buffered when adjacent to residentially zoned land. 
b.  Materials, colors, and design of the screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used in the principal structure. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to the exposed roofing colors of the buildings. 
7.  Lighting. Artificial lighting shall be so arranged and constructed as to not produce direct illumination on adjacent properties. 
(Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17; Res. No. 08-2019, 2-4-19) 
4.02.05 - Design Standards for the Lake Carroll Village Overlay 
A.  Architectural Standards. 
1.  Orientation. Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward the street. Lots with double frontage or through lots shall provide orientation and public entrances on facades along both street frontages. 
2.  Buildings. 
a.  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes, and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from rain and sun. 
b.  Any wall adjacent to the street or that has a public entrance shall have thirty (30) percent in windows, display areas, and entrances, with the bottom of the windows being no less than four (4) feet high so as to provide visibility from adjacent streets and sidewalks. For multi-story buildings, there must be an average of thirty (30) percent in windows, display areas, and entrances for those floors above street level. 
c.  Building frontages greater than [one hundred] 100 feet in length shall have offsets and other distinctive changes in building facades. 
d.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface and finish giving emphasis to entrances. 
3.  Building materials. Permitted materials for building facades include, without limitation, brick, natural decay resistant wood siding, rock, stone, decorative concrete block or concrete walls with textured surface materials, and hardi-board. Facade colors shall be earthtone or neutral. Building trim and accents may feature brighter colors, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of any building facade. Vinyl lap siding may not be used. 
4.  Roofs. With the exception of satellite dishes, antennae, or other such related equipment the purpose of which is to transmit or receive television, radio, or telecommunications signals, all rooftop equipment shall be concealed so that it is not visible from the public right of way. 
5.  Maximum square footage. No single tenant space shall exceed [fifty thousand] 50,000 gross square feet, unless a special use permit pursuant to Section 2.04.24(B) is obtained from the Mayor and City Council allowing additional square feet. 
B.  Site Design Standards. 
1.  Landscaping. 
a.  A landscape strip at least ten (10) feet wide shall be provided between the right-of-way and any buildings, plazas, or parking areas. 
b.  Streetscape trees shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.07.00 of the UDO along the public right-of-way adjacent to the property. 
c.  On buildings larger than [fifty thousand] 50,000 square feet, a minimum of seven (7) percent of the total parking area shall be located within the parking area in the form of landscape islands and peninsulas so as to facilitate access to the building by pedestrians and cyclists. 
d.  Landscaping and buffering shall be completed in accordance with Section 4.07.00 of the UDO. 
2.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
a.  In order to encourage pedestrian-oriented developments, buildings sited within forty (40) feet of the street shall provide primary public access from the public sidewalk along the street. 
b.  Sidewalks, no less than six (6) feet in width, shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abuts a street. 
c.  Pedestrian connections shall be made from the sidewalk to any public entrance of the building, shall consist of a raised pedestrian sidewalk or a raised pedestrian crosswalk, and shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. 
d.  A pedestrian circulation plan shall be provided. 
3.  Parking. 
a.  Number of spaces. The number of parking spaces required by Section 4.03.00 of the UDO shall be provided, unless a parking needs assessment demonstrates that more or less parking should be provided, in which case the number of parking spaces may be reduced or increased at the discretion of the City Manager. 
b.  Location. Vehicular parking areas shall not be located between the building and the street. On-street parking may be permitted at the City Manager's discretion on side streets in designated areas only. 
c.  Parking lots with fifty (50) or more spaces shall be divided into separate areas and divided by landscape areas or walkways at least ten (10) feet in width or by a building or groups of buildings. Parking lots shall be landscaped and buffered in accordance with Section 4.07.00 of the UDO. 
d.  Bicycle parking facilities. Bicycle parking facilities that are open to the public shall be provided. 
e.  Interparcel connectivity. An internal driveway accessing adjacent commercial properties, whether developed or undeveloped, shall be provided unless the City Manager determines the connection is not feasible given the topography. 
4.  Solid Waste Storage Areas. Solid waste receptacles, shipping pallets, bundled cardboard and similar waste materials stored for collection shall be enclosed on all sides and screened from view from adjoining residential properties or streets with a solid enclosure (at least six (6) feet high) with a gate and shall be constructed of wood, masonry, or other compatible material. The enclosure shall measure a minimum of thirteen (13) feet by ten (10) feet with an opening measuring no less than thirteen (13) feet. A ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot concrete pad at least 6 inches thick shall be provided for the garbage truck loading/unloading area. 
5.  Outdoor Storage and Loading Areas. 
a.  Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and property lines. If visible from adjacent property, screening structures shall be made of similar materials as the principal structure. 
b.  Non-enclosed areas for the storage and sale of inventory shall be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, and design of the screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used in the principal structure. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to the exposed roofing colors of the buildings. 
6.  Community Spaces. For developments involving gross floor area in excess of [twenty-five thousand] 25,000 square feet, one [1] square foot of plaza or community space shall be provided for every ten (10) square feet of gross floor area. Plazas and community spaces must incorporate three (3) of the following four (4) elements: 
a.  Sitting spaces. At least one [1] sitting space for each [two hundred fifty] 250 square feet shall be included in the plaza. Ledge benches shall have a minimum depth of thirty-six (36) inches. 
b.  Trees in accordance with the City of Carrollton Tree Species List at a minimum of one [1] tree per [eight hundred] 800 square feet. 
c.  Water features or public art. 
d.  Outdoor eating areas. 
7.  Pedestrian scale lighting. Lighting shall be designed and located at a pedestrian scale consistent with pedestrian movements and the neighborhood. Lighting shall be concealed or shielded to avoid glare and off-site impacts on abutting properties. Lighting poles and fixtures shall be compatible with the function and design of the feature and abutting properties. All lamps shall be positioned, so that they are no higher than fifteen (15) feet above the ground. 
8.  Utilities. All utilities within the development shall be underground and shall be installed in accordance with pursuant to Section 6.17.01(B). 
(Res. No. 05-2018, 3-5-18) 
4.02.06 - Design Standards for the Maple Street Overlay 
The following design standards apply to all properties within the Maple Street Overlay, except those properties zoned R-20. 
A.  Architectural Standards. 
1.  Orientation. Buildings shall have their primary orientation toward the street. Lots with double frontage or through lots shall provide orientation and public entrances on facades along both street frontages. 
2.  Buildings. 
a.  Buildings shall incorporate arcades, roofs, alcoves, porticoes, and/or awnings at public entrances that protect pedestrians from rain and sun. 
b.  Any wall adjacent to the street or that has a public entrance shall have thirty (30) percent in windows, display areas, and entrances, with the bottom of the windows being no less than four (4) feet high so as to provide unobstructed visibility from adjacent streets and sidewalks. For multi-story buildings, there must be an average of thirty (30) percent in windows, display areas, and entrances for those floors above street level. All other walls shall have fifteen (15) percent in windows, display areas, and entrances. 
c.  Building frontages greater than 100 feet in length shall have offsets and other distinctive changes in building facades. 
d.  Buildings shall incorporate lighting and changes in mass, surface and finish giving emphasis to entrances. 
e.  Residential units may be located on the first floor of an existing building that is being repurposed or renovated for multiple uses, provided the following criteria are met: 
1.  The building is greater than fifty (50) years in age. 
2.  At least fifty percent (50%) of the existing building square footage is preserved in the renovation. 
3.  Building materials. Permitted materials for building facades include, without limitation, brick, natural decay resistant wood siding, rock, stone, decorative concrete block or concrete walls with textured surface materials, and hardie-board. Facade colors shall be earthtone or neutral. Building trim and accents may feature brighter colors, not to exceed twenty-five (25) percent of any building facade. Vinyl lap siding may not be used. 
4.  Roofs. With the exception of satellite dishes, antennae, or other such related equipment the purpose of which is to transmit or receive television, radio, or telecommunications signals, all rooftop equipment shall be concealed so that it is not visible from the public right of way. 
5.  Maximum square footage. No single tenant space shall exceed 50,000 gross square feet, unless a special use permit pursuant to Section 2.04.24(B) is obtained from the Mayor and City Council allowing additional square feet. 
B.  Site Design Standards. 
1.  Landscaping. 
a.  Streetscape trees shall be provided in accordance with Section 4.07.00 of the UDO along the public right-of-way adjacent to the property. 
b.  On buildings larger than 50,000 square feet, a minimum of seven (7) percent of the total parking area shall be located within the parking area in the form of landscape islands and peninsulas so as to facilitate access to the building by pedestrians and cyclists. 
c.  Landscaping and buffering shall be completed in accordance with Section 4.07.00 of the UDO. 
2.  Pedestrian Circulation. 
a.  In order to encourage pedestrian-oriented developments, buildings sited within forty (40) feet of the street shall provide primary public access from the public sidewalk along the street. 
b.  Sidewalks, no less than six (6) feet in width, shall be provided along all sides of the lot that abuts a street. 
c.  Pedestrian connections shall be made from the sidewalk to any public entrance of the building, shall consist of a raised pedestrian sidewalk or a raised pedestrian crosswalk, and shall be a minimum of five (5) feet in width. 
d.  A pedestrian circulation plan shall be provided. 
3.  Parking. 
a.  Number of spaces. The number of parking spaces required by Section 4.03.00 of the UDO shall be provided, unless a parking needs assessment demonstrates that more or less parking should be provided, in which case the number of parking spaces may be reduced or increased at the discretion of the City Manager. 
b.  Location. Vehicular parking areas shall not be located between the building and the street. On-street parking may be permitted at the City Manager's discretion on side streets in designated areas only. 
c.  Parking lots with fifty (50) or more spaces shall be divided into separate areas and divided by landscape areas or walkways at least ten (10) feet in width or by a building or groups of buildings. Parking lots shall be landscaped and buffered in accordance with Section 4.07.00 of the UDO. 
d.  Bicycle parking facilities. Bicycle parking facilities that are open to the public shall be provided. 
e.  Interparcel connectivity. An internal driveway accessing adjacent commercial properties, whether developed or undeveloped, shall be provided unless the City Manager determines the connection is not feasible given the topography. 
4.  Solid Waste Storage Areas. Solid waste receptacles, shipping pallets, bundled cardboard and similar waste materials stored for collection shall be enclosed on all sides and screened from view from adjoining residential properties or streets with a solid enclosure (at least six (6) feet high) with a gate and shall be constructed of wood, masonry, or other compatible material. The enclosure shall measure a minimum of thirteen (13) feet by ten (10) feet with an opening measuring no less than thirteen (13) feet. A ten (10) foot by twenty (20) foot concrete pad at least 6 inches thick shall be provided for the garbage truck loading/unloading area. 
5.  Outdoor Storage and Loading Areas. 
a.  Areas for truck parking and loading shall be screened by a combination of structures and landscaping to minimize visibility from adjacent streets and property lines. If visible from adjacent property, screening structures shall be made of similar materials as the principal structure. 
b.  Non-enclosed areas for the storage and sale of inventory shall be permanently defined and screened with walls and/or fences. Materials, colors, and design of the screening walls and/or fences shall conform to those used in the principal structure. If such areas are to be covered, then the covering shall conform to the exposed roofing colors of the buildings. 
6.  Community Spaces. For developments involving gross floor area in excess of 25,000 square feet, one square foot of plaza or community space shall be provided for every ten (10) square feet of gross floor area. Plazas and community spaces must incorporate three (3) of the following four (4) elements: 
a.  Sitting spaces. At least one sitting space for each 250 square feet shall be included in the plaza. Ledge benches shall have a minimum depth of thirty-six (36) inches. 
b.  Trees in accordance with the City of Carrollton Tree Species List at a minimum of one tree per 800 square feet. 
c.  Water features or public art. 
d.  Outdoor eating areas. 
7.  Pedestrian scale lighting. Lighting shall be designed and located at a pedestrian scale consistent with pedestrian movements and the neighborhood. Lighting shall be concealed or shielded to avoid glare and off-site impacts on abutting properties. Lighting poles and fixtures shall be compatible with the function and design of the feature and abutting properties. All lamps shall be positioned, so that they are no higher than fifteen (15) feet above the ground. 
8.  Utilities. All utilities within the development shall be underground and shall be installed in accordance with Section 6.17.01(B). 
(Res. No. 09-2018, 6-4-18) 
4.03.00 - OFF-STREET PARKING SPACE REQUIREMENTS 

4.03.01 - Parking Standards and Design 
A.  Parking space requirements. 
1.  Except as provided in this section, no application for a building permit shall be approved unless there is included with the plan for such building, improvements, or use, a development plan showing the required space reserved for off-street parking and loading. Occupancy shall not be allowed unless the required off-street parking and loading facilities have been provided in accordance with those shown on the approved plan. 
2.  Minimum off-street vehicular parking spaces shall be provided at the time of the construction of the principal building or at the time of the conversion of a building having a previously existing use, to a more intensive use of the same property. In the C-1 zoning district, off-street parking may be waived by Staff if adequate public parking is available within 200 feet of a project. 
3.  When an addition is made to a building containing less than the required parking or loading requirements, off-street parking shall be provided for the entire building, based upon the standards in this section. 
4.  No addition to an existing building shall be constructed which reduces the number of spaces, area, or usability of an existing parking lot or loading space, unless such building and its addition conform with the regulations for parking and loading contained herein. 
5.  Requirements for off-street parking for uses not specifically mentioned in this section shall be the same as required for the use most similar to the one sought. 
6.  The minimum number of parking spaces shall conform to the standards in Table 4.03.01(A). 
7.  Calculation of required parking[:] 
a.  Where floor area determines the amount of off-street parking required, the floor area of a building shall be the sum of the gross horizontal areas of every floor of the building, using exterior wall dimensions. 
b.  For places of public assembly, the number of seats shall be the maximum occupancy load established for the building by the Fire Marshall. 
Table 4.03.01(A). Parking Space Requirements. 
Type of Use or Activity Minimum Number of Spaces Automobile sales and service One space for each regular employee plus one space for each 250 square feet of floor area, plus spaces for inventory vehicles. Banks and professional offices One space for each 300 square feet of floor area. Bed and breakfast One for the owner(s) and one for each guestroom. Beauty parlors and barbershops Two spaces for each operator. Bowling alley Five spaces per alley plus requirements for any other use associated with the establishment, such as a restaurant. Churches and religious facilities One space for each four seats in main auditorium. Convenience stores One space per each 200 square feet of gross floor space. Dormitories Three spaces for each four occupants. Fraternity and sorority houses Two spaces for each resident member. Funeral parlors One space for each four seats in the chapel plus space for each funeral vehicle. Furniture and appliance stores One space for each 500 square feet of showroom. Gasoline service station One space (in addition to service area) for each pump and three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility plus one space for each attendant. Hospitals and nursing homes One space for each four beds plus one space for each staff or visiting doctor, plus one space for each employee on the largest shift. Hotels, motels and tourist courts One space for each guest bedroom plus one space for each two employees on the largest shift. Industrial plants One space for each two employees on the largest single shift plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises. Kindergartens and nursery schools One and one-half spaces for each employee plus safe and convenient off-street spaces for loading and unloading of students. Lodges and clubs One space for each 100 square feet of assembly area, or one space for each ten members, whichever is larger. Libraries and similar uses One space for each 400 square feet of gross space to which the public has access. Mobile home lots Two spaces for each lot. Offices One space for each 400 square feet of floor space. Personal care homes One space for each three beds and one space per employee. Places of amusement or assembly without fixed seating One space for each 200 square feet of floor space devoted to patron use. Places of public assembly with fixed seating One space for each four seats in the principal assembly room. Residence, Single-family Two spaces for each dwelling unit. Residence, Multi-family (3 or more units)  1-bedroom multi-family units 1.5 spaces per unit, plus guest parking  2-bedroom multi-family units 2 spaces per unit, plus guest parking  3-bedroom multi-family units 2 spaces per unit guest parking  4+ bedroom multi-family units 3 spaces per unit, plus guest parking Guest parking 1-space for the first 5-dwelling units or portion thereof plus 1-space per every 5-additional dwelling units or portion thereof, up to 100 dwelling units For dwelling units located on lots with less than 35' of street frontage: 1 additional space per unit Restaurants One space for each four seats provided for patron use. Retail business One space for each 400 feet of gross floor area. Roominghouses and boardinghouses One space for each bedroom. Senior Housing Community 1 space for each studio or one-bedroom unit 2 spaces for each 2-bedroom or 3-bedroom unit 3 spaces for each 4+ bedroom unit 1 guest parking space for every five dwelling units Schools One space for each employee, including teachers and staff members, plus off-street space for the safe and convenient loading and unloading of students, plus additional facilities for student parking taking into consideration the total number of students, the percentage of students driving automobiles and the parking requirements for stadium, gymnasium and auditorium use. Wholesale and warehousing Two spaces for each employee plus one space for each company vehicle operating from the premises.  
8.  Parking space requirements (number of spaces) may be adjusted by the City Manager. Adjustments may be granted for a multiple tenant establishment, commercial center, or joint use of two (2) or more adjacent or adjoining uses. The property owner shall provide the following information to support a request for reduction or waiver of otherwise required parking. 
a.  There is one (1) or more paved driveway connections between the parking areas of the developments involved. The number, location(s), and design specifications of said driveway(s) shall be acceptable to the City. 
b.  A parking study shall be provided to document the proposed number of parking spaces. The study shall include an estimate of the number of spaces required and the source of the estimate. Acceptable sources include studies such as conducted by the Urban Land Institute or the Institute of Transportation Engineers. Parking data for similar uses may be included, provided that the similar uses are documented as similar in density, scale, bulk, area, type of activity, hours of operation, and location. The City shall retain the sole authority to accept the parking data as appropriate for the proposed use. 
c.  A cross-access and cross-parking agreement, in recordable form acceptable to the City, shall be executed by the owners of developments involved. Said agreement shall guarantee the joint use of a specified number of parking spaces. 
9.  Parking space requirements may be reduced, waived by the City Manager, or shared parking may be approved, based upon the availability of an off-site and non-contiguous parking facility or parking lot. The property owner shall provide the following information to support a request for reduction or waiver of otherwise required parking. 
a.  One-half of the off-street parking spaces required by a use whose peak attendance will be at night or on Sundays may be assigned to a use that will be closed at night or on Sundays. 
b.  The availability of the off-site parking lot shall be guaranteed in perpetuity, by virtue of common ownership with the primary site, recorded easements, or other binding agreements acceptable to the City. 
c.  The off-site parking lot shall be located no more than 400 feet from the primary site. The distance shall be measured along the paved public right-of-way from the entrance driveway into the parking area to the entrance of the principal building. 
d.  The off-site parking lot shall meet all development standards set forth in this UDO. 
B.  Parking lot design requirements. 
Off-street parking lots, individual parking spaces, loading areas, and loading stalls shall be designed to conform to the following criteria and standards. 
1.  All multiple-family, commercial, and industrial uses shall provide a paved, dust-free surface. The use of approved permeable or pervious pavement materials shall be subject to approval by the City Engineer. 
2.  All such areas shall be at all times maintained at the expense of the owners thereof in a clean, orderly, and dust-free condition such that it does not create a nuisance. 
3.  All off-street parking and loading areas shall be well maintained. Parking lots and loading areas shall be free of potholes, debris, weeds, broken curbs, and broken wheel stops. 
4.  All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be drained so as to prevent damage to abutting properties and/or public streets. 
5.  All parking areas shall be arranged for convenient access and safety of pedestrians and vehicles. 
6.  Parking lot shall be landscaped in accordance with Section 4.07.00. 
7.  All parking areas shall provide barriers when located at the perimeter of the lot to prevent encroachment onto adjacent property. 
8.  All off-street parking, loading, and service areas shall be separated from walkways, sidewalks, and streets by curbing. Loading stalls shall not hinder movement of pedestrians or vehicles over a street, sidewalk, or alley, or to and from an off-street parking area. 
9.  Off-street parking and loading areas that are to be used at night shall include proper illumination for the safety of pedestrians, vehicles, and for security purposes. Lighting shall be located and shielded to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties. 
10.  Individual spaces and internal aisles shall be designed according to the standards below; 
a.  Parking space dimensions shall be a minimum of nine (9) feet by eighteen (18) feet. 
b.  The number, design, and location of parking spaces provided to ensure handicapped access shall comply with the Americans with Disabilities Act standards for accessible design. 
1.  Handicapped designated parking shall be provided at the ratio of one (1) space for each twenty-five (25) spaces for the first 100 spaces, and 
2.  A ratio of one (1) additional handicapped designated space for each additional 100 spaces. 
c.  There shall be provided adequate interior driveways to connect each parking space with a public right-of-way. 
Table 4.03.01(B). ;hg;Parking Lot Design. 
Required Width of Interior 
Driveways and Aisles (feet) Parking Design 
(degree of angle) 24 90° 18 60° 12 Parallel 10 One-way traffic 
Not adjacent to parking 20 Two-way traffic 
Not adjacent to parking  
11.  Each off-street parking space shall be clearly marked, and directional arrows or signs shall be provided wherever necessary. Markers, directional arrows, and signs shall be properly maintained so as to ensure their maximum efficiency. 
C.  Loading space design standards. 
1.  On every lot on which a business, commercial, or industrial use is hereafter established, space shall be provided for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the public street or alley. 
2.  Off-street loading spaces shall be provided according to the standards below: 
Table 4.03.01(C). Required Loading Spaces by Land Use. 
Land Use Gross Floor 
Area 
(square feet) Loading and Unloading 
Spaces Required 10 × 25 
Berths 10 × 50 
Berths Office, restaurant, hotel or motel Less than 
10,000 0 0 10,000 to 
99,999 1 0 100,000 to 
149,999 0 1 150,000 or over 0 2 Retail establishment, shopping center, industrial use, and other commercial uses Less than 5,000 1 0 5,000 to 19,999 0 1 20,000 to 
49,999 0 2 50,000 to 
79,999 0 3 80,000 to 
99,999 0 4 100,000 to 
149,999 0 5 150,000 or over 0 6  
3.  Such spaces shall have access to an alley or, if there is no alley, to a street. 
4.  Off-street loading spaces shall be designed and constructed so that all maneuvering for loading and unloading can take place entirely within the property lines of the premises. 
5.  Loading spaces shall be provided so as not to interfere with the free, normal movement of vehicles and pedestrians on public rights-of-way. 
6.  Loading spaces shall not impair the movement of vehicles or pedestrians on streets, alleys, or sidewalks. 
7.  Elementary, middle and junior high schools, day care centers, and childcare centers shall provide safe and convenient drop-off areas for students. The drop-off area is intended to allow a student to enter or exit a vehicle directly to a sidewalk abutting the entrance to the school or day care center. 
(Res. No. 11-2008, § 1, 5-5-08; Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17) 
4.03.02 - Drive-Through Facilities and Stacking Lanes 
A.  All uses and facilities providing drive-up or drive-through service shall provide stacking lanes in compliance with the standards of this section. 
B.  Restaurants with drive-up or drive-through facilities shall provide a minimum stacking space to accommodate eight (8) vehicles. A by-pass lane shall be required. 
C.  Banks and financial institutions shall provide stacking spaces according to Table 4.03.02(A). A by-pass lane shall be provided. 
Table 4.03.02(A). Stacking Lane Requirements for Banks and Financial Institutions. 
Number of Drive-Through Lanes Total Number of Vehicles Accommodated 1 4 2 8 Each additional lane 2 additional vehicles accommodated  
      
D.  Stacking lanes shall not be located within a designated delivery area or area designated for loading spaces. 
4.03.03 - Driveway Design Standards and Development Entrances 
A.  To improve public safety and reduce traffic congestion, the city establishes minimum distances between driveways and intersections as provided in Table 4.03.03 (A) for all zoning districts except the C-1 district. 
Table 4.03.03 (A) Minimum Distance between Driveways and Street Types 
Street 
Type Minimum 
distance 
between 
driveways along 
street type 1 Minimum distance 
between 
driveways and 
intersections along 
street type 3 Minimum distance between 
street types 4 Local 5 Collector 6 Major 7 Local No minimum 60 feet 125 
feet 125 feet 125 feet Collector 50 feet 2 75 feet 125 
feet 200 feet 200 feet Major 125 feet 125 feet 125 
feet 200 feet 300 feet  
1. The distance between driveways is measured from centerline to centerline. 
2. Circular driveways serving single-family residences shall not be subject to minimum driveway spacing standards. 
3. The distance between driveways and intersections is measured between the centerline of the driveway and the extension of the nearest right-of-way line of the street that intersects the facing street. 
4. The distance between street types is measured between the nearest right-of-way lines. 
5. Driveways projected to carry more than 100 vehicle trips per day and fewer than 1,000 vehicle trips per day shall be considered local streets. 
6. Driveways projected to carry more than 100 vehicle trips per day and fewer than 1,000 vehicle trips per day shall be considered local streets. 
7. Driveways projected to carry 8,000 or more vehicle trips per day shall be considered major streets. 
B.  Driveway access onto state roads. Access onto state roads shall meet existing Georgia Department of Transportation Driveway Grade Standards. 
1.  Grades for new driveways in all zones shall not exceed a grade of twenty (20) percent for any portion of the driveway. 
2.  All driveways shall be designed in accord with the criteria of the City Engineer and approved prior to issuance of a certificate of occupancy for new construction. 
3.  If required by the City of Carrollton, the developer or owner shall provide certification of driveway grade by a licensed land surveyor. 
4.  All vision clearance standards associated with driveway entrances onto public streets shall not be subject to the variance section of this UDO. 
4.04.00 - PAVING PERMITS 

4.04.01 - Paving Permits Required 
A.  Except as specifically exempted in Section 4.04.01(B) below, it shall be unlawful for any person to pave any portion of property within the City without first obtaining a permit from the City. For purposes of this Section 4.04.01 the term "pave" shall mean to cover any portion of the ground with concrete, asphalt, stones, bricks, or like materials. 
B.  Paving permits are not required in the following zoning districts: ER-3, ER-1, R-20, R-15, R-10, or R-8. 
C.  Non-conforming paved areas may not be expanded. However, resurfacing or other repair and maintenance of existing non-conforming lots will be allowed with a paving permit issued pursuant to this Section. 
D.  A thirty dollar ($30.00) application fee will be charged to cover administration costs. 
(Res. No. 17-2018, 11-5-18) 
4.05.00 - GREENSPACE 

4.05.01 - Greenspace [Requirements]. 
A.  All residential subdivisions where more than four lots are created and multi-family developments shall provide no less than the percentage of gross area indicated in the table below as green space. If green space has been provided for multi-family projects as part of a subdivision process, then no additional green space shall be required as a condition of site plan approval. Tree canopy located within greenspace may count toward overall tree canopy requirements. 
Table 4.05.01 (A) Minimum greenspace requirement 
Development Type Minimum Percentage of Gross Area to be 
Provided as Greenspace Single-family detached 
(avg. lot size greater 
than 20,000 square feet) 
and mixed use 20 percent Single-family detached 
(avg. lot size less than 
20,000 square feet) 25 percent Multi-family, two-family, 
and townhouse 
developments 30 percent  
B.  Types of green space. Buffers, landscaping, and open space, as required per this UDO, may count toward overall green space requirements if they meet one of the following types of green space. 
Table 4.05.01 (B) Greenspace by type 
Type Description Minimum 
Size Minimum 
Width Floodplain Maximum 
percentage per 
development Natural Areas Established for the protection of natural attributes; passive recreation allowed Two (2) acres 100 feet, which may include width of adjacent Greenway 50 percent may be located within the floodplain 80 percent Greenways Linear greenspace that incorporates trails; connects residential areas with other residential areas, public uses, or services None 25 feet Greenways may be located within floodplain; trails must remain outside floodplain 80 percent Greenbelts Runs along the perimeter of a neighborhood; serves as a buffer; may be planted or natural; not intended for recreation use None 25 feet with an average width of 50 feet Greenbelts may be located within the floodplain 50 percent Playgrounds Play areas for children as well as shelters and benches; playgrounds shall not abut any arterial street 2,500 square feet None Playgrounds may not be located within the floodplain 50 percent Plazas or Greens Passive recreational uses that are bounded by streets; greens have less formal landscaping than plazas 60,000 square feet 200 feet May be located within floodplain 20 percent  
C.  Maintenance of greenspace. Unless dedicated to and accepted by the City as part of its Parks and Recreational Lands, the applicant shall establish a property owner's association or some other entity approved by the City to provide for the on-going maintenance of all landscaping and improvements. 
4.06.00 - PLANNED DEVELOPMENT (PD) DISTRICT 

4.06.01 - Generally 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of the Planned Development (PD) district is to encourage creative and flexible projects that include compatible residential, commercial, office, and related public facilities unified by a development plan. The PD district shall be a zoning district, and is permissible when approved according to a site plan and written narrative that ensures the conservation of the natural environment, more efficient use of land, and efficiency in the extension of streets and utilities. 
B.  Objectives. The Planned Development District shall have the following characteristics: 
1.  Open space. Encourage ingenuity and resourcefulness in land planning techniques by developing functional open spaces. 
2.  Sense of place. Allow the design of developments that are architecturally and environmentally innovative and that achieve more efficient utilization of land than is possible through application of conventional zoning standards. 
3.  Mixture of uses. Accommodate a mixture of land uses which are compatible both internally and externally. 
4.  Protection of natural resources. Ensure the conservation of the natural environment including trees and vegetation, topography, and geological resources such as groundwater, soils, and drainage areas. 
5.  Efficient land use. Encourage efficient use of land, street networks, and utility locations. 
6.  Compatibility and consistency. Maintain compatibility with nearby development and consistency with the future land use element of the City of Carrollton Comprehensive Plan. 
4.06.02 - Minimum Standards 
A.  Land Uses. Land uses within a PD district may include any specific use other than industrial uses and uses utilizing outdoor storage of materials or equipment. Section 4.06.02(D) and (E) describe the general types of uses and standards that apply to those uses. In addition, Table 4.06.02(B) indicates the minimum and maximum percentage of each type of use. 
B.  Requirements. The PD district may be proposed in any location consistent with the future development map in order to provide flexibility in the application of development and site design standards. A PD development shall meet the following requirements for location, use provisions, and ownership: 
Table 4.06.02(B). Planned Development Requirements. 
Development Feature Standard Location 
 Road access 
 Public water and sewer   
Major arterial or collector. 
Required. Minimum Common Open Space 15% of total project area. Twenty-five (25) percent of the open space area may be used for stormwater management facilities. Residential PD Land Use Standards   
Residential 
Open Space 
Recreation Minimum 
40% 
15% 
5% Maximum 
75% 
50% 
20% Mixed Use PD Land Use Standards Residential 
Office 
Commercial 
Open Space 
Recreation 35% 
15% 
10% 
15% 
5% 75% 
25% 
40% 
50% 
20% Non-Residential PD Land Use Standards Office 
Commercial 
Open Space 0% 
0% 
15% 85% 
85% 
50% Ownership Single owner, or Multiple owners, provided that a joint application for rezoning and development plan approval is submitted.  
C.  Provisions for the permanent ownership, operation, and maintenance of common open space shall be provided by covenant, deed restriction, easement, or ownership by and for the benefit of a property owners association, land trust, or other legal entity. 
D.  Residential uses: 
1.  Any type of residential dwelling unit is permissible, including single-family, multi-family, town house, apartments, duplex units, and manufactured housing; 
2.  For PD projects including residential development, the density shall not exceed fourteen (14) units per acre; and 
3.  Community centers, meeting facilities, and indoor or outdoor recreation facilities when maintenance for such uses is provided for as set forth in Section 4.06.02 (C). 
E.  Commercial and office uses: 
1.  Unless otherwise prohibited, any commercial or office use may be proposed; 
2.  Development shall be designed and landscaped in a manner that ensures compatibility with residential uses within the PD and adjacent to the PD; and 
3.  Traffic circulation shall not route commercial traffic through residential areas within or adjacent to the PD. 
F.  "Unit" defined. For purposes of residential development, each unit shall have a kitchen and no unit shall exceed four bedrooms. This restriction does not apply to a free standing, detached, single family home. 
(Res. No. 06-2015, 7-17-15) 
4.06.03 - Site Plan Requirements 
A.  A site plan and a written narrative shall accompany an application to rezone as a Planned Development. The submittal and content requirements for the site plan and written narrative are set forth in Article 10. 
B.  Specific site design and development standards shall be set forth on the site plan or in the written narrative and accompanying schedules of use and design standards. 
C.  Upon approval of the rezoning to a PD district, the site plan and written narrative shall be recorded and shall be binding on all future development and use within the PD development. 
D.  Building permits and public improvements shall not be authorized or installed for any PD development until final approval has been granted. 
E.  Procedures for minor and major modifications to an approved PD site plan are set forth in Article 10. 
F.  If no building permit or certificate of occupancy for an approved PD development is issued within twelve months from the date of approval of any such PD rezoning, the Mayor and City Council may, on its own motion, cause the property to revert to its original zoning category after notice by U.S. Mail addressed to the original applicant for rezoning or to such other person as may be substituted for said original applicant upon the records of the Clerk, and reasonable opportunity to said applicant to oppose the reversion to the original PD. 
G.  No application to rezone property to PD shall be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation to the Mayor and City Council unless and until the application meets the minimum requirements set forth in this Section 4.06.03. 
(Res. No. 11-2008, § 3, 5-5-08; Res. No. 06-2015, 7-17-15) 
4.07.00 - LANDSCAPING, BUFFERS, AND TREE PROTECTION 

4.07.01 - Purpose 
The City deems it necessary and desirable in the interest of public health, safety, and welfare to enact an ordinance for the conservation, planting and replacement of trees in the City without denying the reasonable use and enjoyment of real property. The importance of trees is recognized for their shade, cooling, noise and wind reduction, soil erosion prevention, oxygen production, dust filtration, carbon dioxide absorption, aesthetic and economic enhancement of all real property, and their contribution to the general well being and quality of life of the citizens of Carrollton. Consistent with the expressed purpose of this title, all persons shall make reasonable efforts to preserve and retain certain existing, self-supporting trees. It is also the intent of this article that all applicable sites within the city maintain a minimum tree canopy, as defined and described herein. 
4.07.02 - Applicability and Provision of Landscape Plans 
A.  Applicability. New developments and existing developments adding structural or site improvements and developments requiring preliminary plats, and developments for which a land development/Land-disturbance permit is required, shall be subject to the provisions of this article. 
B.  Landscape plans. A plan showing required buffers, tree canopy, and landscaping shall be submitted in support of a site plan or building permit. All landscaping plans for buffers and related areas shall include the following information: 
1.  The location, varieties, number and size of plantings to be planted within the development; 
2.  Topographic information showing the final site grading and drainage for the landscape area; 
3.  Impervious surfaces, including sidewalks, pavement areas and building footprints; 
4.  Total tree canopy calculation by percent provided by both existing and proposed trees. See Appendix A, the City of Carrollton Tree Species table, to calculate tree canopy by percent; 
[5.]  Buffer areas; 
[6.]  Specimen Trees; and 
7.  Property lines. 
4.07.03 - Maintenance Requirements 
The applicant, property owner and/or subsequent or successor owners and their agents shall be responsible for maintenance of any landscaping and any landscaped buffer on the property on a continuing basis for the life of the development. 
A.  Maintenance. All required landscaping shall be maintained in a neat and orderly manner at all times. This shall include, but not be limited to, mowing, edging, pruning, fertilizing, watering, weeding and other activities common to the maintenance of landscaping. Landscaped areas shall be kept free of trash, litter, weeds and other materials or plants not part of the landscaping. Failure to maintain landscape areas shall be considered a violation of this UDO. 
B.  Plant material. All required plant material shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition as is appropriate for the season. Plant materials that exhibit evidence of insect pests, disease and/or damage shall be appropriately treated, and dead plants promptly removed and replaced within the next planting season. 
C.  Pruning. All tree pruning on public property shall conform to the ANSI A300 standards or other best management practices for tree care. 
D.  Tree topping. It shall be unlawful for any person or firm to top or severely prune any street tree, park tree, or other tree on public property. Topping is defined as the severe cutting back of limbs to stubs larger than three inches in diameter within the tree's crown to such a degree so as to remove the normal canopy and disfigure the tree. Severe pruning seriously affects the tree's food supply, can scald the newly exposed bark, make trees vulnerable to insect invasion, stimulate the regrowth of dense, upright branches below the pruning cut, make the tree more vulnerable to wind damage, disfigure the tree aesthetically, and sometimes result in the death of the tree. Where appropriate, crown reduction by a qualified arborist may be substituted. Trees severely damaged by storms or other causes, or certain trees under obstructions such as utility wires where other pruning practices are impractical may be exempted from this provision. 
E.  Maintenance bond required. For new developments, a two-year maintenance bond shall, unless waived by the City Manager, be required for all maintained landscaping. 
4.07.04 - Tree Canopy Requirements 
It is the goal of the City of Carrollton to achieve and maintain tree canopy cover and to promote the functional distribution of that canopy throughout and within the established zoning districts as development occurs through goals and requirements for tree canopy cover. 
A.  Minimum total tree canopy requirements. New developments and existing developments adding structural or site improvements and developments requiring preliminary plats, and developments for which a land development/Land-disturbance permit is required, shall provide at least a minimum amount of tree canopy cover as shown in Table 4.07.04(C). Existing single family residential lots that appear on a preliminary plat approved prior to the adoption of this UDO are exempt. 
B.  Minimum conserved tree canopy cover requirement. On lots equal or greater than 12,500 square feet in gross acreage a minimum amount of tree canopy cover shall originate from tree conservation as shown in Table 4.07.04(C). Trees within forested areas, open space, buffers, stormwater retention and detention areas and facilities, parks and open areas, passive recreation areas, 100-year floodplain, jurisdictional wetlands, and other similar forested areas shall count toward the minimum conserved tree canopy cover requirement if they meet the definition of a conservable tree or trees. All tree conservation shall be accomplished with the tree protection standards set forth in Section 4.07.07. 
C.  Tree canopy cover required by zoning district. The amount of tree canopy cover required as measured in percent of total gross acreage of the site or lot varies by zoning district. Canopy calculations by species is specified in Appendix A in the City of Carrollton Tree Species table. Table 4.07.04(C) contains the minimum tree canopy cover required according to the zoning district. On new single family residential subdivisions, tree canopy cover is required for the overall site, as well as for each individual lot. Tree canopy cover required for each lot may be counted toward the tree canopy cover required for the entire site. The tree canopy cover located in the adjacent public right-of-way may be applied to the individual lot and overall tree canopy requirements. 
Table 4.07.04 (C) Tree Canopy Requirements by Zoning District 
Tree Canopy Requirements by Zoning District Zoning 
District Total Tree Canopy 
Cover, Conserved and 
Planted Percent of total in 
conserved trees 
(lots larger than 
12,500) ER-1 20% 0% ER-3 20% 0% R20 60% 30% Each Lot 50% 20% R15 60% 30% Each Lot 50% 20% R10 45% 15% Each Lot 35% 10% R8 45% 15% Each Lot 35% 10% R-M 4 50% 25% R-M-10 4 50% 25% R-M-15 4 50% 25% R-T 55% 35% M-H-P 50% 20% C-2 40% 0% C-1 0% 0% C-3 45% 15% O-I 50% 25% R-O-I 50% 25% M-1 40% 5% M-2 20% 0%  
1.  See Section 4.07.07 for tree protection measures for conserved trees. 
2.  No more than [thirty] (30) percent of any one tree species shall be planted on a lot. 
3.  Lots that do not contain any pre-development tree canopy are not subject to the conserved tree canopy requirement. 
4.  The City Manager may administratively waive or reduce the tree canopy percentage for those properties in a multifamily redevelopment overlay district. 
(Res. No. 05-2014, 5-5-14; Res. No. 06-2019, 2-4-19; Res. No. 08-2019, 2-4-19) 
4.07.05 - Buffer Standards 
A.  Buffers required. When any nonresidential use, other than agricultural uses, abuts a residential zoning district or when multi-family residences are adjacent to single-family residences or districts or subdivisions, one of the following buffers types shall be installed on the lot with the more intensive or nonresidential use along common lot lines. 
B.  Buffer types. 
a.  Natural buffers. A strip at least 50 feet wide, having existing natural growth equivalent to a densely planted evergreen screen. Planning staff may require additional planting to achieve a uniform buffer strip. 
b.  Landscape buffers. A strip at least 20 feet wide, densely planted with an appropriate mix of trees and shrubs at least three feet high at the time of planting, of a type that will possess growth characteristics of such a nature as to produce a dense, compact evergreen screen capable of growing at least six feet within three years. 
c.  Landscape buffer with fence structure. A buffer strip at least 10 feet wide, containing an opaque fence or barrier at least six feet in height. The wall or fence shall have at least five feet of landscape plantings on the exterior side of the wall and shall be planted with appropriate trees, shrubs, and ground cover as to provide a transition from the wall to both edges of the buffer strip. Planning staff may require additional plantings to acquire a uniform buffer strip. 
4.07.06 - Landscaping Design Standards 
A.  Site selection standards. Trees shall be placed such that they have adequate space to grow unobstructed to maturity. Minimum distances, at the time of planting as measured from the tree trunk to structures and infrastructure shall be required as listed in the table below. Staff may reduce these distance requirements as necessary if the growth of the tree will not be inhibited. 
Table 4.07.06(A). Minimum Distances in Feet Required Between Trees and Structures or Infrastructure by Tree Canopy Size 
Structure/ 
Infrastructure 
Description Tree Canopy Size Category from the 
Tree Species Table Large Medium Small Very 
Small Street intersections, 
measured from the 
right-of-way 35 35 35 35 Traffic Signs 20 20 20 20 Light poles 20 20 15 15 Overhead Utility 
Lines 30 20 0 0 Underground Utility 
Lines 5 5 5 5 Mailboxes 5 5 5 5 Fire hydrants, 
electrical 
transmission boxes, 
water meters, other 
similar structures 5 5 5 5 Curb, sidewalk, 
pavement edge 2 2 1.5 1.5 Buildings 15 10 5 5  
B.  Landscaping requirements. Each project shall provide the amount of landscaping required by use as set forth in the table below. These percentages of landscaping are required for all properties that require a Land-disturbance permit. 
Table 4.07.06(B). Landscaping Requirements 
Use % Landscaping Multifamily, Single-family 
attached 30% Commercial (properties zoned C-1 
exempt) 20% Office or Institutional 30% Industrial 10%  
1.  Landscaped areas shall include all areas that are planted. Areas retained in a natural state may be included if they are comprised of native or non-invasive species. 
2.  Landscaping in the adjacent public right-of-way may be counted toward meeting the overall landscaping requirement of this code. 
3.  Landscaping design shall include a variety of deciduous and evergreen trees and shrubs and flowering plant species well adapted to the local environment. 
4.  Landscaped areas at least 10 feet wide shall buffer buildings adjacent to streets. 
C.  Landscaping in surface parking lots. For any off-street parking lot containing over ten (10) spaces, or for any combination of parking areas on a single lot providing more than ten (10) spaces, the following landscaping shall apply within the parking area. 
1.  A ratio of one parking lot canopy tree for each seven parking spaces is required to create a canopy effect. 
2.  Trees shall be selected from the parking lot canopy trees identified in the City of Carrollton Tree Species Table. 
3.  To be considered a parking lot tree, the tree shall not be any farther than ten feet from, nor any closer than three feet to, the edge of the parking area pavement or curb. 
4.  No more than 14 contiguous parking spaces shall be allowed without a minimum of one landscape island or peninsula containing trees. 
5.  Trees shall be evenly distributed throughout the parking area. 
6.  The landscaped area shall include open soil surface area required for the canopy size tree selected from the City of Carrollton Tree Species Table. However, one medium canopy tree may be planted in a landscape island or peninsula with a minimum dimension of nine feet by 18 feet or one parking stall. 
7.  Planting strips in the interior of the parking lot shall have a minimum width of nine feet outside of curb to outside of curb to accommodate trees. 
8.  Only large canopy trees shall be utilized for perimeter planting areas. For vehicle sales lots, smaller tree species may be used. 
9.  Parking lots adjacent to residential uses shall incorporate a site obscuring hedge that shall grow no less than 36 inches higher than the finished grade of the parking area, except for required vision clearance areas. 
D.  Streetscape trees. Trees shall be required as part of the streetscape on either side of the front property line. Tree establishment shall be done in accordance with the site selection standards identified in Table 4.07.06(A). Tree canopy cover along streets must meet the following minimum requirements. 
1.  One street tree shall be planted for each 30 feet of frontage for that portion of the development fronting the street. Where feasible, existing healthy trees on the site shall be utilized to fulfill this requirement. 
2.  Trees may be spaced at variable distances to conform to site selection standards; however, they must be more or less evenly distributed across the front lot line. 
3.  Street trees may not be allowed in traffic vision clearance zones. 
4.  Street trees shall be selected from the City of Carrollton Tree Species Table. 
4.07.07 - Tree Protection 
The following standards shall apply to trees identified as canopy trees and specimen trees, or that are counted toward the minimum required percentage of tree canopy identified in Table 4.07.04(C). 
A.  Root protection zone. A root protection zone must be established around the trunk of each preserved tree, or grouping of trees. The root protection zone shall be an area defined by the drip line of a tree. The maximum size of the root protection zone shall not exceed one thousand (1,000) square feet per tree. During construction, the area within the root protection zone shall remain free of excess soil, additional fill, equipment, liquids or construction debris. No soil shall be removed from within the root protection zone. 
B.  Protective fencing. A protective barrier shall be erected at the edge of the root protection zone. This barrier may be comprised of snow fencing, vinyl construction fencing, chain link, geotextile material, or other sturdy material approved by the Planning Department. The protective barrier must remain in place at all times during construction. 
C.  Specimen trees. Trees unique due to age, size, species or historic relevance are to be identified on the landscape plan as specimen trees. Special consideration must be made to work around specimen trees. Reasonable effort shall include, but not be limited to, alteration of building design, alternate building location, parking area, detention area, drainage system, or relocation of utilities. Design of buildings, hardscapes and utilities are to be developed with consideration to preserving and featuring specimen trees. The following criteria are used to identify specimen trees. Both size and condition criteria must be met to qualify. 
1.  Size Criteria. 
a.  Large Hardwoods (oaks, poplars, sweetgums, etc.): twenty-seven (27) inch diameter or larger. 
b.  Large Softwoods (pines, deodar, cedar, etc.): thirty (30) inch diameter or larger. 
c.  Small Trees (dogwoods, redbuds, sourwoods, etc.): 8 inch diameter or larger. 
2.  Condition Criteria. 
a.  Life expectancy of more than fifteen (15) years. 
b.  Relatively sound and solid trunk with no extensive decay. 
c.  No more than one major and several minor dead limbs (hardwoods only) 
d.  No major insect or pathological problem. 
3.  A lesser sized tree can be considered a specimen tree, if in the judgment of the City: 
a.  It is a rare or unusual species or of historical significance. 
b.  It is specifically used by a builder, developer, or design professional as a focal point in a project or landscape. 
c.  It is a tree with exceptional aesthetic quality. 
4.  Replacement of Specimen Trees. In the event that a specimen tree is removed or fatally harmed during the land development process, the applicant shall be required to replace any specimen tree with two trees of the same species with a minimum diameter of 4 inches per tree. 
ARTICLE 5 - STANDARDS FOR ACCESSORY AND TEMPORARY USES 
5.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The provisions of Article 5 apply to accessory uses, accessory structures, and temporary uses. Home occupations are considered accessory uses to residential development. Standards for home occupations are set forth in Section 5.01.00. Standards pertaining to accessory structures and fences are set forth in Section 5.02.00. Standards for temporary structures and uses are set forth in Section 5.03.00. Standards for signs, which may be either accessory structures, or the principal use on a parcel, are provided in Section 5.04.00. Standards for wireless communication facilities, which may be located on a lot or parcel with a principal use, or which may be the principal use, are provided in Section 5.05.00. 
5.01.00 - HOME OCCUPATIONS 

5.01.01 - Generally 
In all residential districts, customary home occupations are permitted; however, the following requirements shall apply in addition to all other applicable requirements for the residential district in which such uses are located: 
A.  Home occupation shall be limited in such a way as to not generate excess traffic at its location, and shall not have in excess of, in the aggregate, ten (10) clients or customers at its location in any twenty-four (24) hour period. 
B.  The total floor space devoted to the home occupation shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the heated dwelling space of the dwelling. 
5.01.02 - Standards for Home Occupations 
A.  The following requirements shall apply in addition to all other applicable requirements of this ordinance for the residential district in which such uses are located: 
1.  No outside storage shall be used in connection with the home occupation. Storage in accessory buildings is permitted. 
2.  Sufficient off-street parking shall be provided for those residing in the home and for clients and customers of the permitted home occupation. 
3.  No internal or external alterations inconsistent with the residential use of the building may be permitted. 
4.  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation. 
5.  No machinery that causes noises or other interferences in radio and/or television reception shall be allowed. 
6.  No chemical, electrical or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment shall be used in a permitted home occupation. 
7.  No external signs may be displayed advertising the product or service available. 
8.  No person other than a resident of the dwelling may be employed in the home occupation. 
B.  Customary home occupations may include, but are not limited to the following: 
1.  The office of a professional person. 
2.  Art studio, dressmaking, sewing, canning, or baking. 
3.  Teaching individual musical instruments, dance, crafts or academic subjects with instruction limited to not more than two (2) pupils at one (1) time. 
4.  The care of not more than four (4) children for compensation. 
C.  A customary home occupation specifically does not include the following listed occupations. This list is not comprehensive, and other similar occupations and uses may be prohibited: 
1.  Dancing or band instrument instruction in groups. 
2.  Tearooms and restaurants. 
3.  Tourist homes, boardinghouses or roominghouses. 
4.  Fish hatcheries, worm farms or bait houses. 
5.  Convalescent and nursing homes. 
6.  Kennels and animal hospitals. 
7.  Clinics and hospitals. 
8.  Firewood sales. 
5.02.00 - ACCESSORY STRUCTURES 

5.02.01 - Generally 
A.  An accessory structure is defined as a structure on the same lot with, and of a size and nature customarily incidental and subordinate to, the principal structure. 
B.  Types of accessory structures include, but are not limited to, the following: 
1.  Detached garage and/or carport. 
2.  Storage buildings and/or barns. 
3.  Freestanding greenhouses. 
4.  Swimming pools and pool houses. 
5.  Tennis courts. 
6.  Satellite dish antennas (subject to federal regulations). 
7.  Freestanding workshops. 
8.  Gazebos. 
9.  Radio and/or TV antenna structures not attached to the principal structure. 
10.  Paved areas other than driveways and walkways. 
11.  Property identification signs not associated with or attached to a mailbox. 
12.  Perimeter fencing and/or walls, both of which may be located on the property line. 
13.  Recreational vehicles, campers, boats, and similar type uses. 
(Res. No. 11-2008, § 4, 5-5-08) 
5.02.02 - Standards for Accessory Structures 
Accessory buildings and structures shall comply with all requirements for the principal use except where specifically modified by this article and shall comply with the following limitations: 
A.  A greenhouse or hothouse may be maintained accessory to a dwelling in any residential zoning district. 
B.  A guesthouse may be maintained accessory to a single-family dwelling provided there are no kitchen cooking facilities in the guesthouse. 
C.  Mechanical equipment shall be subject to the provisions of this section. Such equipment shall not be located between the main structure on the site and any street adjacent to a front or side yard, and every attempt shall be made to place such equipment so that it is not visible from adjacent public streets. Any installation of mechanical equipment shall require a building permit. 
D.  Regardless of the side and rear yard requirements of the district, in a residential district, a side or rear yard may be reduced to five (5) feet for an accessory structure, including swimming pools, erected more than fifty (50) feet from any street, other than alleys, provided the structure is detached and separated from other buildings and structures by ten (10) feet or more. 
E.  Exclusive of swimming pools, no more than three (3) accessory structures per lot are permitted in any residential zoning district. The total area of the principal structure and any accessory structures on a lot shall not exceed the maximum percent of lot covered set forth in Table 4.01.01(H). 
F.  An accessory structure for a single-family residence is not permitted in a front yard, unless erected more than 100 feet from the front street right-of-way. 
G.  Signs, fences, parking, driveways, accessory dwellings, and temporary structures are not subject to the provisions of this section. 
(Res. No. 06-2017, 5-1-17; Res. No. 08-2019, 2-4-19) 
5.02.03 - Fences 
Except as otherwise specifically provided in other sections of this UDO, fences and free-standing walls are allowed subject to the following standards: 
A.  For uses within any single-family district, the following standards apply: 
1.  A fence of any type in any required front yard may not exceed 48 inches in height. 
2.  A fence or wall of any type in any rear or side yard shall not exceed eight (8) feet in height. 
3.  The height of fences or walls in rear or side yard areas abutting a street shall be 48 inches in height, or less, if said fence or wall is within ten (10) feet of any public right-of-way. 
4.  The framework for newly constructed fences and walls shall face toward the builder's property, except where fences are jointly constructed. 
5.  Fences shall lean at a vertical plane of no more than five (5) percent. 
B.  For uses in the M-H-P, R-T, R-M, R-M-10, R-M-15, R-O-I, O-I, C-1, C-2, and C-3 zoning districts, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  In any front, side, or rear yard adjacent to the public right-of-way, a fence or wall may not exceed eight (8) feet in height. Chain link fencing is not allowed in any front yard. 
2.  Landscaping shall be installed on both sides of a fence in any front yard or yard adjacent to any street. 
3.  The framework for newly constructed fences and walls shall face toward the builder's property, except where fences are jointly constructed. 
4.  Fences shall lean at a vertical plane of no more than five (5) percent. 
(Res. No. 08-2019, 2-4-19) 
5.03.00 - TEMPORARY STRUCTURES AND USES 

5.03.01 - Temporary Structures and Uses during Construction 
A temporary building or use in connection with a construction project shall be permitted during the construction period. The following standards shall be met by temporary uses established during construction: 
A.  A building permit shall be required. 
B.  Temporary offices may be located on a construction site to be used for administrative functions during construction. Temporary construction offices may have the name of the construction company printed on one (1) permanently affixed sign on the outside of the building. Such sign shall be a maximum of four (4) feet by eight (8) feet. In addition, the proposed construction building shall meet tie-down requirements for mobile structures, and have a contract for sewage pump-out. Construction buildings, equipment, machinery, and materials shall be removed within thirty (30) days of completion of the construction site for which they are permitted. 
C.  On-site outdoor storage of equipment and construction materials shall be allowed during the period of construction. 
D.  Portable toilet facilities shall be provided. 
E.  Construction and demolition debris dumpsters are allowable and are not required to be screened. 
F.  A temporary office shall be allowed, which may be used for sales functions or sales offices, allowing for the sale, resale, or marketing of dwellings, structures, or property within the development in which it is located, or adjacent developments under the same control. 
G.  On-site temporary use of structures and equipment for the building of roads, public utilities, and government projects shall be allowed. 
5.03.02 - Special Events and Seasonal Sales 
A.  Special events include carnivals, fairs, festivals, seasonal sales, tent meetings, outdoor food sales, or other periodic events of a temporary nature. Such events are typically outdoors, and the maximum number of such events for a single business location or parcel shall be four (4) in any twelve (12) month period with a maximum duration of fifteen (15) consecutive days per event. 
B.  Special events shall be limited to the following zoning districts: C-1, C-2, C-3, M-1, M-2 and PD. 
1.  The following standards apply to carnivals, fairs, festivals, tent meetings, A permit is required according to the procedures set forth in Article 10, except that special events conducted by a church or school shall not be required to obtain a permit, but shall be required to comply with the standards of this section; 
2.  The applicant shall ensure the provision of adequate sanitation facilities, sewage disposal, garbage and refuse disposal, potable water supply, and food service during the special event; 
3.  The area devoted to the special event shall not be located on any required setbacks, buffers, parking spaces, parking lot aisles, driveways, fire lanes, or other traffic circulation areas. 
4.  The site shall have floodlighting for the special event and parking areas, if any activities are to be offered during darkness. Lighting shall be shielded and directed to avoid direct illumination of adjacent properties as measured at the property line; 
5.  The site shall have adequate parking facilities. Parking may be on-site or off-site. Where off-site parking is provided, there shall be adequate plans for transporting or conducting patrons from the off-site parking facilities to the special event area; 
6.  The applicant shall provide adequate traffic control and security in and around the special event area during hours of operation; and 
7.  All stages, booths, tents, scaffoldings, or structures of any nature on, under, or within which persons may congregate, shall conform to applicable building, health, and other construction codes. 
C.  The following standards apply to seasonal sales: 
1.  A temporary use permit must be obtained from the Building Official. 
2.  The area devoted to seasonal sales shall not be located on any required setbacks, buffers, parking spaces, parking lot aisles, driveways, fire lanes, or other traffic circulation areas; 
3.  Goods, tents, equipment, or materials used for the seasonal sales activity shall not be located within any right-of-way; 
4.  Parking spaces shall be provided to support the seasonal sales activity. Parking spaces necessary to support the seasonal sales activity shall be in addition to parking provided on the site to serve other uses and shall be calculated based on the square feet of sales area according to the standards in Article 4; 
5.  The applicant shall ensure the provision of adequate garbage and refuse disposal; and 
6.  The applicant shall demonstrate conformance with all applicable building, health, and other federal, state, or local laws. 
(Res. No. 11-2008, § 2, 5-5-08; Res. No. 02-2019, 1-7-19) 
5.03.03 - Movable Modular Storage Units 
Movable module storage units (called "storage pods") are permissible temporary structures, provided that such structures are located in compliance with the following standards: 
A.  The duration shall be limited to fourteen (14) days. One (1) renewal may be granted for an additional fourteen (14) days. 
B.  The storage pod may be placed on a paved or unpaved surface. When the location of the storage pod is on an unpaved surface, the permit shall be conditioned upon the requirement that grass, sod, or landscaping shall be restored after removal of the storage pod. 
C.  The storage pod may be placed in a front or rear yard. Placement in a side yard is prohibited. 
D.  The storage pod shall not be placed within an easement, stormwater area, or required buffer. 
E.  The storage pod shall be placed at least one (1) foot from any property line. 
F.  The storage pod shall not obstruct pedestrian access. 
5.03.04 - Model Homes and Sales Offices 
A.  Model homes are permissible only in conjunction with a new residential development during the period of construction of site improvements and new homes. 
B.  Model dwelling units may be erected or displayed in districts that include residential uses, provided that such models shall not be used for residential purposes, but only for display as a means to sell homes. 
C.  One (1) or more model homes may be established in a residential development, including planned developments, subject to the following standards: 
1.  A model home shall be located on a platted lot meeting all standards of this UDO; 
2.  A model home shall be located to meet all site design standards of this UDO, except for the modifications specifically enumerated herein; 
3.  A model home shall be located only on a collector or arterial street; 
4.  A model home may include a sales office. Hours of sales operations shall not extend beyond 8:00 p.m.; 
5.  One (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for each employee plus one (1) off-street parking space per model home. In addition, one (1) off-street parking space shall be provided for handicapped parking. These spaces shall be provided on the same lot as the model dwelling unit or on a contiguous lot within the specific project; and 
6.  The number of model home units shall not exceed five (5) percent of the number of homes or lots permissible in the residential development. Fractions shall be rounded to the nearest whole number. 
D.  The model home shall be discontinued as a model unit and sales office when ninety (90) percent of the lots or homes in the residential development have been sold. The model home site shall be redesigned to comply with all site design requirements applicable to the residential development. Such redesign includes, at a minimum, removal of parking in excess of that associated with a single-family home; removal of any signs; and removal of any exterior lighting associated with the model home and sales office. 
5.04.00 - SIGNS 

5.04.01 - Purpose 
A.  The Mayor and City Council of Carrollton, Georgia recognize that, although signs and advertising are proper and necessary uses of private property and constitute a legitimate business entitled to the protection of the law, such signs and advertising should be reasonably regulated in the interest of the public safety and welfare by the establishment of standards for the location, size, illumination, number, construction, and maintenance of all signs and advertising structures in Carrollton, Georgia. 
B.  In this regard, this ordinance is intended to protect the public safety, to assure compatibility of signs with surrounding land uses, to enhance the business and economy of the City of Carrollton, to protect the public investment in streets and highways, to maintain the tranquil environment of residential areas, to promote industry and commerce, and for the orderly and reasonable display of advertising for the benefit of all its citizens. 
5.04.02 - General Sign Regulations 
A.  No sign shall: 
1.  Obstruct any fire escape, any means of egress or ventilation, or prevent free passage from one part of a roof to any other part thereof, nor shall any sign be attached in any form, shape, or manner to a fire escape; 
2.  Interfere with road or highway visibility or obstruct or otherwise interfere with the safe and orderly movement of traffic; 
3.  Be erected, painted, or drawn on any tree, rock, or other natural surface; 
4.  Be located on any building, fence, or other property belonging to another person without the consent of the owner; 
5.  Contain statements, words, or pictures of an obscene, indecent, or immoral character such as will offend public morals; 
6.  Advertise any activity, service, or product prohibited by the laws and regulations of the United States or the State of Georgia or by the ordinances or resolutions of the City of Carrollton, Georgia; 
7.  Be permitted unless it is structurally safe, clean, and in good repair; or emit or utilize in any manner any sound capable of being detected on any traveled road or highway by a person with normal hearing. 
B.  No sign, sign structure, or advertising device shall be located on utility poles or within the right-of-way of any street or public roadway. 
C.  The following are not permitted except as temporary special event signs as provided in Section 5.04.05(E): 
1.  Banners, pennants, streamers, or other multi-colored triangle shaped or irregular shaped displays attached by ropes, strings, wires, or other devices; 
2.  Gas filled figures; 
3.  Portable displays; or 
4.  Search lights, beacons, or other advertising novelties. 
D.  No mobile or wheeled signs are permitted except as temporary special event signs as provided in Section 5.04.05(E). 
E.  Signs in designated local historic districts must be approved by the Historic Preservation Commission. 
F.  No dilapidated or neglected signs shall be permitted. A sign (including sign structure) is considered dilapidated or neglected if it does not present a neat and orderly appearance, which may be manifested by the following: 
1.  Rust or holes on or in the sign or sign structure; 
2.  Broken, missing, loose, or bent parts; 
3.  Faded or flaking paint; 
4.  Non-operative or partially non-operative illuminating or mechanical devices; or 
5.  Missing letters in sign copy. 
G.  No sign constructed of non-durable material including, but not limited to, paper, cardboard, or flexible plastic may be displayed for more than sixty (60) days. Nothing herein shall prohibit such a sign from being replaced by an identical sign. This provision does not apply to temporary signs as governed by this ordinance. 
H.  No portable, trailer, sidewalk, sandwich, curb, or "A"-type signs shall be permitted except as temporary special event signs as provided in Section 5.04.05(E), or in the Downtown District, only if allowed and regulated by the Main Street Program. 
I.  No sign or sign structure above a height of three (3) feet shall be maintained within twenty (20) feet of the intersection of right-of-way lines of two streets or of a street intersection with a railroad right-of-way. 
J.  The following signs are prohibited by this ordinance: multi-faced signs; rotating signs; and animated signs (including but not limited to those involving motion, flashing, blinking, or varying light intensity). 
K.  In a Residential-Office-Institutional District (R-O-I), the maximum allowable sign shall be six (6) square feet; only one sign shall be permitted; and it shall be free-standing and shall be located in front of the principle structure/use. 
(Res. No. 08-2011, 8-1-11; Res. No. 02-2019, 1-7-19) 
5.04.03 - Signs in Residential Districts 
A.  For real estate developments or projects, two (2) free-standing signs are permitted per entrance. Each sign shall not exceed a maximum of seventy-five (75) square feet and eight (8) feet in height. 
B.  For individual residential units in all residential zoning districts, one (1) wall and one (1) freestanding sign per housing unit is allowed, but such signs shall not exceed two (2) square feet maximum size per sign and three (3) feet in height. 
5.04.04 - Signs in Non-Residential Districts 
A.  The following signs are permitted in all non-residential zoning districts: 
1.  Freestanding Sign - Individual Non-Residential Lot. 
One (1) freestanding sign per lot limited to one hundred (100) square feet and a maximum of fifteen (15) feet in height. No part of a sign shall be located within ten (10) feet of a property line. Legal signs may be permitted up to, but not on the public right-of-way. 
2.  Freestanding Sign - Planned Commercial/Office/Industrial Development. 
a.  One (1) freestanding sign per lot, which is a maximum of thirty (30) feet in height. A free-standing sign shall be limited to: 
With 2 Individual Establishments 100 Square Feet With 4 Individual Establishments 120 Square Feet With 6 or more Individual Establishments 150 Square Feet  
b.  Free-standing signs must direct attention to a building, profession, product, service, business activity, or entertainment conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
c.  No part of a sign shall be located within ten (10) feet of a property line. Legal signs may be permitted up to, but not on the public right-of-way. 
3.  Wall Sign. 
Four (4) wall signs, each of which is limited to seventy-five (75) square feet. Not more than one (1) sign per wall shall be permitted. 
4.  Canopy Sign. 
Canopy signs may be substituted for wall signs following the same sizing criteria as wall signs. Canopy signs shall not be erected less than eight (8) feet above pedestrian walkways and fourteen (14) feet above areas of vehicle access at the lowest extremity of the sign. 
5.  Instructional Sign. 
Instruction signs, including thereon an advertising trademark, logo, or emblem identification, and used to give direction or specific instruction to the public may be located adjacent to but not within the right-of-way line, and must not exceed six (6) square feet in area or three (3) feet in height above the ground, if free-standing. 
6.  Roof Signs. 
Roof signs are prohibited in the City of Carrollton by this UDO. 
7.  Outdoor Advertising Signs. 
In addition to the general regulations applying to all sign classifications, outdoor advertising signs shall comply with the following: 
1.  Zoning Districts Where Allowed. 
Outdoor advertising signs are permitted on properties that are adjacent to a state or federal highway and in C-2, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. 
2.  Location and Spacing. 
No outdoor advertising sign shall be placed within three hundred (300) feet of a residence, church, school, park, or cemetery. No outdoor advertising sign shall be located within one thousand (1,000) feet of another outdoor advertising sign on either side of the street as measured along the right-of-way of such street. 
3.  Size. 
No outdoor advertising sign shall exceed seven hundred (700) square feet inclusive of any trim but excluding the base, apron, supports, and other structural members. 
4.  Georgia Department of Transportation Regulations. 
With respect to matters or issues not specifically addressed by this UDO, any applicable rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Transportation shall apply. 
8.  Political Signs. 
a.  For the purposes of this section, the term "political sign" shall mean a sign identifying and urging voter support for a particular election, issue, political party or candidate for public office. 
b.  Notwithstanding any other provisions to the contrary in this article, political signs do not require a permit and are permitted in all zoning districts for a period of not more than six weeks before a duly authorized election date as established by applicable federal, state, or local law. Political signs shall not exceed eight (8) square feet, shall be located off public right-of-way, and shall not exceed more than two (2) per lot. All political signs or devices must be removed within ten (10) days of the candidate's or issues election or defeat. 
9.  Electronic Reader Boards. 
Electronic reader boards are permitted as a free-standing sign, or a portion of a free-standing sign, with the following restrictions: 
a.  Size. The reader board is limited to 24 square feet. 
b.  Change in sign copy. Words on sign shall be set for two (2) second intervals. 
c.  Light intensity. Light intensity shall be fixed. 
(Res. No. 08-2011, 8-1-11; Res. No. 11-2012, 11-5-12) 
5.04.04.1 - Signs in the Lake Carroll Village Overlay 
Signage is vital in the area encompassed by the Lake Carroll Village Overlay. While functioning primarily as a communication tool, signs can also contribute to the unique character of an area. The area encompassed by the Lake Carroll Village Overlay has a diverse mix of pole, monument, wall, temporary, and dilapidated signage. The intent of the sign design standards in the Lake Carroll Village Overlay is: (i) to encourage excellence in signage, both as a communication tool and as an art form; (ii) to allow and encourage creative and unique sign designs while preventing cluttered and unattractive streetscapes; and (iii) to provide basic parameters for creative signs that may be varied and unique like the businesses they represent. 
Effectively designed signage should respond to the site, landscape, and architectural design context within which they are located. Signs should be compatible in scale, proportion, and design with the building's facade and its surroundings. These standards do not dictate design. 
The sign standards for the Lake Carroll Village Overlay address the following: (i) appropriate locations; (ii) number of signs allowed on a property; (iii) maximum area for individual signs; (iv) height limitation; (v) color and materials; (vi) lighting; (vii) temporary signage (both on-site and off-site); (viii) off-site signs; and (ix) dilapidated or abandoned signage. 
A.  Non-Permitted Signs. 
The following signs are not permitted in the Lake Carroll Village Overlay: 
1.  Outdoor advertising signs. 
2.  Roof signs. 
3.  Standard box cabinet wall signs. For purposes of this section, a "standard box cabinet wall sign" means a fabricated sign box, which contains a light source and a plastic or aluminum face with letter or graphics, and which is typically mounted to a wall or is part of a monument or pylon sign. 
4.  Abandoned or discontinued signs or structures. 
5.  Electronic reader boards. For purposes of this section, the term "electronic reader board" is not intended to preclude all signs with digital lettering or numbering, which can be changed from a remote location. Rather, the term "electronic reader board" is meant to refer to a sign whose text, numbering, messaging, or graphics are either in constant motion or change every few seconds or minutes, often with a corresponding change of color or light intensity. 
B.  Permitted Signs. 
While monument signs are encouraged within the Lake Carroll Village Overlay, the following signs are permitted in the Lake Carroll Village Overlay: 
1.  Freestanding Signs. 
a.  One (1) freestanding sign is permitted per lot. 
b.  For corner lots or lots with frontage on more than one street or road, an additional free standing sign per street or road on which the lot fronts is permitted. 
c.  Maximum area: fifty (50) square feet. 
d.  Maximum height: eight (8) feet. 
e.  Set back: Ten (10) feet from the right-of-way but may be reduced at the discretion of the City Manager if there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property, including but not limited to its size, shape, and topography. 
f.  Free-standing signs must direct attention to a building, profession, product, service, business activity, or entertainment conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
g.  No part of a sign shall be located within ten (10) feet of a property line. 
2.  Wall Signs. 
a.  One wall sign is permitted per elevation with a public entrance and/or facing the public right-of-way. For buildings with multiple tenant spaces, one sign is permitted for each tenant space. 
b.  Maximum width: sixty-six percent (66%) of the linear width of the facade for the space in which the business is located. 
c.  Maximum area: fifty (50) square feet. 
3.  Signs to the Side or Rear of Building. Signs to the side or rear of building elevations for ground floor businesses are permitted, provided that the elevation contains a public entrance. 
4.  Second Floor Signs. Businesses located on a second floor and facing a street may have one wall sign above the second floor windows, not to exceed the dimensions set forth in Section 5.04.04.1(B)(2) and with lettering in proportion to the size of the sign and width of the business. 
5.  Awning Signs. 
a.  Awning signs are allowed and are typically painted on or attached to an awning or canopy above a business door or window. 
b.  Awning signs may be allowed on the shed portion of the awning, but are preferred on the valance flap. The flap height should be large enough for letters and symbols. 
c.  Maximum letter height: seventy-five percent (75%) of the height of the valance flap or shed area. 
d.  Minimum valance height: eight (8) inches. 
e.  Minimum vertical clearance: eight (8) feet. 
f.  Allowable materials: matte finish canvas, glass, or metal. 
g.  Awning signs shall be solid in color or striped. The color of the sign should complement the color and material of the building to which it is attached. 
h.  The shape of the awning sign should relate to the window or door opening. Barrel-shaped awnings shall be used for arched windows, and rectangular awnings shall be used on rectangular windows. 
6.  Instructional Signs. Instruction signs, including thereon an advertising trademark, logo, or emblem identification, and used to give direction or specific instruction to the public may be located adjacent to but not within the right-of-way line, and must not exceed six (6) square feet in area or three (3) feet in height above the ground, if free-standing. 
7.  Hanging Signs. 
a.  Hanging signs are projecting signs suspended below a marquee or canopy, which are intended to be read by pedestrians or slow-moving motorists. 
b.  To minimize visual clutter, hanging signs shall not be located within close proximity to other hanging signs or projecting signs, preferably at least [twenty-five] 25 feet from each other. 
c.  Minimum vertical clearance: eight (8) feet. 
d.  Maximum projection: forty-eight (48) inches. 
e.  Maximum area: six (6) square feet 
f.  Permitted locations: first floor for all businesses and upper floors for businesses with covered entries, porches, or balconies. 
8.  Window Signs. 
a.  Window signs are painted on or attached to the inside of a window facing the street. This type of signage can contain text, graphic logos, and other images. 
b.  Window signs shall not completely obscure visibility into or out of the window. 
c.  A maximum of one window sign is permitted per window pane or framed window area. 
d.  Temporary window signs are allowed to identify special events and sales provided they are removed immediately following the event. 
e.  Maximum area: twenty-five percent (25%) of the total transparent glass area of windows parallel to the street, excluding the area of all glass doors. 
f.  Location: limited to ground floor window facing the primary street frontage and adjoining parking lot or commercial uses on second floor windows for commercial uses that do not have ground floor occupancy. 
9.  Plaque Signs. 
a.  Plaque signs are attached to surfaces adjacent to entries and are smaller versions of wall signs. 
b.  Maximum projection: two (2) inches. 
c.  Maximum area: two (2) square feet. 
d.  Location: limited to wall surfaces adjacent to entry. 
e.  Graphics: limited to business name and logo. 
10.  Banner Signs. 
a.  Banner signs contain a logo or design placed on lightweight material. A banner sign is a permanent sign and is intended to add liveliness, color, and a sense of movement to a pedestrian-oriented street. 
b.  Banner signs may be used in lieu of a wall sign, but a single tenant space may not have both a wall sign and a banner sign. 
c.  Size: The size of banners should be in scale with the associated building. 
d.  Poles and brackets: Must be placed so as not to obscure architectural elements and the location of poles and brackets should be considered in context of the entire facade. 
e.  Orientation: Must be vertical and mounted perpendicular to the building face and secured by brackets both at the top and bottom of the sign. 
f.  Projection: No more than forty-eight (48) inches. 
g.  Minimum vertical clearance: eight (8) feet. 
h.  Banners along the same block of a street should generally be set at the same angle from the buildings. 
11.  Murals. Murals painted on a wall surface may be permitted upon approval by the Carrollton Arts Commission to ensure: (i) the artwork complements the design of the building in color, shape, and location on the building; and (2) the material is durable and resistant to graffiti and weather. If the mural contains advertising, logos, or commercial messages, it qualifies as a sign and must be reviewed as signage. 
(Res. No. 05-2018, 3-5-18) 
5.04.04.2 - Signs in the Maple Street Overlay 
Signage is vital in the area encompassed by the Maple Street Overlay. While functioning primarily as a communication tool, signs can also contribute to the unique character of an area. The area encompassed by the Maple Street Overlay has a diverse mix of pole, monument, wall, temporary, and dilapidated signage. The intent of the sign design standards in the Maple Street Overlay is: (i) to encourage excellence in signage, both as a communication tool and as an art form; (ii) to allow and encourage creative and unique sign designs while preventing cluttered and unattractive streetscapes; and (iii) to provide basic parameters for creative signs that may be varied and unique like the businesses they represent. 
Effectively designed signage should respond to the site, landscape, and architectural design context within which they are located. Signs should be compatible in scale, proportion, and design with the building's façade and its surroundings. These standards do not dictate design. 
The sign standards for the Maple Street Overlay address the following: (i) appropriate locations; (ii) number of signs allowed on a property; (iii) maximum area for individual signs; (iv) height limitation; (v) color and materials; (vi) lighting; (vii) temporary signage (both on-site and off-site); (viii) off-site signs; and (ix) dilapidated or abandoned signage. 
A.  Non-Permitted Signs. 
The following signs are not permitted in the Maple Street Overlay: 
1.  Outdoor advertising signs. 
2.  Roof signs. 
3.  Standard box cabinet wall signs. For purposes of this section, a "standard box cabinet wall sign" means a fabricated sign box, which contains a light source and a plastic or aluminum face with letter or graphics, and which is typically mounted to a wall or is part of a monument or pylon sign. 
4.  Abandoned or discontinued signs or structures. 
5.  Electronic reader boards. For purposes of this section, the term "electronic reader board" is not intended to preclude all signs with digital lettering or numbering, which can be changed from a remote location. Rather, the term "electronic reader board" is meant to refer to a sign whose text, numbering, messaging, or graphics are either in constant motion or change every few seconds or minutes, often with a corresponding change of color or light intensity. 
B.  Permitted Signs. 
While monument signs are encouraged within the Maple Street Overlay, the following signs are permitted in the Maple Street Overlay: 
1.  Freestanding Signs. 
a.  One (1) freestanding sign is permitted per lot. 
b.  For corner lots or lots with frontage on more than one street or road, an additional free standing sign per street or road on which the lot fronts is permitted. 
c.  Maximum area: fifty (50) square feet. 
d.  Maximum height: eight (8) feet. 
e.  Setback: Ten (10) feet from the right-of-way but may be reduced at the discretion of the City Manager if there are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property, including but not limited to its size, shape, and topography. 
f.  Free-standing signs must direct attention to a building, profession, product, service, business activity, or entertainment conducted on the premises upon which the sign is located. 
g.  No part of a sign shall be located within ten (10) feet of a property line. 
2.  Wall Signs. 
a.  One wall sign is permitted per elevation with a public entrance and/or facing the public right-of-way. For buildings with multiple tenant spaces, one sign is permitted for each tenant space. 
b.  Maximum width: sixty-six percent (66%) of the linear width of the façade for the space in which the business is located. 
c.  Maximum area: fifty (50) square feet. 
3.  Signs to the Side or Rear of Building. Signs to the side or rear of building elevations for ground floor businesses are permitted, provided that the elevation contains a public entrance. 
4.  Second Floor Signs. Businesses located on a second floor and facing a street may have one wall sign above the second floor windows, not to exceed the dimensions set forth in Section 5.04.04.1(B)(2) and with lettering in proportion to the size of the sign and width of the business. 
5.  Awning Signs. 
a.  Awning signs are allowed and are typically painted on or attached to an awning or canopy above a business door or window. 
b.  Awning signs may be allowed on the shed portion of the awning, but are preferred on the valance flap. The flap height should be large enough for letters and symbols. 
c.  Maximum letter height: seventy-five percent (75%) of the height of the valance flap or shed area. 
d.  Minimum valance height: eight (8) inches. 
e.  Minimum vertical clearance: eight (8) feet. 
f.  Allowable materials: matte finish canvas, glass, or metal. 
g.  Awning signs shall be solid in color or striped. The color of the sign should complement the color and material of the building to which it is attached. 
h.  The shape of the awning sign should relate to the window or door opening. Barrel-shaped awnings shall be used for arched windows, and rectangular awnings shall be used on rectangular windows. 
6.  Instructional Signs. Instruction signs, including thereon an advertising trademark, logo, or emblem identification, and used to give direction or specific instruction to the public may be located adjacent to but not within the right-of-way line, and must not exceed six (6) square feet in area or three (3) feet in height above the ground, if free-standing. 
7.  Hanging Signs. 
a.  Hanging signs are projecting signs suspended below a marquee or canopy, which are intended to be read by pedestrians or slow-moving motorists. 
b.  To minimize visual clutter, hanging signs shall not be located within close proximity to other hanging signs or projecting signs, preferably at least 25 feet from each other. 
c.  Minimum vertical clearance: eight (8) feet. 
d.  Maximum projection: forty-eight (48) inches. 
e.  Maximum area: six (6) square feet 
f.  Permitted locations: first floor for all businesses and upper floors for businesses with covered entries, porches, or balconies. 
8.  Window Signs. 
a.  Window signs are painted on or attached to the inside of a window facing the street. This type of signage can contain text, graphic logos, and other images. 
b.  Window signs shall not completely obscure visibility into or out of the window. 
c.  A maximum of one window sign is permitted per window pane or framed window area. 
d.  Temporary window signs are allowed to identify special events and sales provided they are removed immediately following the event. 
e.  Maximum area: twenty-five percent (25%) of the total transparent glass area of windows parallel to the street, excluding the area of all glass doors. 
f.  Location: limited to ground floor window facing the primary street frontage and adjoining parking lot or commercial uses on second floor windows for commercial uses that do not have ground floor occupancy. 
9.  Plaque Signs. 
a.  Plaque signs are attached to surfaces adjacent to entries and are smaller versions of wall signs. 
b.  Maximum projection: two (2) inches. 
c.  Maximum area: two (2) square feet. 
d.  Location: limited to wall surfaces adjacent to entry. 
e.  Graphics: limited to business name and logo. 
10.  Banner Signs. 
a.  Banner signs contain a logo or design placed on lightweight material. A banner sign is a permanent sign and is intended to add liveliness, color, and a sense of movement to a pedestrian-oriented street. 
b.  Banner signs may be used in lieu of a wall sign, but a single tenant space may not have both a wall sign and a banner sign. 
c.  Size: The size of banners should be in scale with the associated building. 
d.  Poles and brackets: Must be placed so as not to obscure architectural elements and the location of poles and brackets should be considered in context of the entire façade. 
e.  Orientation: Must be vertical and mounted perpendicular to the building face and secured by brackets both at the top and bottom of the sign. 
f.  Projection: No more than forty-eight (48) inches. 
g.  Minimum vertical clearance: eight (8) feet. 
h.  Banners along the same block of a street should generally be set at the same angle from the buildings. 
11.  Murals. Murals painted on a wall surface may be permitted upon approval by the Carrollton Arts Commission to ensure: (i) the artwork complements the design of the building in color, shape, and location on the building; and (2) the material is durable and resistant to graffiti and weather. If the mural contains advertising, logos, or commercial messages, it qualifies as a sign and must be reviewed as signage. 
(Res. No. 09-2018, 6-4-18) 
5.04.05 - Temporary Signs 
In addition to the general regulations and restrictions applying to all sign classifications, the following signs may be erected and maintained as follows: 
A.  Real Estate Signs. 
On other than individual single-family residential lots, real estate signs shall be allowed not exceeding one hundred (100) square feet and shall be limited to two (2) such signs per project, or one (1) such sign per project entrance. On individual single-family residential lots, one (1) real estate sign per single-family residential lot not exceeding three (3) square feet is permitted. 
B.  Construction Signs. 
For construction on or development of a lot, one (1) construction sign shall be allowed per contractor, engineer, architect, or financial institution associated with the project. 
C.  Real Estate Directional Sign. 
Real estate directional signs are permitted, provided: such signs shall not exceed a maximum size of four (4) square feet; such signs shall not be illuminated; and no more than two (2) real estate directional signs may be placed on any lot. 
D.  Weekend Directional Sign. 
Weekend directional signs are off-premises signs, which provide direction to property for sale, lease or rent. Weekend directional signs may be erected from Friday at 3:00 p.m. until 11:59 p.m. on Sunday to direct traffic to a specific project. Weekend directional signs are not permitted within the public right-of-way. 
E.  Special Event Sign. 
Any person, firm, or corporation is allowed special event signs on-premises for a special use or event, such as, but not limited to, grand openings, seasonal sales, liquidations, going out of business sales, fire sales, and give-away or free promotions, only under the following conditions and requirements: 
1.  Prior to such special event or use and the erection and placement of any such signs or devices, a permit shall be obtained from the Building Official or his authorized representative. 
2.  The maximum number of special event sign permits issued to a single business location or parcel shall be four (4) in any twelve (12) month period, and no permit shall be issued for period exceeding fifteen (15) consecutive days. 
3.  Special event signs shall not exceed fifty (50) square feet and no more than two (2) special event signs may be placed at any given business location or parcel, unless the business location or parcel has frontage on more than one public street, in which event the business location or parcel may place up to two (2) special event signs per frontage on a public street. 
4.  All temporary special event signs must be removed immediately upon the expiration of the period authorized in the approved permit. Failure to remove the signs or structures following the expiration of the period authorized in the approved permit shall result in the issuance of a citation by the Building Official or his authorized representative. Any person, firm, or corporation issued a special event sign permit failing to remove said sign at the expiration of the period authorized by the applicable permit shall be prohibited from receiving another special event sign permit for a period of one (1) year from the date of the violation. 
5.  No special event signs may be located in the public right-of-way, and any such signs located in the public right-of-way shall be removed and impounded, and a thirty dollar ($30.00) impound fee per sign will be required to recover the impounded signs. 
6.  Information relating to pricing, discounts, financing, or incentives offered with respect to the sale of new or used automobiles or trucks that appears on a temporary basis on the windows or bodies of automobiles or trucks or on the storefronts of automobile or truck dealerships shall not be considered a special event sign and shall not otherwise be subject to regulation as a sign. 
(Res. No. 02-2019, 1-7-19) 
5.04.06 - Non-Conforming Signs 
A.  The lawful use of a permanent sign existing at the time of the adoption of this ordinance may be continued in non-conformance with the requirements of this ordinance, except that the non-conforming sign shall not be enlarged, altered, modified, improved, or rebuilt. A non-conforming sign may be repaired to the extent necessary to maintain it in a safe condition and in a neat and orderly appearance. A change in the advertising message on the sign shall not constitute an alteration or modification of the sign. 
B.  No structural repair or change in shape, size, or design shall be permitted except to make a non-conforming sign comply with all requirements of this ordinance or to render the sign structurally sound. Routine maintenance and changing of copy shall be permitted as long as such maintenance or changing of copy does not result in or change the shape, size, or design. 
C.  A non-conforming sign structure may not be replaced by another non-conforming sign structure, except where a change in conditions beyond the control of the owner warrant the sign's repair. 
5.04.07 - Construction, Maintenance and Inspection 
A.  All signs shall be constructed and maintained in conformance with the City of Carrollton building codes. Such signs, together with their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in good repair and must be maintained in a safe condition with a clean appearance. 
B.  The Building Official or his authorized representative shall inspect signs installed under the provisions of this ordinance to determine that each sign meets the requirements set forth in this ordinance and is maintained in conformance with all applicable codes of the City of Carrollton and the provisions of this ordinance. 
C.  It shall be the responsibility of the Building Official or his designee to notify the sign contractor, if known, the sign owner, or the property owner of any violations. Such notice shall be in writing and provide the particulars as to the violation. All violations must be corrected within ten (10) days following service of such notice. Said notice may be served by certified mail or personal delivery. The Building Official or his authorized representative is empowered to issue a citation for violation requiring the presence of the violator in the Municipal Court of the City of Carrollton. 
D.  The Building Official or his duly authorized representatives are herewith authorized to enter private property for the purpose of making inspections to insure compliance with all provisions of this ordinance. 
5.04.08 - Administration 
All of the provisions of this article shall be administered by the City Manager, and the appropriate appeal procedure shall be the same as established in Article 9 through the Board of Development Appeals. 
5.04.09 - Permits 
A.  Permits are required for all signs as follows: 
1.  A sign permit is required before a sign may be erected or attached to, suspended from, or supported on a building or structure, or before an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated, or materially improved upon, except as is herein provided by this ordinance. 
2.  If the plans, specifications, and intended use of the applied sign or part thereof conform in all respects to the applicable provisions of this ordinance and City building and electrical codes, a sign permit shall be issued. 
3.  A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within a period of six (6) months after the date of permit issuance. 
5.04.10 - Application for Permits 
A.  Except as specifically exempted from the provisions of this ordinance, it shall be unlawful for any person to post, display, substantially change, or erect a sign without a permit. A change in the copy only of a sign shall not constitute a substantial change. 
B.  Applications for sign permits shall be filed by the sign owner or its agent with the Building Official or his designee. The application shall describe and set forth the following: 
1.  The street address of the property upon which the subject sign is to be located and a site plan of the property which bears the scaled and labeled proposed location of the sign. 
2.  The aggregate area and copy area for all signs on the parcel. 
3.  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located. 
4.  The name, address, telephone number, business license number, and signature of the business owner authorizing placement of the sign. 
5.  The name, address, telephone number, fax number, business license number, and signature of the sign contractor. 
6.  The type of sign to be erected, the area and copy of the sign, the height of the sign (if free-standing), the shape of the sign, the color(s) of the sign, the material of the sign, and details showing how the sign will be mounted, installed, or erected. 
7.  For free-standing and monument signs only, the dimensioned sign location on a site plan; the structural foundation and mounting details; and the location and size of the sign. 
8.  All existing free-standing and monument signs on the property. 
9.  The cost of the sign (materials and installation). 
10.  If an electrical sign, a copy of the electrical permit. Signs connected to an approved, existing wired outlet or junction box do not require electrical permits. 
11.  For illuminated signs, maximum foot candles must be specified on the permit application. Maximum foot candles shall not exceed 12,000 lumens. 
5.04.11 - Permit Fees 
The fee schedule for sign permits is provided in Table 5.04.11(A) as follows, except that the fee shall be waived for bona fide charitable organizations only. 
Table 5.04.11(A). Sign Permit Fees. 
Type of Sign Permit Fee (See Note 1) Canopy $1.00/Square foot (SF) Construction No Permit Required Freestanding $1.00/SF Instructional $1.00/SF Monument Sign $1.00/SF Outdoor Advertising Construction Cost Per Building Permit Fee Schedule Real Estate No Permit Required Real Estate Directional No Permit Required Roof Prohibited Special Event Sign $30.00/Per Sign Wall $1.00/SF  
Note: 
1.  A minimum of $25.00 shall be charged for each sign permit, plus the applicable electrical permit fee, if such permit is also required. 
(Res. No. 02-2019, 1-7-19) 
5.04.12 - Prohibited Signs 
A.  All signs, other than non-conforming signs, which are not in compliance with this ordinance are prohibited and illegal and shall not be erected or maintained. 
B.  Signs on Rights-of-Way. 
All prohibited signs located on public rights-of-way are hereby declared litter and may be removed and disposed of by any City employee. 
5.04.13 - Citations 
The Building Official or his duly authorized representative is hereby empowered to issue a citation for violation of this ordinance requiring the presence of the violator in the Municipal Court of the City of Carrollton in any case where it is found that a sign is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, converted, or maintained in violation of any provision of this ordinance. 
5.04.14 - Penalties for Violation 
Any person, firm, or corporation who shall fail to comply with requirements of this ordinance shall, upon conviction of a violation of this ordinance, be punished as a misdemeanor offense. Each violation shall be considered a separate offense, and each day in violation shall be considered a separate offense. 
5.04.15 - Administrative Variance 
    The City Manager is hereby authorized to grant an administrative variance from any provision contained within Section 5.04.01 et seq., provided that no such administrative variance shall exceed twenty percent (20%) of the limit, rule, or regulation that would otherwise apply. 
(Res. No. 11-2012, 11-5-12) 
5.05.00 - WIRELESS COMMUNICATION FACILITIES (WCF) 

5.05.01 - Purpose and Goals 
A.  The purpose of this section is to establish general guidelines for the siting of WCF's. 
B.  The goals of this section are to: 
1.  Provide a range of locations for WCFs in a variety of zones; 
2.  Within each zone, provide clear performance standards addressing the siting of WCFs; 
3.  Encourage the locating of WCFs in non-residential areas and minimize the total number of owners throughout the community; 
4.  Encourage the location of WCFs on existing structures, including utility poles, signs, water towers, building, and other WCFs where feasible; 
5.  Encourage collocation and site sharing of new and existing WCFs; 
6.  Encourage users of towers and antennas to configure them in a way that minimizes the adverse visual impact of the towers and antennas; 
7.  Facilitate the use of public property and structures for WCFs; 
8.  Enhance the ability of providers of telecommunication services to provide such service to the community quickly, effectively, and efficiently. 
5.05.02 - Applicability 
A.  Public property. 
Antennas or towers located on property owned, leased, or otherwise controlled by the City shall be exempt from the requirements of this ordinance, provided a license or lease authorizing such antenna or tower has been approved by the City. 
B.  Amateur radio: Receive-only antennas. 
This ordinance shall not govern any tower, or the installation of any antenna, that is under thirty-five (35) feet in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator or is used exclusively for receive-only antennas. 
C.  Pre-existing towers and antennas. 
Any tower or antenna having a properly issued permit prior to the effective date of this section shall not be required to meet the requirements of this section, other than the requirements of Section 5.05.03(J) and (K). Any such towers or antennas shall be referred to in this section as "pre-existing towers" or "pre-existing antenna arrays". 
5.05.03 - Development Standards 
The guidelines set forth in this section shall govern the location of all towers, and the installation of all antennas, governed by this section; provided, however, the City may waive these requirements if it determines the goals of this section are better served thereby. 
A.  Height standards. 
1.  Attached WCFs. 
Attached WCFs shall not add more than twenty (20) feet in height to the existing building or structure to which it is attached (attachment structure). 
2.  WCFs with supporting structures. 
WCF's constructed with supporting structures shall be subject to the standards set forth in Table 5.05.03(A), below. 
Table 5.05.03(A). Development Standards for Wireless Communication Facilities. 
Zoning District Maximum Height 1 Setbacks 2 Additional Buffers, 
Landscaping 3 E-R, R-20, 
R-15, R-10, 
R-T, R-M, 
R-O-I 75 feet 50% height of tower, plus 1 foot per each 2 feet of tower height over 75 feet 25 M-H-P 90 feet 20 O-I 90 feet 15 C-1, C-3 75 feet 15 C-2 110 feet-1 user 
 130 feet-2 users 
 150 feet-3 users 10 M-1, M-2 180 feet 10  
1.  Attached WCFs in any zone are limited in height to twenty (20) feet from the top of the attachment structure. 
2.  The antenna array for an attached WCF is exempt from the setback requirements of this section and from the setbacks for the zone in which they are located, provided, no such antenna array shall extend more than five (5) feet horizontally from the attachment structure. 
3.  Landscaping and buffer requirements are in addition to the underlying zone requirements. The antenna array for an attached WCF is exempt from the landscaping and buffer requirements of this section. 
4.  If the project site abuts another industrial district, the current setbacks specified in the zoning ordinance would apply for those property lines where the two (2) industrial zoning districts meet. 
B.  Setbacks and maximum lot size. 
1.  Attached WCFs. 
Antenna arrays for attached WCFs are exempt from the setback standards of this section and from the setbacks for the zone in which they are located. An attached WCF antenna array may extend up to five (5) feet horizontally beyond the edge of the attachment structure so long as the antenna array does not encroach upon an adjoining parcel. 
2.  WCFs with support structures. 
WCF's constructed with supporting structures shall be subject to the setback requirements set forth in Table 5.05.03(A), above; provided, however, that the City may reduce the standard setbacks and separation requirements if the goals of this section would be better served thereby. 
C.  Landscaping and buffer requirements. 
1.  WCFs shall be landscaped in accordance with the landscape requirements contained in the zoning ordinance, except for additional requirements stated herein. 
2.  Existing mature tree growth and natural land forms on the site shall be preserved to the extent feasible; provided, however, that vegetation that causes interference with the antennas or inhibits access to the equipment facility may be trimmed. 
3.  Existing vegetation on site may be used in lieu of required landscaping where approved by the City Manager, or his or her designee. 
4.  Additional landscaping and buffer requirements (See also table 5.05.03(A), above): 
a.  In single-family, townhouse, multi-family, and estate residential zoning districts, a twenty-five (25) foot perimeter buffer is required, with a minimum of one (1) tree per twenty-five (25) lineal feet of buffer, with a maximum of fifty (50) percent being shade trees. Retention of existing trees on site in order to meet this requirement is encouraged. Grass or other ground cover species shall be planted on all areas of the buffer strip required which are not covered by other landscape material. 
b.  In the mobile home residential zoning district, a twenty (20) foot perimeter buffer is required, with a minimum of one (1) tree per twenty-five (25) lineal feet of buffer, with a minimum of fifty (50) percent being shade trees. Retention of existing trees on site in order to meet this requirement is encouraged. Grass or other ground cover species shall be planted on all areas of the buffer strip required which are not covered by other landscape material. 
c.  In office-institutional, central business and neighborhood commercial zoning districts, an additional fifteen (15) foot buffer shall be required. 
d.  In the general commercial and industrial districts an additional ten (10) foot buffer shall be required. 
5.  Maintenance. 
It will be the responsibility of the owner/tenant to keep all landscaping material free from disease and properly maintained in order to fulfill the purpose for which it was established. The owners of the property, and any tenant on the property where buffers and landscaping is required, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the maintenance of all landscaping materials. Such maintenance shall include all actions necessary to keep the buffer and landscape areas free from litter and debris, to keep plantings healthy, and to keep planting areas neat in appearance. Any vegetation that constitutes part of the buffer or landscaping shall be replaced in the event it dies. 
D.  Aesthetics, placement, materials, and color. 
1.  Attached WCFs shall have both antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical equipment that are of a neutral color identical to, or closely compatible with, the color of the supporting structure so as to make the antenna and related equipment as visually unobtrusive as possible. In addition, the placement of the antenna array and supporting equipment shall be consistent with proper functioning of the WCF while mitigating the impact of the facility on the surrounding area. 
2.  WCFs with support structures shall consist of towers with a galvanized steel finish, or subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color (except in the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts), so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. At a tower site, the design of the building and related structures shall, to the extent possible, use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the tower facilities to the natural setting and built environment. In most instances, WCFs with support structures should be of the monopole variety except when providers can document and demonstrate need for lattice-type towers. 
E.  Separation requirement. 
In zoning districts, other than general commercial and industrial districts, WCFs over ninety (90) feet in height shall not be located within one-quarter (1/4) of a mile from any existing WCF that is over ninety (90) feet in height. 
F.  Lighting. 
Towers shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by FAA or other applicable authority. Lighting may be required if the tower is near a non-FAA controlled landing strip pending review by the City Manager. If lighting is required, the City may review the available lighting alternative and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
G.  Noise. 
No equipment shall be operated at a WCF so as to produce noise in excess of the applicable noise standards under WAC 173-60, except for in emergency situations requiring the use of a backup generator, where the noise standards may be exceeded on a temporary basis. No generator shall be used prior to commercial power being delivered to the site. 
H.  Security fencing. 
WCFs with support structures shall be enclosed by a security fence not less than six (6) feet in height, and the support structure shall be equipped with an appropriate anti-climbing device; provided, however, that the City may waive such requirements, as it deems appropriate; however, nothing herein shall prevent security fencing which is necessary to meet other requirements of state or federal agencies. 
I.  Radio frequency emissions. 
1.  The Federal Telecommunications Act of 1996 (FTA) gives the Federal Communication Commission (FCC) sole jurisdiction in the field of regulation of Radio Frequency (RF) emissions, and WCFs which meet the FCC standards shall not be conditioned or denied on the basis of the RF impacts. 
2.  In order to provide information to its citizens, copies of ongoing FCC information concerning WCFs and radio frequency emission standards shall be made available. Applicants for WCFs shall be required to provide information on the projected power density of the facility and how this meets the FCC standards. 
J.  Federal requirements. 
All WCFs must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with authority over WCFs. If such standards and regulations are changed, then the owners of the WCFs governed by this ordinance shall bring such antenna arrays and/or support structures into compliance with such revised standards and regulations within six (6) months of the effective dates of such standards and regulations unless a more stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring WCFs into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall constitute grounds for the removal of the WCF at the owner's expense in accordance with Section 5.05.07 of this UDO. 
K.  Structural integrity. 
To ensure the structural integrity of towers, the owner of a tower shall ensure it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the Electronic Industries Association/Telecommunications Industries (EIA/TIA) 222 Revision F Standard entitled "Structural Standards for Steel Antenna Towers and Antenna Supporting Structures (or Equivalent)," as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the City concludes a tower fails to comply with such codes and standards and constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon notice being provided to the tower's owner, the owner shall have thirty (30) days to bring such tower into compliance with such standards. If the owner fails to bring such tower into compliance within said thirty (30) days, the City may remove such tower at the owner's expense in accordance with Section 5.05.07 of this UDO. A letter stamped by an engineer certified in the state shall be required stating that the WCF and support structure meets or exceeds all applicable requirements set forth herein. 
(Res. No. 12-2007, §§ 1, 2, 11-5-07) 
5.05.04 - Review Process 
A.  General. 
The applicable development standards referred to herein are those set forth in Section 5.05.03 and in Table 5.05.03(A) above. 
B.  Attached WCFs are permitted as follows: 
1.  Attached WCFs in commercial and industrial zones that meet the development standards are permitted as of right. 
2.  Attached WCFs in commercial and industrial zones that exceed the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
3.  Attached WCFs in residential zones that meet the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
4.  Attached WCFs in residential zones that exceed the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
5.  Attached WCFs in office and institutional and central business district zones that meet the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
6.  Attached WCFs in office and institutional and central business district zones that exceed the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
C.  WCFs with support structures are permitted as follows: 
1.  WCFs with support structures in the commercial and industrial zones that meet the development standards are permitted as of right. 
2.  WCFs with support structures in the commercial and industrial zones that exceed the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
3.  WCFs with support structures in the office and institutional and central business zoning districts that meet the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
4.  WCFs with support structures in the office and institutional and central business zoning districts that exceed the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
5.  WCFs with support structures in residential zones that meet the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
6.  WCFs with support structures in residential zones that exceed the development standards shall require a conditional use permit subject to the review and approval of said permit during public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
D.  WCFs on property owned, leased or otherwise controlled by the City, provided that the WCF has been approved by the City and the development standards in Section 5.05.03 are met, are permitted as of right. 
E.  Temporary WCFs for a term not to exceed ninety (90) days, with a possible ninety (90) day extension with approval of the City Manager, are permitted as of right. 
5.05.05 - Approval Procedures 
A.  Permitted as of right. 
Where a WCF is permitted as of right, only a building permit is required. 
B.  Administrative review. 
1.  Review of WCFs under this section will be conducted by the City Manager, or his or her designee, upon application for a building permit for the WFC. 
2.  Each applicant for administrative approval shall apply to the City Manager, providing information set forth in subsection (D)(2) of this section. 
3.  The City Manager, or his or her designee, shall respond to each application within thirty (30) days after receiving it by either approving or denying the application. 
4.  In connection with any such administrative approval, the City Manager, may, in order to encourage shared use, administratively waive any zoning district setback requirements by up to fifty (50) percent. 
5.  If an administrative approval is denied, the applicant may appeal said denial in accordance with the provisions of Article 10 of this UDO to the Board of Development Appeals. 
C.  Specific administratively approved uses. 
The following uses may be approved by the City Manager, or his or her designee, after conducting an administrative review: 
1.  Installing an antenna on an existing structure other than a tower (such as a building, sign, light pole, water tower, or other free-standing nonresidential structure) that is less than fifty (50) feet in height, so long as such addition does not add more than twenty (20) feet to the height of the existing structure; 
2.  Installing an antenna on an existing tower of any height, including a pre-existing tower and further including the placement of additional buildings or other support equipment used in connection with said antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than twenty (20) feet to the height of said existing tower. 
D.  Conditional use permit. 
1.  General. 
The following provisions shall govern the issuance of conditional use permits: 
[a.]  If the WCF is not a permitted use under subsection (A) of this section or permitted to be approved administratively pursuant to subsections (B) and (C) of this section, then a conditional use permit shall be required for the construction of a tower or the placement of an antenna in all specified zoning districts. 
b.  In granting a conditional use permit, the Mayor and City Council may impose conditions to the extent the City concludes such conditions are necessary to minimize any adverse effect of the proposed tower on adjoining properties. 
2.  Information required. 
Each applicant requesting a conditional use permit under this ordinance shall submit the following: 
a.  Plans. 
The applicant shall submit a scaled plan and a scaled elevation view and other supporting drawings, calculations, and other documentation, signed and sealed by appropriately licensed professionals, showing the location and dimensions of all improvements, including information concerning topography, radio frequency coverage, tower height requirements, setbacks, drives, parking, fencing, landscaping, adjacent uses, and other information deemed by the City to be necessary to assess compliance with this ordinance. 
b.  Inventory of existing sites. 
Each applicant for an antenna or tower shall provide to the City Manager an inventory of its existing towers that are either within the jurisdiction of the City or within one-quarter (1/4) mile of the border thereof, including specific information about the location, height, and design of each tower. The City Manager may share such information with other applicants applying for administrative approvals or conditional use permits under this ordinance or other organizations seeking to locate antennas within the jurisdiction of the City, provided, however the City Manager is not, by sharing his information, in any way representing or warranting such sites are available or suitable. 
c.  Collocation. 
Pursuant to goals in Section 5.05.01, each applicant shall provide a statement indicating intent to allow shared use of the tower and how others will be accommodated. Any information of an engineering nature that the applicant submits, whether civil, mechanical, or electrical shall be certified by a licensed professional engineer. 
3.  Reviewing bodies. 
Review of WCFs under this section will be conducted by the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
4.  Public notice. 
Notice shall be given for this review in accordance with the procedures established in the zoning ordinance for notice of applications and hearings before the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council. 
5.  Hearing. 
The Mayor and City Council shall render a decision on the conditional use request in accordance with the procedures established in this UDO. 
6.  Factors considered in granting conditional use permits. 
Both the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council shall consider the following factors in determining whether to issue a conditional use permit, although either body may waive, reduce, or, in certain instances, increase the burden on the applicant on one or more of these criteria if either body concludes that the goals of the City's ordinances are better served thereby. 
a.  Height of the proposed tower; 
b.  Proximity of the tower to a residential structure and residential district boundaries; 
c.  Nature of uses on adjacent and nearby properties; 
d.  Surrounding topography; 
e.  Design of the tower, with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness; 
f.  Proposed ingress and egress; and 
g.  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures, as listed below in subsection (7). 
7.  Availability of suitable existing towers or other structures. 
No new tower shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the reasonable satisfaction of the City that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing tower or structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna may consist of any of the following: 
a.  No existing towers or structures are located within the geographic area required to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
b.  Existing towers or structures are not of sufficient height to meet applicant's engineering requirements. 
c.  Existing towers or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support applicant's proposed antenna and related equipment. 
d.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna on the existing towers or structures, or the antenna on the existing towers or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna. 
e.  The fees, costs, or contractual provisions required by the owner in order to share an existing tower or structure are unreasonable. Costs exceed new tower development. 
f.  The applicant demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing towers and structures unsuitable. 
8.  Findings. 
A decision rendered by the Mayor and City Council under a conditional use permit shall be supported by findings of fact and conclusions of law based upon substantial evidence in the record. 
9.  Timing of decision. 
The Mayor and City council shall render its decision within sixty (60) days after referral from the Planning Commission, unless the Mayor and City Council can demonstrate that more time is required and the time is agreed to by the applicant. 
5.05.06 - Notice to Adjacent Property Owners 
The City is responsible for notifying all adjacent property owners, as shown on the tax records, for applications involving the location of WCFs in residential areas and for all applications requiring a conditional use permit. 
5.05.07 - Removal of Abandoned WCF's 
A telecommunications structure may be determined to be abandoned because of discontinued use or falling into disrepair or noncompliance because of neglect of maintenance according to the standards set forth in this ordinance. 
A.  Abandonment because of discontinued use. 
A telecommunication structure shall be determined to be abandoned if the structure becomes more than twenty-five (25) percent damaged and the owner fails to repair the same within six (6) months or if the structure falls into a like disrepair from vandalism, neglect, or collapse so as to discontinue all telecommunication service for a period of nine (9) months. Within ninety (90) days after notice from the City that a structure has been considered abandoned, the owner of the structure shall either re-establish use of the site or remove all equipment, support structures and appurtenances. 
B.  Abandonment due to disrepair or noncompliance. 
In the event a telecommunications structure falls into disrepair or noncompliance because of neglect of maintenance, the facility shall be determined to be abandoned if repairs are not affected to restore compliance within thirty (30) days after written notice of noncompliance from the codes enforcement officer. Failure to comply within thirty (30) days shall result in expiration of prior approvals for the facility. 
C.  Expiration of prior approvals. 
Any proposal to re-establish the telecommunication structure after failure to comply with restoration of facilities because of disrepair or neglect shall be treated as a new application subject to reviews, approvals and fees required by this ordinance. 
D.  Liability of noncompliance. 
No time period stated herein shall relieve the owner of a telecommunication structure from responsibility to maintain a safe facility. 
E.  If applicable, a copy of relevant portions of a signed lease, which requires the applicant to remove the tower and associated facilities upon cessation of operations at the site, shall be submitted at the time of application. In the event that a tower is not removed at the cessation of operations at a site, the tower and associated facilities may be removed by the City and the costs of removal assessed against the property. 
5.05.08 - Non-[C]onforming WCF's 
WCFs in existence on the date of the adoption of this section which do not comply with the requirements of this section shall be referred to as non-conforming WCFs and are subject to the following provisions: 
A.  Non-conforming WCFs may continue to operate for the purpose now used, but may not be expanded without complying with this ordinance, except as further provided in this section. 
B.  Non-conforming WCFs may add additional antennas (belonging to the same carrier or other carriers) subject to administrative review in Section 5.05.05. 
C.  Non-conforming WCFs which are hereafter damaged or destroyed due to any reason or cause may be repaired and restored to their former use, location, and physical dimensions subject to obtaining a building permit therefore, but without otherwise complying with this section. 
D.  The owner of any non-conforming WCF may replace, repair, rebuild, and/or expand such WCF in order to improve the structural integrity of the facility, to allow the facility to accommodate collocated antennas or facilities, or to upgrade the facilities to current engineering, technological, or communications standards, without having to conform to the provisions of this ordinance, so long as such facilities are not increased in height by more than ten [(10)] percent and/or setbacks are not decreased by more than ten [(10)] percent. 
5.05.09 - Modifications to Existing Facilities 
A.  Minor modifications. 
Minor modifications to WCFs permitted under this ordinance shall be approved under an administrative review by the City Manager, or his or her designee (see Section 5.05.05). Minor modifications are as follows: 
1.  The addition of no more than two (2) antenna arrays to any existing WCF, so long as the addition of the antenna arrays add no more than [twenty] (20) feet in height to the WCF; 
2.  An increase in height of the support structure which is no greater than ten [(10)] percent; 
3.  A decrease in setbacks by no more than ten [(10)] percent; 
4.  Collocations of up to one (1) antenna array shall be considered a minor modification. 
B.  Major modifications. 
Major modifications to WCFs permitted under this ordinance shall be approved under review and by public hearings of the Planning Commission and the Mayor and City Council as stated in Section 5.05.05. Major modifications are any modifications that exceed the definition of minor modification. 
ARTICLE 6 - INFRASTRUCTURE IMPROVEMENTS 
6.00.00 - GENERALLY 
This Article sets out the minimum requirements and standards for construction of subdivisions and other land development projects, including general principals of design and layout and requirements for such public facilities as streets and utilities. 
6.01.00 - STANDARDS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE 

6.01.01 - Standard Design Specifications 
The Design and Construction Standards of the City of Carrollton, also referred to in this UDO as "Design and Construction Standards," as maintained by the City Engineering Department and as may be amended from time to time by said department, are incorporated into this Code as though set forth within the body of this Code. In the case of a conflict between the Design and Construction Standards and the text of this Code, the text of this Code shall control. 
6.01.02 - Traffic Signs and Street Striping 
The installation of all traffic control signs and street striping shall be governed by the standards contained in the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, latest edition, published by the Federal Highway Administration of the U.S. Department of Transportation. 
6.01.03 - Georgia DOT Standard Specifications 
Unless otherwise specially set forth in this Code or the Design and Construction Standards, all of the materials, methods of construction, and workmanship for the work covered in reference to street construction and storm drainage construction shall conform to the latest standard specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
6.01.04 - AASHTO Design Standards 
Design criteria and standards not specifically set forth herein or in the latest standard specifications of the Georgia Department of Transportation shall conform to the latest edition of the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO), "A Policy on Geometric Design of Highways and Streets." The latest edition of the Roadside Design Guide by AASHTO shall be consulted regarding set-back criteria and clear zone distance criteria for structures within a public street right-of-way or private street easement. 
6.01.05 - Street Lighting 
The American National Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting of the Illumination Engineering Society, as approved by the American National Standards Institute (1973), or as more recently amended, shall be consulted regarding illumination of public rights-of-way. 
6.02.00 - PROJECT DESIGN - GENERAL DESIGN STANDARDS 

6.02.01 - Suitability of the Land 
A.  Land with a slope of 35% or more, land within an area of special flood hazard (the 100-year floodplain), and land otherwise determined by the City Engineer to be physically unsuitable for subdivision or development because of flooding, poor drainage, topographic, geologic or other such features that may endanger health, life or property, aggravate erosion, increase flood hazard, or necessitate excessive expenditures of public funds for supply and maintenance of services shall not be approved for subdivision or development unless adequate methods are formulated by the developer for solving the problems. Such land shall be set aside for such uses as shall not involve such a danger. 
B.  Land within a proposed subdivision or development that is unsuitable for development shall be incorporated into the buildable lots as excess land or set aside as open space. Lots that do not comply with the requirements of this Code are prohibited. 
6.02.02 - Conformance to the Comprehensive Plan and Other Adopted Plans 
In addition to the requirements established herein, all subdivisions and individual development projects shall comply with the following laws, rules and regulations: 
A.  All proposed subdivisions and individual development projects shall conform to the Comprehensive Plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the City Engineer. 
B.  In subdivisions or developments related to or affecting any State or U.S. numbered highway, the City Engineer shall require the approval of the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
C.  Dedications and reservations. 
1.  All transportation facilities such as highways, major thoroughfares and other streets shall be platted by the developer in the location and to the dimension indicated on the Comprehensive Plan or the Transportation Plan, whichever is the most recently adopted or amended. 
2.  Public facilities other than transportation facilities, such as school sites, park sites, library sites, fire station sites, sites for public utilities or for other public use or open space, shall be shown as dedicated or as reserved on the preliminary and final plats under the following circumstances: 
a.  When any of said public facilities are shown in the Comprehensive Plan and located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision or development; or 
b.  When any of said public facilities have not been anticipated by the Comprehensive Plan, but are considered essential to or extremely important to the development of the City or to that neighborhood or portion of the City within which the subdivision or development project lies, by the Carrollton Mayor and City Council. 
3.  Time limitation on reservations. 
If the developer reserves land for any public facility other than transportation facilities and it is not acquired by gift, purchase, condemnation or otherwise nor optioned by the appropriate public agency within 5 years from the date of recording of the subdivision or by the time Certificates of Occupancy have been issued for 75% of the dwelling units in the development, whichever occurs first, the subdivider may claim the original reservation, or portion thereof, and cause it to be subdivided in a manner suitable to the subdivider subject to the provisions of this UDO. 
4.  Waiver of dedication or reservation requirement. 
The City Engineer may waive the platting and reservation requirements of subsection (C) above whenever the public body responsible for land acquisition executes a written release stating that such a planned feature is not being acquired. 
5.  Refusal of dedication offer. 
a.  Whenever a plat or site plan proposes the dedication of land to public use that the City Engineer finds not required or suitable for such public use, the City Engineer shall refuse to approve the plat or site plan. The City Engineer's opinion may be appealed to the Carrollton Mayor and City Council. 
b.  Whenever a plat or site plan proposes the dedication of land to public use that the Carrollton Mayor and City Council finds to be not required or suitable for such public use, the Carrollton Mayor and City Council shall refuse to accept the dedication. 
6.02.03 - Name of Subdivision or Development Project 
The name of each subdivision or development project must have the approval of the City Engineer. The name shall not duplicate nor closely approximate the name of an existing subdivision or development project in the City of Carrollton or Carroll County. 
6.02.04 - Street Names 
A.  Proposed streets obviously in alignment with other existing and named streets shall bear the names of the existing streets. In no case shall the name for a proposed street duplicate existing street names in the Carrollton area, irrespective of the use of a suffix such as: street, avenue, boulevard, road, pike, drive, way, place, court or other derivatives. 
B.  Street names are subject to approval by the City Engineer. 
6.02.05 - Street Addresses 
Street addresses shall be obtained from the City Engineer and shall be shown on each final plat. 
6.02.06 - Blocks 
A.  Residential blocks. 
1.  Unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer under unusual circumstances, block lengths shall not exceed 1,800 feet nor be less than 600 feet in length. 
2.  In blocks greater than 1,000 feet in length, the City Engineer may require one (1) or more public easements of not less than ten (10) feet in width to extend entirely across the block for pedestrian crosswalks, fire protection or utilities. 
3.  Width: Residential blocks shall be wide enough to allow two (2) rows of lots, except where reverse frontage lots on major thoroughfares are provided, or when prevented by topographic conditions or size of the property, or for lots along the periphery of the subdivision, or where abutting upon limited access highways or railroads, or where other situations make this requirement impractical, in which case the City Engineer may approve a single row of lots. 
B.  Non-Residential blocks. 
Blocks for other than residential use shall be of such length and width as may be suitable for the prospective use, including adequate provision for off-street parking and service. 
6.02.07 - Lots 
A.  Minimum lot dimensions and areas. 
All lots shall meet or exceed the area and dimensional requirements of this UDO for the zoning district and type of development in which the lots are located. Lot size may be reduced by the Mayor and City Council if approved as a Planned Development. 
B.  Authority of Health Department. 
Nothing contained in this Article shall be construed as preventing the Carroll County Health Department, after study of the conditions existing in a proposed subdivision, from requiring that all or any portion of the area of such subdivision shall not be built upon or that the minimum lot sizes set forth in this Development Ordinance are inadequate and must be increased to ensure the protection of the public health. 
C.  Adequate building sites. 
Each lot shall contain a site large enough for a normal building that will meet all building setback requirements as set forth in this Code and not be subject to flood or periodic inundation. 
D.  Arrangement. 
Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be at right angles to straight street lines or radial to curved street lines (including cul-de-sacs). 
E.  Corner lots. 
Corner lots shall be sufficiently large to permit the location of buildings so as to conform to the front building lines on both streets. 
F.  Through lots. 
On through lots (i.e., "double-frontage" lots) the minimum front yard setback for principal buildings shall be provided along each street. 
G.  Flag lots. 
Flag lots must meet the minimum lot width for the applicable zoning district at the minimum front setback line required for principal buildings. 
H.  Lot remnants. 
Lot remnants (lots below minimum area or width left over after subdividing tracts of land) shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 

6.02.08 - Areas Reserved for Future Development 
If any portion of a tract is reserved for future subdivision development, the minimum lot width and frontage of the reserved area may be reduced to the width required for a future street to serve such area. 
A.  Such a reserved area must be labeled "Reserved for Future Development" on the final subdivision plat, and the portion of the lot where a street will be built must be labeled "Future Street." 
B.  Such a reserved area will not be eligible for issuance of a building permit unless the lot meets all requirements of this UDO, including minimum lot width and frontage requirements of the applicable zoning district. 
6.02.09 - Plats Straddling Political Boundaries 
Whenever access to a subdivision is required across land in another governmental jurisdiction, the City Engineer may request assurance from the City Attorney, and/or the other jurisdiction that access is legally established, and that the access road is adequately improved. In general, lot lines shall be laid out so as to not cross jurisdictional boundary lines. 
6.02.10 - Design Standards for Planned Developments 
A.  The project design standards and requirements of this Article may be modified in the case of a Planned Development (PD) which, in the judgment of the Carrollton Mayor and City Council, provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, provided zoning density standards for the entire tract are not exceeded, and which also provides such covenants or other legal procedures as will assure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
B.  Plans for such developments shall be submitted to and approved by the Carrollton Mayor and City Council as a Planned Development (PD), as required by this UDO. No building permits shall be issued until such approval has been given. 
6.03.00 - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

6.03.01 - Minor Subdivisions 
By definition, a minor subdivision does not involve the construction of major public improvements, such as new streets or stormwater detention. However, the following improvements are required in order to adequately serve the lots and protect the safe operation of the existing road: 
A.  Right-of way shall be dedicated along the property's frontage from the centerline of the existing road equal to 1/2 of the minimum requirement for the classification of the road, as established in Section 6.07.04. Minimum road improvements, (i.e. additional lane widening, curb and gutter, roadway overlay, etc.) may be required, if determined necessary by the City Engineer, to bring a substandard city road facility up to a minimum acceptable standard, within the limits of the property frontage being subdivided if the proposed subdivision is greater than five (5) lots. The requirement for such road improvements shall not alter or change the designation from Minor Subdivision. 
B.  The potential location of a driveway connection serving each lot and meeting the requirements of these development regulations shall be indicated on the final subdivision plat. 
C.  The stormwater carrying capacity of the road, whether in an existing ditch or gutter, shall not be compromised. If the stormwater characteristics of the existing road are inadequate to accommodate the new lots, the City Engineer may require improvement as appropriate. 
D.  Survey monument markers of all lot corners shall be provided in accordance with the requirements of Section 6.04.00. 
6.03.02 - Major Subdivisions, Multifamily and Non-[R]esidential Developments 
The following improvements shall be provided by the developer or at the developer's expense in every major subdivision or individual multi-family or non-residential development in accordance with the requirements and standards contained in this Article. 
A.  Survey monumentation in accordance with Section 6.04.00. 
B.  Streets providing access to such a development and to all lots in such a subdivision, including the extension of streets required to provide access to adjoining properties, in accordance with Section 6.07.00. 
1.  Streets contained wholly within such a subdivision shall be improved to the full standards contained in this Article. Existing streets that adjoin such a development shall be improved to the minimum standards from the centerline of the street along the development's frontage. 
2.  Curb and gutter where required along all roadways, or drainage swale where allowed. 
C.  Street name signs, stop bars, striping and traffic control signs, as approved by the City Engineer, shall be installed by the developer in accordance with Section 6.08.00. 
D.  Street lights in accordance with Section 6.09.00. 
E.  Driveway access to each lot shall be installed by the developer in accordance Section 6.10.00. 
F.  Project access improvements (deceleration, turn lanes, etc.) as deemed necessary by the City Engineer under the provisions of Section 6.11.00. 
G.  Sidewalks, if required, under Section 6.12.00. 
H.  Stormwater drainage and detention facilities in accordance with Section 6.13.00. 
I.  Public or private water supply as required under Section 6.14.00. 
J.  Fire hydrants as required under Section 6.15.00. 
K.  Public or private sanitary waste disposal as required under Section 6.16.00. 
6.03.03 - Guarantee in Lieu of Completed Improvements (Performance Bonds) 
No final subdivision plat shall be approved by the City or accepted for recordation by the Clerk of the Superior Court until one of the following conditions has been met: 
A.  All required improvements have been constructed or funded in a satisfactory manner and approved by the City Engineer, or 
B.  The Carrollton Mayor and City Council has received in escrow 150% of the estimated cost of installation of the required improvements, and has received a copy of an executed contract for installation of the improvements between the developer and a qualified contractor. The executed contract shall call for completion of the improvements within twenty-four (24) months of approval of the final subdivision plat. 
C.  The improvements funded through the escrow fund shall be limited to final pavement topping for streets, final grassing of street shoulders, landscaping, and street and parking lot striping and sidewalks. 
D.  Upon completion of deferred improvements, the as-built surveys are to be updated by the developer and submitted to the City Engineer. 
6.04.00 - SURVEY MONUMENTS 

6.04.01 - Exterior Development Boundaries 
A.  A two (2) inch iron pipe at least twenty-four (24) inches long shall be placed at all corners of the exterior boundaries of the subdivision or development project being developed and shall be driven no less than six (6) inches above the finished grade. 
B.  Existing permanent monuments that, in the professional opinion of a registered land surveyor, are of sufficiently durable construction shall be marked and maintained. 
6.04.02 - Lot and Street Corners 
A.  All other street or lot corners shall be marked with a three-quarter (3/4) inch iron pipe at least twenty-four (24) inches long and driven no less than two (2) inches above the finished grade. 
B.  All such monuments shall be properly set in the ground and shall be approved by a registered land surveyor prior to the time of final plat approval. 
6.04.03 - Floodplain Elevations 
On developments containing floodplains, flood elevation references shall be set. 
6.05.00 - UTILITY EASEMENTS 

6.05.01 - Notice of Intention to Utilize Right-of-Way 
Any public utility seeking to condemn or utilize an easement over or through or within the paved portion of the public right-of-way which is under the supervision and control of the City, in order to run wires, pipes, cables, maintain dams, flow backwater, or for any other uses necessary to its purpose, shall first notify the City Engineer or its designated agent of the utility's intention to so condemn or utilize, and in all cases other than condemnation said utility shall obtain a permit from the City Engineer. Utilization shall mean any manner of use of the above-described right-of-way, including but not limited to, cutting of the pavement or boring under the pavement. Such notification shall include the location and description of the right-of-way to be condemned or utilized and the purpose of the condemnation or utilization. In the event of emergency repair service involving utilization of the paved portion of the right-of-way during hours other than normal office hours, the utility shall notify the City Engineer on the next business day. 
6.05.02 - Promulgation of Standard Specifications 
Standard specifications regulating the installation of pipes, wires, cables, poles, lines, etc., over, through or within a public right-of-way are located within the Design and Construction Standards. These specifications shall be in conformance with the requirements of this Section and shall be designed to protect and safeguard the welfare of the City and its citizens. (A copy of the Design and Construction Standards shall be available for public view during normal business hours at the City Engineer's office.) 
6.05.03 - Approval of Installation 
As to new installation, no public utility shall install any lines, wires, pipes or poles, or otherwise utilize a public right-of-way until after obtaining prior written approval from the City Engineer respecting the proposed location of said lines, wires, pipes, etc., in accordance with these regulations. The City Engineer shall determine if the installed location and placement of any utility along a public right-of-way meets the requirements of this Section and the Design and Construction Standards (see Section 6.05.02). The City Engineer shall then issue a written approval or disapproval to the public utility regarding the installation. Any installation made by any utility in a location other than that specified in this Section shall be removed and reinstalled in the proper location entirely at the expense of the utility. Failure to reinstall at the proper location will result in the withholding of any further installation permits. Failure to conform to this Section or the permit will result in the withholding of any further installation permits. 
6.05.04 - Location of Utility Lines and Structures 
A.  Particular side of street for specific utilities. Water, electrical, telephone and cable television lines shall be located on the south or west side of any road, highway or street; and gas, electrical, telephone and cable television lines shall be located on the north or east side of any road, highway or street. The determination of which side is north and which side is south and which side is east and which side is west shall be made at the point where said street, road or highway begins. If there is any question regarding which side of the highway, road or street any particular utility should use, then said utility shall contact the City Engineer. The City Engineer shall then instruct the public utility regarding which side of a specific road, street or highway the particular utility should use. 
B.  All utilities within existing or proposed City right-of-way shall be installed in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards, and any utility placement guidelines or regulations in effect at the time of installation. 
6.05.05 - Variances 
The City Engineer is authorized to approve a variance from the requirements of Section 6.05.00, if, in his opinion, such variance is absolutely necessary under the conditions then and there existing and such variance will not create a public hazard or otherwise be detrimental to the best interest of the City and its citizens. The City Engineer shall keep a record of all variances granted under this subsection. This record shall include the name of the utility to which said variance is granted, the description and location of the variance, and the reasons for granting said variance. 
6.05.06 - Use of Minimum Area; Restoration of Disturbed Areas 
Any utility shall condemn or utilize only that portion of a public right-of-way necessary for the purpose intended. It shall leave undisturbed the area surrounding the condemned or utilized right-of-way and shall replace or repair, in kind, any structures, shrubbery, driveways, embankments, ground cover, etc., which are altered or disturbed while installing pipes, wires, ditches, or otherwise using the public right-of-way, and shall re-grade the undisturbed area to its original contours. 
6.05.07 - Excavations; Backfilling 
No street cuts for crossings will be made unless specifically approved by the City Engineer after at least three attempts to bore at different locations. Patches shall be made in accordance with City standards. 
6.05.08 - Liability for Costs and Expenses 
Any costs or expenses incurred by the City in repairing or replacing any such structures, etc., as described in Section 6.05.06, which are not left in their original condition by the public utilities shall be chargeable to the public utility, including reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection of said costs or expenses. 
6.05.09 - Inspections 
The utility cutting the asphalt of the roadway for the installation/repair of a utility is required to notify the City Engineer, in advance, of the date and time of the roadway backfilling and repaving so that the City Engineer can schedule an inspection of this work. 
6.05.10 - Penalties 
Any utility that does not notify the City Engineer in advance of the date and time of the roadway backfilling and repaving shall be fined in accordance with this Code. In addition, the utility may be required by the City Engineer to core the patching, at the utility's cost, to determine its compliance with the City of Carrollton Standard Specifications. All cost or expenses incurred by the City in repairing or replacing any structure, shrubbery, driveway, embankment, ground cover or any other item which has been altered or disturbed and not left or returned to the original condition by the utility, shall be chargeable to the utility which disturbed the area or cut the City roadway. The City shall be entitled to collect reasonable attorney's fees incurred in the collection of such costs or expenses and all costs of collection. 
6.05.11 - Overlapping Easements 
Easements for water, sanitary sewers and drainage purposes may be combined, but must comply with all requirements of the City of Carrollton as to width and pipe separation. 
6.06.00 - OTHER EASEMENTS 
Easements other than utility easements shall be required in connection with subdivisions or developments for the following purposes, among others: 

6.06.01 - Pedestrian Easements 
Pedestrian easements not less than twenty (20) feet wide, may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation, or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation, and other community facilities. Easement width may be increased to twenty-four (24) feet for the installation of the Carrollton Greenbelt, at the discretion of the Mayor and City Council. 
6.06.02 - Drainage Easements 
A.  A publicly dedicated drainage easement is to be provided along any manmade drainage channel or drainage pipe located outside a street right-of-way. All easements shall be no less than twenty (20) feet wide when used as an open ditch. Piped storm drainage shall have a minimum easement width of twenty (20) feet. 
B.  Drainage easements off the street right-of-way shall be clearly defined on the plat and deed of the individual property owner, and such property owner shall keep the easement free of obstructions and maintain that part of the easement within the property owner's boundary line so that free and maximum flow is maintained at all times. The property owner shall not alter any drainage improvements without the prior written approval from the City Engineer. 
6.06.03 - Conservation and Natural Resource Easements 
Conservation and natural resource easements shall be clearly defined on the plat and deed of the individual property owner, and must conform to the requirements set forth in this UDO. 
6.07.00 - STREETS 

6.07.01 - Access 
A.  A publicly approved street meeting the requirements of this Article shall serve every development and every lot within a subdivision. Private streets must meet all public street standards unless modification is approved by the Carrollton Mayor and City Council as part of a Planned Development pursuant to Section 4.06.00. 
B.  Every subdivision and every multi-family or non-residential development project shall have access to the public street system via a paved road. Development and building permits shall not be issued unless continuous paved road access between the property and the public street system is provided by a publicly dedicated street or an approved private street. 
C.  A building permit shall not be issued on any property that does not front on or have approved access to a publicly dedicated street or an approved private street. 
D.  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
E.  No subdivision or development shall be designed in a way that would completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
F.  The minimum distance between street types shall be provided as shown in Table 6.07.01 (A), or as required by the Georgia Department of Transportation if one of the streets is a state or federal route. The distance between street types is measured from the nearest right-of-way. 
Table 6.07.01 (A): Minimum Distance between Street Types 
Street Type Minimum distance between street types Local Collector Arterial Local 125 feet 125 feet 125 feet Collector 125 feet 200 feet 200 feet Arterial 125 feet 200 feet 300 feet  
6.07.02 - Street Classifications 
Streets are classified according to the function that they serve, the type, speed, and volume of traffic they will carry and the required standards of design. The classifications of streets and roads are as shown on the latest approved or amended Zoning Map of the City of Carrollton. 
6.07.03 - Relation to Present and Future Street System 
A.  The street pattern within a development or subdivision shall provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of the existing street pattern of anticipated development, if any, at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width. Topography and natural features such as streams and tree growth shall be considered. 
B.  Existing streets that adjoin a development or subdivision boundary shall be deemed a part of the development or subdivision. The proposed street system within a subdivision shall have the right-of-way of existing streets extended no less than the required minimum width. Subdivisions that adjoin only one side of an existing street shall dedicate one-half of the additional right-of-way needed to meet the minimum width requirement for the street. If any part of the subdivision includes both sides of an existing street, all of the required additional right-of-way shall be dedicated. 
C.  The proposed development must include a traffic control device plan for the existing streets and intersections that adjoin a development or subdivision boundary for approval by the City Engineering Department. 
D.  All right-of way required for off-site improvements shall be acquired by the developer at no expense to the City of Carrollton. If the Developer is unable to acquire the right-of-way, the City Attorney shall initiate condemnation proceedings, at the expense of the developer, after authorization by the Mayor and City Council. 
E.  Where, in the opinion of the City Engineer, it is necessary to provide for inter-parcel access to adjoining property, proposed streets shall be extended by dedication of right-of-way to the boundary of such property and existing streets through the development. 
1.  Where an existing street on the adjoining property terminates at the boundary of the development or subdivision, the street shall be extended into the development or subdivision. 
2.  Where no street exists on the adjoining property, a temporary turn-around shall be provided at the boundary of the development or subdivision at an appropriate location. 
F.  Subdivisions shall be laid out so as to discourage through traffic on local streets. However, the provision for the extension and continuation of arterial and collector streets into and from adjoining areas is required. 
G.  Where, in the opinion of the City Engineer or his designee, it is necessary to provide traffic calming measures to reduce the negative effects of motor vehicle use, alter driver behavior, and improve conditions for non-motorized street users, proposed developments will be required to submit traffic calming plans and/or studies to be implemented or coordinated through the approval, permitting, and construction process through the development procedures. 
H.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the City Engineering Department shall require marginal access streets, single tier lots, or such other treatment as will provide protection for abutting properties, reduction in the number of intersections with the major street and separation of local and through traffic. 
6.07.04 - Design Standards for Streets 
A.  Arterial (major) Streets. 
Any new construction of an arterial street or any roadway that is under the jurisdiction of the State shall conform to Georgia Department of Transportation standards. Any modification of or connection to a State or U.S. numbered highway shall meet all design requirements of and be approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
B.  Local and Collector Streets. 
All local and collector streets shall comply with the design and construction requirements of this UDO, except that all State or U.S. numbered highways shall meet all design requirements of and be approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
C.  Minimum width of right-of-way. 
Minimum width of right-of-way measured from lot line to lot line shall be as shown on Table 6.07.04(A). 
Table 6.07.04 (A): Minimum Right-of-Way Width 
Street Classification Width of Right-of-way Arterial Street 100 feet Collector Street* 
 Residential (Single-family, Duplex)* 
 Multifamily, commercial, industrial   
60 feet 
80 feet Local Commercial or Industrial Street 60 feet Local Residential Street 50 feet Alleys 20 feet  
*A Residential Collector is any street within a residential development that will have over 100 daily peak hour trips. 
D.  Additional right-of-way. 
1.  Subdivisions that include an existing street that does not conform to the minimum right-of-way requirements of this UDO shall provide additional width along one or both sides of such street or road so that the minimum right-of-way required by this UDO is established. Subdivisions abutting only one side of such a street or road shall provide a minimum of one-half of the right-of-way required by these regulations, measured from the center of the existing right-of-way. 
2.  When a future street or road, as proposed in the Comprehensive Plan, adjoins or traverses the subdivision or development project, the future right-of-way shall be platted as part of the subdivision or development project. No development will be allowed within the platted future right-of-way except for drives and landscaping, and the platted future right-of-way is to be treated as a lot line for the provision of all setback lines as required by this Article. The developer will be contractually bound to the City to sell this strip of land to the City at a future date, for the amount stated in the tax digest. A right-of-way agreement shall be executed before the City Engineer approves the development. 
E.  General design requirements. 
a.  General design requirements for streets, including street grades, minimum design speeds, vertical and horizontal alignment, and minimum sight distance, are located within the Design and Construction Standards on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
F.  Dead-end streets (cul-de-sacs). 
1.  A cul-de-sac street shall be no more than 600 feet long or serve more than 19 lots, whichever is greater, unless necessitated by topographic or other conditions and approved by the City Engineer. If these conditions exist, the maximum length shall be 800 feet unless a greater length is approved by the Carrollton Mayor and City Council through the Planned Development process. 
2.  Turn-around dimensions. 
a.  Cul-de-sacs in residential subdivisions shall terminate in a circular turn-around having a minimum right-of-way of at least 100 feet in diameter, and a paved turn-around with a minimum outside diameter of eighty (80) feet. 
b.  Cul-de-sacs in commercial and industrial subdivisions shall terminate in a circular turn-around having a minimum right-of-way of at least 160 feet in diameter, and a paved turn around with a minimum outside diameter of 120 feet. 
3.  A dead-end street, other than a cul-de-sac, shall not be allowed except as a temporary stage of construction of a street that will be extended in a later stage of construction. Such a temporary dead-end street shall be provided with a temporary turn-around having a roadway radius of at least forty (40) feet if: 
a.  One or more lots front exclusively on the street; and 
b.  Extension of the street is not under construction when the final plat is submitted for recording. 
c.  Temporary turn-arounds shall consist of six (6) inches of graded aggregate base. The turn-around must be paved to city standards before the expiration of the maintenance bond. 
G.  Alleys and service drives. 
1.  Alleys may be required at the rear of all lots used for multi-family, commercial, or industrial developments. 
2.  Alleys in residential subdivisions shall not be permitted, unless the alleys are intended to provide rear-access to garages on each lot. 
3.  When allowed, dead-end alleys shall be provided with a turn-around having a roadway radius of at least forty (40) feet, a "T-head" turn-around, or other solution acceptable to the City Engineer. 
H.  Half streets prohibited. 
Half streets along development boundaries are prohibited. Whenever a street is planned adjacent to the proposed development or subdivision tract boundary, the entire street right-of-way shall be platted within the proposed development or subdivision. 
I.  Split Level Streets. 
A street that is constructed so as to have lanes in each direction at a different vertical level within the same right-of-way shall provide a pavement width of at least fourteen (14) feet in each direction and a vegetated median between the lanes having a slope of not greater than three to one. Split level streets will be allowed when: 
1.  Topographic conditions are such that alternatives to the typical street construction would be more desirable. 
2.  The shape and size of the parcel could be more efficiently developed. 
In either case, approval must be obtained from the City Engineer for the specific design. 
6.07.05 - Street Improvements 
Roadways shall be constructed and paved meeting the following standards: 
A.  Minimum [W]idth of [P]avement. 
1.  The minimum pavement width, measured from edge of pavement to edge of pavement, shall be as required for the street type on Table 6.07.05(A). 
Table 6.07.05(A): Pavement Widths 
Street Classification Width of 
Pavement* Arterial and Collector Streets**  4-Lane + turning lane 60 feet  2-Lane + turning lane 36 feet  2-Lane 24 feet Residential Collector*** 24 feet Local Commercial or Industrial Street 24 feet Local Residential Street 20 feet Alley 20 feet  
*  Not including curb and gutter, turn lanes, striped medians, etc. 
** Per Georgia DOT for State and U.S. numbered highways. 
***A Residential Collector is any street within a residential development that will have over 100 daily peak hour trips. 
B.  Curb and Gutter. 
1.  Curb and gutter are required along: 
a.  All new commercial and industrial streets and internal circulation areas. 
b.  All new residential subdivision streets except for those subdivisions in which the minimum lot size is five (5) acres or more. 
c.  Existing City streets and roads that abut a subdivision where curb and gutter are required, or abut a multi-family or non-residential development. 
d.  New construction on existing City streets and roads, including deceleration lanes and travel lane widenings. 
2.  All curb and gutter is to be six (6) inch "L"-back type curb in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards, unless roll-back type curb is approved by the City Engineer where grades permit and stormwater drainage will not be adversely affected. 
C.  Paving Standards. 
Roadways shall be paved in accordance with the standards set forth in Design and Construction Standards on file in the City Engineer's office. 
6.07.06 - Private Streets 
A.  Private streets, if approved by the City, shall meet all requirements and standards that apply to public streets unless modified in a Planned Development. 
B.  The private street shall be located on a tract of land dedicated as an access easement and be no less wide than that required for right-of-way for a similar public street. The easement must be recorded with each lot's deed and grant the right of vehicular access to all lots served by the street, as well as the right to place public and private utilities therein. The private street shall be owned by the property owners association or whatever entity is set up as the maintaining and operational body of the development. 
C.  A note shall be required on the final plat concerning ownership of the private street and continued maintenance of the private street. 
D.  Owner's release. 
1.  At the time of purchasing property that is served by a private street, or upon any sale or resale of a lot, the purchaser shall acknowledge by execution of a release that the street is private and not maintained by the City, and that maintenance of the street is the responsibility of the owner or other private association or entity identified in the release. The release is to be prepared using a form acceptable to the City Attorney and shall be recorded with the Clerk of the Superior Court. 
2.  Failure to execute such a release shall not relieve the purchaser of maintenance responsibility for the private street. 
E.  Lot dimensional requirements. 
For a property served by a private street: 
1.  The building setback, lot width and other dimensional requirements of the zoning district in which the property is located shall be measured from the private street easement. 
2.  Land located within the private street easement shall not be included in the area of the lot for the purpose of meeting the minimum lot area required by the zoning district in which the property is located. 
F.  Other standards. 
1.  A private street subdivision shall meet all other requirements and standards that apply to public subdivisions, such as stormwater runoff and detention requirements, the provision of utilities, and traffic and street name signs. 
2.  Private streets shall be denoted as such on the street name signs for each such street. Proposed streets, which are extensions of, or in alignment with, existing or other proposed streets shall have the same name. Street names shall not duplicate or be phonetically similar to other existing street names. The City may require a different color than the standard color for the street name sign, or may require that an additional sign be affixed to the street name sign pole indicating that the street is not maintained by the City. 
3.  Any gate placed across a private street that limits access to a subdivision or development shall provide for unimpeded access by emergency vehicles, governmental vehicles on official business, and delivery services including the U.S. Postal Service. Accessibility to such gated communities shall comply with all standards and requirements of the City for access activation. 
6.07.07 - Substandard Streets 
In the event that access to a subdivision or development project is from a substandard street (i.e., a dirt or gravel road), the following project access improvements may be provided by the developer in order to obtain a development permit or building permit, as applicable: 
A.  The substandard street shall be upgraded by the developer to a paved roadway from all project entrances to the nearest standard paved road along the route of access. 
B.  The roadway section shall meet the requirements of a local residential street. 
C.  The developer shall design the road and provide the labor, equipment and materials required for roadway improvements and necessary drainage improvements. 
D.  The right-of-way required for these off-site improvements shall be acquired by the developer at no expense to the City. If the developer cannot acquire adequate right-of-way, the City Attorney shall initiate condemnation proceedings at the expense of the developer after authorization by the Carrollton Mayor and City Council. 
E.  If the City desires the roadway to be improved to a standard greater than that for a local residential street, the City shall provide or pay the cost of the additional right-of-way, materials and labor. 
6.07.08 - Traffic Impact Studies 
The applicant is encouraged to conduct traffic studies as needed in order to identify geometric facilities that will be needed to satisfy the access/egress requirements of the site. The City Engineer will require a traffic study for any site estimated to generate more than 750 new trips in an average day or 100 peak hour trips in either the a.m. or p.m. peak hour using ITE Trip Generation Rates. The City Engineer may also require impact studies in other cases as deemed necessary. 
6.08.00 - TRAFFIC CONTROL DEVICES 

6.08.01 - Street Name Signs 
A.  Street name signs and posts of a type approved by the City Engineering Department shall be placed at all intersections. Street name signs must conform to the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition and the Georgia Department of Transportation's Standards and Specifications. Street name sign plans and details must be submitted for approval before being installed. 
B.  Street name signs shall be installed by the developer at the developer's expense (or a homeowners association in the event an alternate signpost is chosen at a later date). Ornamental posts and frames may be used within developments, pending approval; however, all signs must conform to the MUTCD in relation to size, shape, color, materials, and reflectivity requirements. The City Engineering Department will not maintain or provide material replacements or credit for replacement of non-standard and decorative posts, frames, and signs. If a decorative post and sign requires maintenance or replacement, the city will only provide the standard post and signage as a replacement option. 
6.08.02 - Traffic Control Signs 
A.  Traffic control signs and posts of a type approved by the City Engineering Department shall be placed on City roadways and intersections. Traffic control signs must conform to the requirements of the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition and the Design and Construction Standards. Street name sign plans and details must be submitted for approval before being installed. 
B.  Traffic control signs shall be installed by the developer at the developer's expense (or a homeowners association in the event an alternate signpost is chosen at a later date). Ornamental posts and frames may be used within developments, pending approval, however all signs must conform to the MUTCD in relation to size, shape, color, materials, and reflectivity requirements. The City Engineering Department will not maintain or provide material replacements or credit for replacement of non-standard and decorative posts, frames, and signs. 
6.08.03 - Striping and Pavement Marking Requirements 
A.  All new development streets accessing City roadways shall provide appropriate intersection pavement marking, channelization, and raised pavement markers as required by the City Engineering Department. 
B.  Striping and pavement marking of a type approved by the City Engineering Department shall be placed on City roadways and intersections. Striping and pavement marking, including the installation of raised pavement markers (RPMs), must conform to the standards, materials, and requirements of the Georgia Department of Transportation, Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices (MUTCD), latest edition and the Design and Construction Standards. Striping and pavement marking plans and details must be submitted for approval before being installed. 
C.  Striping, pavement marking, and raised pavement markers shall be installed by the developer at the developer's expense. 
D.  All newly constructed streets having three (3) or more lanes (including auxiliary lanes) and existing streets being widened with one (1) or more additional lanes shall be striped by the developer at the developer's expense per the City Engineering Department's Design and Construction Standards. 
6.08.04 - Traffic Signals and Signs 
A.  All traffic signals and associated signage shall conform to the MUTCD, Georgia Department of Transportation requirements, and the Design and Construction Standards. Traffic signal requirements will vary depending on field conditions and proximity to other traffic control signals. 
B.  The City Engineering Department requires the installation of permanent traffic control signal devices and structures where wood poles are considered temporary support strain poles and are only to be used on temporary traffic control signal installations as approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
C.  Where, in the opinion of the City Engineer or his designee, that it may be necessary to provide traffic signal control at new or improved intersections, a traffic signal warrant analysis, based on the requirements of the MUTCD, and a traffic signal installation will be required of the developer and at the developer's expense through the approval, permitting, and construction process through the development procedures. 
D.  Traffic signal plans and details must be submitted for approval before being installed. 
6.08.05 - Traffic Signal System Interconnectivity 
Where, in the opinion of the City Engineer or his designee, it is necessary to provide traffic signal interconnectivity, coordination and signal timing optimization due to close proximity to an existing traffic signal, proposed developments will be required to submit plans and/or studies and fund the installation of these signal system impact improvements through the approval, permitting, and construction process through the development procedures. 
6.09.00 - STREET LIGHTS 
Street lights are intended to provide illumination on public streets to a level that provides a reasonably safe and secure operating environment for pedestrian and vehicular traffic within the public right-of-way. Street lights shall not serve as security lighting for private property. Any lighting of private property that results from the public street lighting program is purely circumstantial. 
The city does not budget or fund the installation of utility poles or any types of decorative poles for street lighting. It is solely the developer's responsibility to coordinate said installations with the appropriate power company. 

6.09.01 - Location 
A.  Locations for street lights are determined by the City Engineer working with personnel of the various power companies. The American Standard Practice for Roadway Lighting, as sponsored by the Illuminating Engineering Society and approved by the American Standards Association, along with recognized engineering practices are used as guidelines for the placement of street lights. 
B.  Generally, street lights are installed along public streets, at major intersections, and at defined hazardous locations. Attempts are made to light street sections in accordance with the following guidelines. Table 6.09.01(A) illustrates the average spacing between fixtures. 
Table 6.09.01 (A): Spacing between street light fixtures 
Roadway Width 
(number of lanes) Average Spacing Between Fixtures (feet) Residential Commercial Industrial 2 250-400 250-350 250-350 3 N/A 200-300 200-300 4 or more N/A 200-300 200-300  
6.09.02 - Design Standards 
All street lights shall meet the following specifications: 
A.  The fixture must be installed on a pole that is accepted for maintenance by the appropriate power company. 
B.  The location and number of required street lights shall be determined by the City Engineer. 
C.  Decorative-type fixtures may be installed; however, the developer and/or homeowners association shall be responsible for the cost of said fixtures. 
D.  In all cases, the design will utilize existing poles as much as possible. In residential areas, poles are normally placed at every other property line, and lights will generally be placed on every other pole. The spacing between lights will typically vary between 250 feet and 400 feet, depending upon terrain, existing poles, lot size, type of locality, street condition, etc. Every effort shall be made to achieve consistent spacing of lights in each particular area. Lights will not be installed within 200 feet of any existing light. 
6.10.00 - DRIVEWAYS AND DEVELOPMENT ENTRANCES 
All proposed subdivisions, subdivision lots and other land developments shall be provided with driveways or development entrances meeting the following requirements: 

6.10.01 - Driveway Access to State Roads 
Access onto a State road shall meet existing Georgia Department of Transportation requirements, except that the entrance must be paved within the right-of-way. A copy of the Georgia Department of Transportation permit shall be submitted to the City Engineer before the plans can be approved. 
6.10.02 - Driveway Access to City Streets 
A.  Driveways should be restricted to locations where movements into and out of them can occur in a safe and orderly manner. 
B.  Driveways should be designed to eliminate or minimize opposite lane encroachment while entering and exiting property. 
C.  All driveways are to be designed and constructed with sidewalk transitions as necessary. 
D.  When the property frontage is less than two hundred (200) feet, only one driveway shall be considered for approval. Additional entrances/exits for property having street frontage in excess of two hundred (200) feet may be considered by the City of Carrollton upon a showing that such additional entrances/exits are necessary and would not increase traffic congestion or otherwise reduce the safety and convenience of the traveling public. 
E.  All access points and driveways may be subject to further restriction and consideration as may be deemed necessary by the Georgia Department of Transportation and/or the City of Carrollton to insure safe, functional design and efficient operation of the streets. 
F.  All driveways shall slope up from the edge of road a minimum of six (6) inches within the right-of-way to ensure that stormwater flow is maintained within the right-of-way. This requirement may be waived in road sections that drain away from the gutter line. 
G.  The developer shall be responsible for the relocation of public or private utilities and drainage structures as may be required for construction of the necessary entrance improvement. 
6.10.03 - Single-Family Detached Residential Driveway Standards 
A.  Residential lots in any major subdivision shall have no direct driveway access to an arterial road or a collector (other than a residential collector) unless approved by the Carrollton Mayor and City Council, or to a State or U.S. numbered highway unless approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation, and incorporated into the construction drawings for the project prior to issuance of a development permit by the City of Carrollton. 
B.  Reverse frontage lots may be utilized but are not required in major residential subdivisions where direct access to a City road, or to a State or U.S. numbered highway, is not allowed. 
C.  An easement of at least ten (10) feet in width, across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided in a major residential subdivision along the line of lots abutting any pre-existing collector or arterial street. 
D.  The houses in a major residential subdivision adjacent to any pre-existing collector or arterial street must be screened from view from said road as follows: 
1.  The ten (10) feet no-access easement may be improved with a structural zoning buffer meeting the requirements of the Landscaping, Buffers and Tree Conservation Article of this UDO; or 
2.  A twenty-five (25) feet wide zoning buffer may be provided as follows: 
a.  The buffer may retain its natural vegetation if existing trees and understory shrubs will adequately screen the view of the adjacent houses. 
b.  Any combination of a landscaped berm, supplemental vegetation or opaque fencing may be added within the buffer to provide adequate screening. 
c.  When a driveway abuts on an existing or proposed minor or major arterial street, a turn-around shall be required. 
d.  All residential driveways along collector and arterial roadways are to be designed and constructed to the following standards. 
1.  Width: Minimum twelve (12) feet, Maximum twenty-four (24) feet. 
2.  Radii or Flare: Minimum five (5) feet. 
3.  Spacing from Street Intersection: Minimum forty (40) feet. 
4.  Angle of intersection with roadway: Not less than seventy-five (75) degrees. 
5.  Max Grade: two percent (2%) across any sidewalk section then eight percent (8%) in the right-of-way when connecting to a collector or arterial street and fifteen percent (15%) within the right-of-way when connecting to a lower category street. 
6.  Length: A minimum of twenty-five (25) feet or to the edge of the right-of-way, whichever is greater, shall be paved with a treated hardened surface. 
7.  Access to all residential lots shall be from interior subdivision streets or roads where possible. Exceptions are subject to the approval of the City Engineer. 
8.  Where a residential driveway crosses a drainage swale, a driveway culvert shall be sized to handle the twenty-five (25) year storm event. Where the drainage swale is adjacent to an arterial or collector street, additional storm events, up to and including the 100-year storm event, may be required to be analyzed to prevent flooding of the street. 

6.10.04 - Access Easements 
Vehicular access may be provided from a public street via easement in any one or more of the following circumstances: 
A.  The property existed in whole as a legal lot of record prior to the adoption of this UDO, but does not meet the minimum frontage requirement for the applicable zoning district. The property must be served by an exclusive access easement that shall be limited to the provision of access to only one principal use or structure on one lot. 
B.  The access easement serves one (1) single-family residence on a lot which is otherwise a buildable lot of record, and which is sharing a common driveway with one other single-family residence, both of which meet the minimum size, frontage, lot width and other requirements of this UDO. 
C.  The access easement was lawfully established as such prior to the adoption of this UDO. 
D.  The access easement coincides with a private street approved by the City. The ownership and maintenance responsibility by private party[(ies)] must be clearly established on the final plat of the development. 
E.  The access easement serves a buildable lot of record which meets the minimum frontage requirements of this UDO, but from which access cannot be achieved. 
6.10.05 - Residential Subdivision Entrances 
A.  Entrance streets to all major residential subdivisions containing more than twenty-five (25) lots shall construct a deceleration lane at each entrance to the subdivision. See Section 6.11.00 below. 
B.  New residential major subdivisions with twenty-five (25) lots or fewer whose entrance is on an existing collector or arterial road shall install offset radii and fifty (50) feet tapers. 
6.10.06 - Commercial/Industrial Subdivision Entrances 
A.  A deceleration lane shall be installed at all entrance roads into a commercial or industrial subdivision. See Section 6.11.00 below. 
B.  The City Engineer may require a traffic study to determine if the project's size warrants a center turn lane, longer deceleration lane, an acceleration lane or other improvements. If the traffic study determines that the traffic generated by the project warrants it, the City Engineer will require the additional improvements or other mitigating measures. 
6.10.07 - Driveways for Multifamily and Non-[R]esidential Development 
A.  Multifamily and non-residential development projects shall install a deceleration lane at each driveway entrance connected to a collector or arterial street. See Section 6.11.00 below. For such a project located on a corner lot, a continuous twelve (12) feet wide travel lane shall be provided in lieu of a deceleration lane along both intersecting streets for the length of the property's frontage (but not exceeding 200 feet). 
B.  The spacing, geometric configurations and number of driveways for proposed commercial and non-commercial developments along the City street system will be determined by the Carrollton Engineering Department and shall be in accordance with any formal City of Carrollton driveway and encroachment control regulations, which may be in effect at the time development takes place, or may be determined by an approved traffic study prepared for and in conjunction with a specific development. 
C.  Commercial businesses on corner lots that have frontage on interior residential subdivision streets shall have access only from the main street. 
D.  The City Engineer may require a traffic study to determine if a center turn lane, a longer deceleration lane, an acceleration lane or other improvements will be necessary. If the traffic study determines that the traffic generated by the project warrants it, the City Engineer will require the additional improvements or other mitigating measures. 
E.  Driveways servicing multi-family, commercial and office/industrial developments shall provide uninterrupted ingress/egress. 
F.  For purposes of sight distance, all driveways are to be considered low volume intersections and to comply with minimum intersection/corner sight distance requirements contained in this UDO. 
G.  To allow for proper corner clearance, the minimum tangent curb length between a driveway radius and an intersection shall be one hundred (100) feet. 
H.  Driveways are not to be installed closer than ten (10) feet to a catch basin, measured along the gutter line from the centerline of catch basin to the nearest edge of the driveway (extended). No catch basins will be allowed within driveway turning radii. 
I.  For all developments, roadway improvements to provide a separate left turn lane into the proposed development shall be considered on a case-by-case basis. 
J.  If the closest intersection is or is likely to be signalized, then traffic movements to and from any driveway within two hundred fifty (250) feet of an intersection with a collector or an arterial street shall be limited to right turns only. 
K.  Multifamily, commercial and office/industrial driveways are to be constructed to the following standards: 
1.  Width: 
a.  Minimum twelve (12) feet for one-way access; 
b.  Maximum eighteen (18) feet for one-way access; 
c.  Minimum Two (2) twelve (12) feet lanes for two-way access; and 
d.  Maximum Two (2) sixteen (16) feet lanes for two-way access (driveways with turn lanes, medians or other design alternatives are subject to the approval of the City Engineer). 
2.  Lanes shall be designated by striping and directional arrows. 
3.  Radii: 
a.  Minimum thirty (30) feet 
b.  Maximum fifty (50) feet 
4.  Angle of intersection: not less than seventy-five degrees (75°). 
5.  Grade: plus or minus two percent (2%) of the intersecting roadway within the right-of-way. 
L.  Design standards may be varied with the approval of the City Engineer to meet the design intent of special design districts. 
6.11.00 - DECELERATION LANES AND TURN LANES 

6.11.01 - Deceleration and Turning Lanes 
A.  A deceleration lane shall be required at each entrance to a residential subdivision of more than twenty-five (25) lots, at each entrance to a commercial or industrial subdivision, and at each entrance to a multi-family or non-residential development project at its point of access. 
B.  A left turning lane shall be required for each entrance to a subdivision or development project intersecting a major arterial street. 
6.11.02 - Median Breaks 
If the street has an existing or proposed median, and the developer is approved by the City or the Georgia Department of Transportation, as applicable, to construct a median break to serve the development, a left turn lane leading to the median break shall be provided by the developer meeting the design standards of the City. 
6.11.03 - Deceleration and Turning Lane Construction Standards 
A.  Deceleration lanes and turn lanes shall be a minimum length of 150 feet, with an additional fifty (50) foot taper length, and a pavement width of twelve (12) feet (exclusive of curb and gutter). Additional right-of-way to accommodate the deceleration lane or turn lane and a ten (10) foot shoulder shall be dedicated by the developer to the City. 
B.  Curb and gutter, deceleration lanes and tapers are required, unless otherwise waived or modified by the City Engineer due to site, drainage or continuity considerations. 
C.  Associated drainage improvements as deemed necessary by the construction of the deceleration or turn lane shall be required. 
D.  Other project access improvements may be required by the City Engineer in addition to, or in lieu of, a required deceleration lane in order to ensure adequate site access, pedestrian access, convenience and safety to the motoring public, based on a traffic study prepared by a professional engineer. 
E.  The developer will pay the cost of any catch basins that must be constructed along an existing City street as a result of the deceleration lane. 
F.  Utilities and drain pipes shall be relocated at the developer's expense outside of the deceleration lane. 
6.12.00 - SIDEWALKS 
    Sidewalks shall be installed according to City standards by the developer under the following circumstances: 
A.  A sidewalk shall be provided within the right-of-way of any road adjacent to any residential or commercial development. The sidewalks shall be installed at the same time other improvements are installed within the development. 
B.  Within a residential subdivision, a sidewalk shall be provided on both sides of every street within the subdivision. A residential subdivision with lots greater than three (3) acres in size is exempt from these requirements. 
C.  Sidewalks shall meet the following standards: 
1.  In commercial developments, the sidewalk must be at least six (6) feet wide. In residential developments, the sidewalk must be at least five (5) feet wide. 
2.  The sidewalk must be located at least four (4) feet from the back of the street curb. The City Engineer may approve a reduction if topographic or other natural features prohibit this separation from the curb. 
(Res. No. 05-2019, 1-7-19) 
6.13.00 - STORM DRAINAGE 
Systems and facilities for the conveyance and control of stormwater shall be designed, installed and maintained subject to the Design and Construction Standards on file in the City Engineer's office and the regulations set forth in Article 7. 
6.14.00 - WATER SUPPLY 
A.  Public water service shall be provided to every lot in every subdivision and to every development for both domestic use and fire protection if public water is available or under bid or contract to be available within 1,000 feet of the subdivision or development. 
B.  All water system improvements and their installation shall meet the adopted standards of the Carrollton Water and Wastewater Departments. A contractor approved by the City of Carrollton shall install all elements of the water system, including mains, valves, service laterals through the curb line, and fire hydrants at the developer's expense. 
6.15.00 - FIRE HYDRANTS 
A.  Fire hydrants are required in all subdivisions and development projects served by a public water system. 
B.  Fire hydrants as specified by the Fire Department and the City of Carrollton shall be located every five-hundred (500) feet and/or at every intersection, whichever is closer. 
6.16.00 - SANITARY SEWERAGE DISPOSAL 
A.  When in the written opinion of the Carroll County Health Department and the City Engineer, public sanitary sewers are within reasonable access of the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision. All sewer service lines in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards. 
B.  When in the written opinion of the City of Carrollton a public sanitary sewer is not acceptable, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot may be used when in compliance with the Carroll County Health Department requirements. A community sewage disposal system may not be used. 
C.  Whenever the installation of a sanitary system is required as provided by these regulations, no new street shall be paved without such sewer being first installed in accordance with the requirements of the Georgia Department of Human Resources sewer specifications and the City of Carrollton Design and Construction Standards. 
6.17.00 - LOCATION OF UTILITIES AND STREET CUTS 

6.17.01 - Location of [U]tilities in [S]treets 
A.  Above-ground [U]tilities. 
Street light poles, junction boxes, transformers and other public or private utility structures placed above ground within a public street right-of-way or private street easement must meet set-back criteria and clear zone distance criteria based on the latest edition of the Roadside Design Guide, by the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials, or be located at least nine (9) feet back from the back of the street curb (or edge of pavement) and one (1) foot back from the edge of any sidewalk, whichever is farthermost from the roadway. 
B.  Underground Utilities. 
1.  All electric, telephone, cable TV and other wires shall be placed underground in any major subdivision, and in any multi-family or non-residential development. 
2.  Utilities placed underground shall be placed within the street right-of-way or easement as shown in the Design and Construction Standards. 
3.  The right-of-way is to be cleared and rough graded the full width prior to any utility installation. 
4.  Any disturbance or construction in the completed (seeded and/or sodded) right-of-way by a public utility such as power, water, sewer, gas, phone and cable must be repaired and/or replaced with the specified materials as called for in the initial improvements. 
5.  All utilities beneath pavement shall be installed and the ditch backfilled and thoroughly compacted before any pavement or base is installed, or the pipes shall be bored if installed after street construction. 
6.  All utility manholes and valve boxes shall be brought to the finished grade within the roadway section. If delay of final topping is approved, manholes and valve boxes shall be installed flush with the binder, and shall be raised to finished grade by the developer when the final topping is installed. 
7.  All private utilities that will cross under pavement shall be installed completely throughout the subdivision prior to any roadway base being applied. Installation of approved utility sleeves shall be considered as an alternate, or shall be bored if installed after the street has been constructed. 
6.17.02 - Utility Permits 
A.  All construction plans for utility repairs or new utility installations within City rights-of-way shall be reviewed and approved by the City Engineer and shall be in accordance with any formal Carrollton Engineering utility permit regulations or guidelines which may be in effect at the time a request is received. 
B.  No existing City street can be open cut unless unusual circumstances, as determined by the City Engineer, warrant it. Any request for approval to open cut an existing City street must be submitted with sufficient documentation to enable the City Engineer to make a reasonable determination as to the necessity for an open cut. 
C.  If a pavement cut is approved, all trenches shall be backfilled and compacted the same day the trench is opened unless otherwise approved by the City Engineer. 
1.  Trenches under the paving shall be returned to 95% compaction. The backfill in all such ditches will be thoroughly compacted in six (6) inch lifts, the subgrade shall be brought to the lines, grades, and typical roadway section shown on the plans. 
2.  See City Design and Construction Standards for details. 
6.18.00 - SITE CLEARING AND GRADING 

6.18.01 - Development Permit Required 
A.  Clearing and grading shall not proceed until issuance of an approved development permit. No development permit authorizing clearing or grading shall be issued prior to review and approval by the City Engineer of landscaping, buffers and tree conservation plans as applicable to the property. 
B.  Grading shall be done in accordance with the lines and grades drawn on the approved grading plan. Clearing, grubbing and grading of a site for development of a residential subdivision shall be limited to those areas necessary to construct the streets and utilities, the stormwater detention facilities, and necessary erosion and sedimentation control devices, along with related easements, rights-of-way and slopes. Clearance beyond these limits to balance cut and fill for the streets, drainage or utilities may be approved administratively by the City Engineer based on a grading plan and cut/fill calculations prepared by a Georgia registered professional engineer qualified in site work, provided that the additional clearance is kept to the minimum deemed necessary by the City Engineer. 
6.18.02 - Erosion and Sedimentation Control Measures 
Required erosion and sedimentation control measures must be installed in accordance with the approved soil erosion and sedimentation control plan prior to any major development activity and as development progresses. 
6.18.03 - Stormwater Drainage Facilities 
Required stormwater drainage facilities are to be installed in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan as development progresses. 
6.18.04 - Clearing and Grubbing 
The entire area within the typical grading section shall be cleared and grubbed of all trees, bushes, stumps and debris. Such debris shall be disposed of in a lawful manner. 
6.18.05 - Earthen Embankments and Slopes 
Earthen embankments shall meet the design and compaction requirements set forth in the Design and Construction Standards. The maximum slope for all cut and fill slopes are located in the Design and Construction Standards in the office of the City Engineer. 
ARTICLE 7 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
7.00.00 - PURPOSE AND INTENT 
The purpose and intent of this article is to protect, maintain, and enhance the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare by establishing minimum requirements and procedures to control the adverse effects of increased post-development stormwater runoff and non-point source pollution associated with new development and redevelopment. Proper management of post-development stormwater runoff will minimize damage to public and private property and infrastructure; safeguard the public health, safety, environment, and general welfare of the public; and protect water and aquatic resources. This article seeks to meet that purpose through the following objectives: 
A.  Establish decision-making processes surrounding land development activities that protect the integrity of the watershed and preserve the health of water resources. 
B.  Require that new development and redevelopment maintain the predevelopment hydrologic response in their post-development state as nearly as practicable in order to reduce flooding, streambank erosion, non-point source pollution and increases in stream temperature, and maintain the integrity of stream channels and aquatic habitats. 
C.  Establish minimum post-development stormwater management standards and design criteria for the regulation and control of stormwater runoff quantity and quality. 
D.  Establish design and application criteria for the construction and use of structural stormwater control facilities that can be used to meet the minimum post-development stormwater management standards. 
E.  Encourage the use of non-structural stormwater management and stormwater better site design practices, such as the preservation of open space and other conservation areas, to the maximum extent practicable. Coordinate site design plans, which include open space, with the City's greenspace protection plan. 
F.  Establish provisions for the long-term responsibility for and maintenance of structural stormwater control facilities and nonstructural stormwater management practices to ensure that they continue to function as designed, are maintained, and pose no threat to public safety. 
G.  Establish administrative procedures for the submission, review, approval, and disapproval of stormwater management plans and for the inspection of approved active projects, and long-term followup. 
7.01.00 - DEFINITIONS 
The definitions for Article 7 are located in Article 1. 
7.02.00 - APPLICABILTY 
This article shall be applicable to all land development; including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless otherwise exempted. The provisions of this article shall apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
A.  New Development that involves the creation of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activities of one (1) acre or more. 
B.  Redevelopment that includes the creation or addition of 5,000 square feet or more of impervious cover, or that involves other land development activity of one (1) acre or more. 
C.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is defined by the City Engineer to be a "hotspot" land use. 
D.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in paragraphs (A) and (B) of this subsection, if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development; even though multiple, separate, and distinct land development activities may take place at different times on different schedules. 
7.03.00 - EXEMPTIONS 
The following activities are exempt from this article: 
A.  Development of individual single-family or duplex residential lots that involve the creation of less than 5,000 square feet of impervious cover or that involve other land development activities less than one (1) acre and are not part of a subdivision or phased development project. 
B.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures that involve the creation of less than 5,000 sq. ft. of impervious cover or that involve other land development activities less than one (1) acre. 
C.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the City Engineer. 
7.04.00 - ADMINISTRATION 
The City Engineer shall administer, implement and enforce the provisions of this article. 
7.05.00 - STORMWATER DESIGN MANUAL 
The City Engineer shall utilize the policy, criteria, and information, including technical specifications and standards, set forth in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, as now and hereafter amended, for the proper implementation of the requirements of this article. The manual may be updated and expanded periodically, based on improvements in science, engineering, monitoring, and local maintenance experience. 
7.06.00 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT REQUIRED 
No owner or developer shall perform any land development activities without first obtaining a stormwater management permit and meeting the requirements of this article prior to commencing the proposed activity. Any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall first submit a stormwater management permit application to the City Engineer. Applications for a stormwater management permit shall be on a form provided by the City Engineer for that purpose and shall be accompanied by the following items in order to be considered: 
A.  Stormwater concept plan and consultation meeting certification in accordance with Section 7.07.00. 
B.  Stormwater management plan in accordance with Section 7.08.00. 
C.  Inspection and maintenance agreement in accordance with Section 7.09.00, if applicable. 
D.  Performance guarantee in accordance with Section 7.10.00, if applicable. 
E.  Permit application and plan review fees in accordance with Section 7.11.00. 
F.  Construction drawings, stormwater hydrology, and hydraulics report and site analysis. 
Applications for a stormwater management permit that are incomplete or which otherwise do not meet the criteria set forth above, as determined by the City Engineer, shall not be reviewed by the City. 
7.07.00 - STORMWATER CONCEPT PLAN AND CONSULTATION MEETING 
Before any stormwater management permit application is submitted, the landowner or developer shall meet with the City Engineer, or his designee, for a consultation meeting on a concept plan for the post-development stormwater management system to be utilized in the proposed land development project. This consultation meeting shall take place prior to the submission of any development or redevelopment plan. The purpose of this meeting is to discuss the post-development stormwater management measures necessary for the proposed project; as well as to discuss and assess constraints, opportunities, and potential ideas for stormwater management designs before the formal site design engineering is commenced. 

7.07.01 - Concept Plan Requirements 
To accomplish this goal, the following information shall be included in the concept plan, which shall be submitted to the City Engineer a minimum of five (5) business days prior to the meeting: 
A.  Existing conditions/proposed site plans. Existing conditions and proposed site layout sketch plans that illustrate, at a minimum, existing and proposed topography; perennial and intermittent streams; mapping of predominant soils from soil surveys (when available); boundaries of existing predominant vegetation and proposed limits of clearing and grading; and location of existing and proposed roads, buildings, parking areas, and other impervious surfaces. 
B.  Natural resources inventory. A written or graphic inventory of the natural resources located within a 1/4-mile radius of the site as they exist prior to the commencement of the project. This description should include a discussion of soil conditions, forest cover, topography, wetlands, and other native vegetative areas on the site; as well as the location and boundaries of other natural feature protection and conservation areas such as wetlands, lakes, ponds, floodplains, stream buffers, and other setbacks (e.g., drinking water well setbacks, septic setbacks, etc.). Particular attention should be paid to environmentally sensitive features that provide particular opportunities or constraints for development. 
C.  Post-development stormwater management system concept plan. A written or graphic concept plan of the proposed post-development stormwater management system, including: preliminary selection and location of proposed structural stormwater controls; location of existing and proposed conveyance systems; flow paths; location of floodplain/floodway limits; relationship of site to upstream and downstream properties and drainages; and preliminary location of proposed stream channel modifications, such as bridge or culvert crossings. 
D.  Local watershed plans, and any relevant resource protection plans will be consulted in the discussion of the concept plan. 
7.08.00 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PLAN REQUIREMENTS 
A.  The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this article, including the performance criteria set forth in Section 7.13.00 of this article. 
B.  The stormwater management plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a design professional, licensed in the State of Georgia, who is qualified to address stormwater issues and who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meet the requirements of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the City's Design and Construction Standards. 
C.  The stormwater management plan must ensure compliance with the requirements and criteria in this article and minimize adverse post-development stormwater runoff impacts from the development. The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system. The plan shall include all of the information required by the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the City's Design and Construction Standards. This includes: 
1.  Common address and legal description of site. 
2.  Vicinity map. 
3.  Existing conditions hydrologic analysis. The existing conditions hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of existing site conditions with the drainage basin boundaries indicated; acreage, soil types, and land cover of areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; all perennial and intermittent streams and other surface water features; all existing stormwater conveyances and structural control facilities; direction of flow and exits from the site; analysis of runoff provided by off-site areas upstream of the project site; and methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. For redevelopment sites, predevelopment conditions shall be modeled using the established guidelines for the portion of the site undergoing land development activities. 
4.  Post-development hydrologic analysis. The post-development hydrologic analysis for stormwater runoff rates, volumes, and velocities, which shall include: a topographic map of developed site conditions with the post-development drainage basin boundaries indicated; total area of post-development impervious surfaces and other land cover areas for each sub-basin affected by the project; calculations for determining the runoff volumes that need to be addressed for each sub-basin for the development project to meet the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 7.13.00 of this article; location and boundaries of proposed natural feature protection and conservation areas; documentation and calculations for any applicable site design credits that are being utilized; methodologies, assumptions, site parameters and supporting design calculations used in analyzing the existing conditions site hydrology. If the land development activity on a redevelopment site constitutes more than 50 percent of the site area for the entire site, then the performance criteria in Section 7.13.00 of this article must be met for the stormwater runoff from the entire site. 
5.  Where the existing development is to be redeveloped, the applicant should attempt to make every reasonable effort to provide water quality and detention for the total land area of the redeveloped site, which may include but not be limited to underground detention and subsurface water quality treatment. 
6.  Stormwater management system. The description, scaled drawings, and design calculations for the proposed post-development stormwater management system shall include a map and/or drawing of the stormwater management facilities, including the location of non-structural site design features and the placement of existing and proposed structural stormwater controls, including design water surface elevations, storage volumes available from zero to maximum head, location of inlet and outlets, location of bypass and discharge systems, and all orifice/restrict or sizes; a narrative describing how the selected structural stormwater controls will be appropriate and effective; cross-section and profile drawings and design details for each of the structural stormwater controls in the system, including supporting calculations to show that the facility is designed according to the applicable design criteria; a hydrologic and hydraulic analysis of the stormwater management system for all applicable design storms (including stage-storage or outlet rating curves, and inflow and outflow hydrographs); documentation and supporting calculations to show that the stormwater management system adequately meets the post-development stormwater management performance criteria in Section 7.13.00 of this article; drawings, design calculations, elevations and hydraulic grade lines for all existing and proposed stormwater conveyance elements, including stormwater drains, pipes, culverts, catch basins, channels, swales and areas of overland flow; and where applicable, a narrative describing how the stormwater management system corresponds with any watershed protection plans and/or local greenspace protection plan. 
7.  Post-development downstream analysis. A downstream peak flow analysis, which includes the assumptions, results and supporting calculations to show safe passage of post-development design flows downstream. The analysis of downstream conditions in the report shall address each and every point or area along the project site's boundaries at which runoff will exit the property. The analysis shall focus on the portion of the drainage channel or watercourse immediately downstream from the project. This area shall extend downstream from the project to a point in the drainage basin where the project area is ten (10) percent of the total basin area. In calculating runoff volumes and discharge rates, consideration may need to be given to any planned future upstream land use changes. The analysis shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
8.  Construction-phase erosion and sedimentation control plan. An erosion and sedimentation control plan which satisfies the requirements of Article 3 of this UDO. The plan shall also include information on the sequence/phasing of construction and temporary stabilization measures and temporary structures that will be converted into permanent stormwater controls. 
9.  Landscaping and open space plan. A detailed landscaping and vegetation plan describing the woody and herbaceous vegetation that will be used within and adjacent to stormwater management facilities and practices. The landscaping plan must also include: the arrangement of planted areas, natural and greenspace areas and other landscaped features on the site plan; information necessary to construct the landscaping elements shown on the plan drawings; descriptions and standards for the methods, materials and vegetation that are to be used in the construction; density of plantings; descriptions of the stabilization and management techniques used to establish vegetation; and a description of who will be responsible for ongoing maintenance of vegetation for the stormwater management facility and what practices will be employed to ensure that adequate vegetative cover is preserved. 
10.  Operations and maintenance plan. Detailed description of ongoing operations and maintenance procedures for stormwater management facilities and practices to ensure their continued function as designed and constructed or preserved. These plans will identify the parts or components of a stormwater management facility or practice that need to be regularly or periodically inspected and maintained, and the equipment and skills or training necessary. The plan shall include an inspection and maintenance schedule, maintenance tasks, responsible parties for maintenance, ongoing funding sources, access and safety issues. Provisions for the periodic review and evaluation of the effectiveness of the maintenance program and the need for revisions or additional maintenance procedures shall be included in the plan. 
11.  Maintenance access easements. The applicant must ensure adequate access from public right-of-way to stormwater management facilities and practices requiring regular maintenance at the site for the purpose of inspection and repair by securing all the maintenance access easements needed on a permanent basis. Such access shall be sufficient for all necessary equipment for maintenance activities. Upon final inspection and approval, a plat or document indicating that such easements exist shall be recorded and shall remain in effect even with the transfer of title of the property. Regular maintenance shall be the responsibility of the homeowner's association or the property owner. 
12.  Inspection and maintenance agreements. Unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City Engineer, as provided in Section 7.09.00, the applicant must execute an easement and an inspection and maintenance agreement binding on all subsequent owners of land served by an on-site stormwater management facility or practice in accordance with Section 7.14.00. 
13.  Evidence of acquisition of applicable environmental permits. The applicant shall certify and provide documentation to the City Engineer that all other applicable environmental permits have been acquired for the site prior to approval of the stormwater management plan. 
7.09.00 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT INSPECTION AND MAINTENANCE AGREEMENTS 
Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the City Engineer requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an onsite stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the City Engineer, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, that shall be binding on all subsequent owners of the site. 

7.09.01 - Approval Required 
The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the City Engineer prior to plan approval, and recorded in the office of the Carroll County Clerk of Superior Court, real estate division, upon final plat approval. 
7.09.02 - Agreement Requirements 
The following items shall be included in the inspection and maintenance agreement: 
A.  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner(s). If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the person to be permanently responsible for its inspection and maintenance. 
B.  The inspection and maintenance agreement shall include a schedule for when and how often routine inspection and maintenance will occur to ensure proper function of the stormwater management facility or practice. The agreement shall also include plans for annual inspections to ensure proper performance of the facility between scheduled maintenance and shall also include remedies for the default thereof. 
C.  The City of Carrollton Mayor and City Council may, upon recommendation by the City Manager, accept in lieu of an inspection and maintenance agreement the dedication of any existing or future stormwater management facility for maintenance, provided such facility meets all the requirements of this article and includes adequate and perpetual access and sufficient area, by easement or otherwise, for inspection and regular maintenance. 
7.10.00 - PERFORMANCE GUARANTEE 
Prior to issuance of a stormwater management permit under this article, the applicant shall provide to the City sufficient financial security to guarantee the performance of stormwater management facilities for a period of two (2) years after the final plat is recorded or a certificate of occupancy is issued, as described in the applicant's approved stormwater management plan. The applicant's financial guarantee may be any of the following: 
A.  An escrow of funds with the City; 
B.  An escrow with a bank or savings and loan association upon which the City can draw funds; 
C.  An irrevocable letter of commitment or credit upon which the City can draw funds; 
D.  A certificate of deposit with assignment letter; or 
E.  Any other form of guarantee approved by the Mayor and City Council that will satisfy the objectives of this article. 
The guarantee shall be in an amount necessary to secure the full costs, as determined by the City Engineer, of constructing, installing or maintaining the stormwater management facilities required by this Article. In the event the applicant or responsible person fails to ensure adequate maintenance pursuant to the approved stormwater management plan, the City Engineer may elect to take those steps necessary to correct the defective maintenance pursuant to the provisions of Section 7.15.00. 
7.11.00 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERMIT APPLICATION 

7.11.01 - Application Procedure 
A.  Applications for stormwater management permits shall be filed with the City Engineer. Permit applications shall include the items set forth in Section 7.06.00 of this article (two (2) copies of the stormwater management plan and the inspection maintenance agreement, if applicable, shall be included). 
B.  The City Engineer shall notify the applicant in writing within 30 days of receipt of the completed application whether the application, stormwater management plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or denied. 
C.  If the permit application, stormwater management plan or inspection and maintenance agreement are denied, the written notification from the City Engineer shall specify the reasons for the denial, and the applicant may then revise any item not meeting the requirements hereof and resubmit the same. Such resubmittal shall be treated as a new application; however, no new application fee shall be required. 
D.  Upon a finding by the City Engineer that the stormwater management permit application, stormwater management plan, and inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, meet the requirements of this article, the City Engineer shall issue a stormwater management permit for the land development project, provided all other legal requirements for the issuance of such permit have been met. 
E.  Notwithstanding the issuance of the stormwater management permit, in conducting the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall be subject to the following requirements: 
1.  The applicant shall comply with all applicable requirements of the approved plan and this article and shall certify that all land development will be completed according to the approved plan. 
2.  The land development project shall be conducted only within the area specified in the approved plan. 
3.  No changes may be made to an approved stormwater management plan without review and written approval by the City Engineer. 
4.  Upon completion of the land development project, the applicant or other responsible person shall submit the engineer's report and certificate and as-built plans pursuant to Section 7.14.02 of this Article. 
7.11.02 - Permit Application Fees 
The fee for review of an application for a stormwater management permit shall be based on the fee structure established by the City of Carrollton Mayor and City Council. The total fee due shall be submitted with the application and review of the application shall not begin until the permit application fee is paid in full. 
7.12.00 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT MODIFICATIONS FOR OFF-SITE FACILITIES 
The stormwater management plan for each land development project should provide for stormwater management measures located on the site of the project. Where the physical characteristics of the site so dictate, as determined by the City Engineer, the applicant may be allowed to modify the stormwater management plan to utilize an off-site or regional stormwater management facility. A modified stormwater management plan must be submitted to the City Engineer that shows the adequacy of the off-site or regional facility. 

7.12.01 - Eligibility 
To be eligible for a modification, the applicant must demonstrate to the satisfaction of the City Engineer that the use of an off-site or regional facility will not result in the following impacts to upstream or downstream areas: 
A.  Increased threat of flood damage to public health, life safety, and property. 
B.  Deterioration of existing culverts, bridges, dams, and other structures. 
C.  Accelerated streambank or streambed erosion or siltation. 
D.  Degradation of in-stream biological functions or habitat. 
E.  Water quality impairment in violation of state water quality standards, and/or violation of any state or federal regulations. 
The off-site or regional facility must be: 
A.  Located on property legally dedicated for the purpose. 
B.  Designed and adequately sized to provide a level of stormwater quantity and quality control that is equal to or greater than that which would be afforded by on-site practices. 
C.  There must be a legally-obligated entity responsible for long-term operation and maintenance of the off-site or regional stormwater facility. 
In addition, on-site measures shall be implemented, where necessary, to protect upstream and downstream properties and drainage channels from the site to the offsite facility. 
7.13.00 - POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT PERFORMANCE CRITERIA 

7.13.01 - Water Quality 
All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
A.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
B.  Appropriate structural stormwater controls or non-structural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
C.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the City Engineer are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, non-structural practices, and pollution prevention practices. 
7.13.02 - Stream Channel Protection 
Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches. The City Engineer may modify or waive the requirements of this section for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a manmade channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity. 
A.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer. 
B.  24-hour extended detention storage of the 1-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. 
C.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
7.13.03 - Overbank Flooding Protection 
Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the 25-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event. If control of the 1-year, 24- hour storm under subsection 7.13.02 is waived or modified, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the 2-year through the 25-year return frequency storm event must be provided. The City Engineer may modify or waive the provisions of this subsection for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
7.13.04 - Extreme Flooding Protection 
A.  Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and/or safely conveying the 100-year, 24-hour storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
B.  Extreme flood protection shall be provided either by controlling the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event through on-site or regional structural stormwater controls to maintain the existing 100-year floodplain and/or by sizing the on-site conveyance system to safely pass the 100-year, 24-hour return frequency storm event and allowing it to discharge into a receiving water whose protected floodplain is sufficiently sized to account for extreme flow increases without causing damage. 
C.  The City Engineer may modify or waive the provisions of subsection (A) for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
7.13.05 - Structural Stormwater Controls 
A.  All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the City Engineer before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. 
B.  Applicants shall consult the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
7.13.06 - Stormwater Credits for Non-Structural Measures 
The use of one or more better site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under Section 7.13.01. The applicant may, if approved by the City Engineer, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, there is a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
7.13.07 - Drainage System Guidelines 
A.  Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutters, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters, shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more that one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
2.  All culverts, pipe systems, and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
3.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
7.13.08 - Dam Design Guidelines 
Any land development activity that involves a site which proposes a dam, as such term is defined by O.C.G.A. § 12-5-372(4), shall comply with the Georgia Safe Dams Act and Rules for Dam Safety, as applicable. 
7.14.00 - CONSTRUCTION INSPECTION OF POST-DEVELOPMENT STORMWATER MANAGEMENT SYSTEM 

7.14.01 - Inspections to Ensure Plan Compliance During Construction 
A.  Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the City Engineer or conducted and certified by a Professional Engineer (P.E.) licensed in the State of Georgia, a registered landscape architect (RLA), or a registered surveyor who has been approved by the City Engineer. However, the P.E. or RLA who conducts the periodic inspection, if applicable, shall not be the person who certifies the plans pursuant to Section 7.14.02. The purpose of the inspections shall be to establish compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
B.  All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
1.  The date and location of the inspection. 
2.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan. 
3.  Variations from the approved construction specifications. 
4.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
C.  If any violations are found the applicant shall be notified in writing in accordance with the provisions of Section 7.15.00. 
7.14.02 - Final Inspection and As-Built Plans 
Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted or a final plat recorded, the applicant shall be responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as-built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a P.E. licensed in the State of Georgia or an RLA. A final inspection by the City Engineer is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. The City Engineer may verify the accuracy of the submitted as-built plans prior to the issuance of a final recorded plat or certificate of occupancy. 
7.15.00 - VIOLATIONS AND PENALTIES 

7.15.01 - Notice of Violation 
If the City Engineer determines that an applicant or other responsible person has failed to comply with the provisions of this article or is engaged in activity covered by this article without having first secured a stormwater management permit, a notice of violation shall be served on the owner or the responsible person in charge of the activity being conducted on the site. The applicant or other responsible person shall be provided a reasonable opportunity, of not less than 10 days, to cure such violation; except, that in the event the violation constitutes an immediate danger to public health or public safety, 24-hours' notice shall be sufficient. The notice of violation shall contain: 
A.  The name and address of the owner or the applicant or the responsible person. 
B.  The address or other description of the site upon which the violation is occurring. 
C.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation. 
D.  A description of the remedial measures necessary to bring the action or inaction into compliance with the stormwater management permit, the stormwater management plan, or this article and the date for the completion of such remedial action. 
E.  A statement of the penalty or penalties that may be assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation is directed. 
7.15.02 - Penalties 
In the event the remedial measures described in the notice of violation have not been completed by the date set forth for such completion in the notice of violation, any one or more of the following actions or penalties may be taken or assessed against the person to whom the notice of violation was directed: 
A.  Stop work order. The City Engineer may issue a stop work order that shall be served on the applicant or other responsible person. The stop work order shall remain in effect until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violation or violations described therein, provided the stop work order may be withdrawn or modified to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violation or violations. 
B.  Withhold certificate of occupancy. The City Engineer may refuse to issue a certificate of occupancy for the building or other improvements constructed or being constructed on the site until the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein. 
C.  Suspension, revocation or modification of permit. The City Engineer may suspend, revoke or modify any permit authorizing the land development project. A suspended, revoked or modified permit may be reinstated after the applicant or other responsible person has taken the remedial measures set forth in the notice of violation or has otherwise cured the violations described therein, provided such permit may be reinstated (upon such conditions as the City Engineer may deem necessary) to enable the applicant or other responsible person to take the necessary remedial measures to cure such violations. 
D.  Citation. The City Engineer, or his designee, may issue a citation to the applicant or other responsible person requiring such person to appear in the Municipal Court of the City of Carrollton to answer charges for such violation. Each act of violation and each day upon which any violation shall occur shall constitute a separate offense. 
ARTICLE 8 - BOARDS AND COMMISSIONS 
8.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The departments, committees, boards, and commissions described in Article 8 are established for the purpose of implementing the provisions of the UDO. The departments, committees, boards, and commissions described in this article shall have the powers and duties described within this UDO. 
8.01.00 - CITY OF CARROLLTON PLANNING COMMISSION 

8.01.01 - Creation 
The City of Carrollton Planning Commission, herein referred to as the Planning Commission, is created and established to be organized and empowered as provided herein. 
8.01.02 - Membership 
The Planning Commission shall consist of ten (10) members, seven (7) of which must live in the City of Carrollton. Members shall be appointed by the Mayor and City Council, and the terms of the members shall be for three (3) years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor and City Council, who shall have the authority to remove any member who misses more than three (3) consecutive meetings or for other cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Res. No. 22-2016, 9-12-16) 
8.01.03 - Quorum 
A quorum of the Planning Commission shall consist of five (5) voting members. Any official decision of the Planning Commission provided herein shall require a quorum. 
8.01.04 - Officers 
The Planning Commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The Planning Commission shall also elect a vice-chairperson from among its members. The term for the vice-chairperson shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The vice-chairperson shall serve as chair in absence of the chairperson. 
8.01.05 - Meetings, Rules and Procedure, and Records 
    The Planning Commission shall set a regular monthly meeting time and place and meet at such other times as the chairperson or Planning Commission may determine; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed as requiring the Planning Commission to meet when it has no regular business to transact. All meetings of the Planning Commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the Planning Commission shall be public records. The Planning Commission shall make its own By-Laws and Rules of Procedure. If action is not taken by the Planning Commission due to the lack of quorum, the agenda item is sent to the Mayor and City Council by default after a period of thirty (30) days. 
(Res. No. 08-2011, 8-1-11) 
8.02.00 - CITY OF CARROLLTON BOARD OF DEVELOPMENT APPEALS 

8.02.01 - Creation 
The City of Carrollton Board of Development Appeals is hereby created and shall be a part of the planning functions of the City of Carrollton. The Board of Development Appeals shall hear and decide appeals and variances to the UDO, as provided in this UDO. 
8.02.02 - Membership 
The Board of Development Appeals shall consist of five (5) members. Members shall live in the City of Carrollton and be appointed by the Mayor and City Council. The terms of the members shall be for three (3) years. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor and City Council, who shall have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
8.02.03 - Quorum 
A quorum of the Board of Development Appeals shall consist of three (3) voting members. Any official decision of the Board of Development Appeals provided herein shall require a quorum. 
8.02.04 - Officers 
The Board of Development Appeals shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The Board of Development Appeals shall also elect a vice-chairperson from among its members. The term for the vice-chairperson shall be one (1) year with eligibility for re-election. The vice-chairperson shall serve as chair in absence of the chairperson. 
8.02.05 - Meetings, Rules and Procedure, and Records 
The Board of Development Appeals shall set a regular monthly meeting time and place; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed as requiring the Board of Development Appeals to meet when it has no regular business to transact. All meetings of the Board of Development Appeals at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the Board of Development Appeals shall be public records. The Board of Development Appeals shall make its own By-Laws and Rules of Procedure. 
8.03.00 - CITY OF CARROLLTON HISTORIC PRESERVATION COMMISSION 

8.03.01 - Creation 
The City of Carrollton Historic Preservation Commission is hereby created and shall be a part of the planning functions of the City of Carrollton. 
8.03.02 - Membership 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Mayor and City Council. All members shall be residents of the City and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of natural resources. The terms of the members shall be for three (3) years. Members shall not serve more than two consecutive terms. Any vacancy in membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the Mayor and City Council, who shall have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. All members shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
8.03.03 - Quorum 
A quorum of the Historic Preservation Commission shall consist of three (3) voting members. Any official decision of the Historic Preservation Commission provided herein shall require a quorum. 
8.03.04 - Meetings, Rules and Procedure, and Records 
The Historic Preservation Commission shall set a regular monthly meeting time and place; provided, however, that this provision shall not be construed as requiring the Historic Preservation Commission to meet when it has no regular business to transact. All meetings of the Historic Preservation Commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public, and all records of the Historic Preservation Commission shall be public records. The Historic Preservation Commission shall make its own By-Laws and Rules of Procedures. 
ARTICLE 9 - VARIATIONS 
9.00.00 - GENERALLY 
The purpose of this article is to provide mechanisms for obtaining relief from certain provisions of this UDO. There are several ways that potential relief from hardship is addressed. Section 9.01.00 addresses relief through requirements regarding non-conforming development. Section 9.02.00 addresses relief through the grant of a variance in a particular situation due to the characteristics of the land to be developed based on the required site design standards. Section 9.03.00 addresses relief through the grant of an administrative waiver in specific situations. Section 9.04.00 addresses relief through recognition of vested rights regarding use and/or design. 
9.01.00 - NON-CONFORMING LOTS, STRUCTURES AND USES 

9.01.01 - Generally 
A.  Within the zoning and overlay districts established by this UDO there may exist lots, structures, or uses of land which were lawfully established before this UDO was adopted but which do not comply with the requirements set forth in this UDO. 
B.  It is the intent of Section 9.01.00 to allow these non-conformities to continue until they are removed or discontinued. It is further the intent of this section that non-conformities shall not be enlarged upon, expanded or extended, nor be used as grounds for adding structures or uses prohibited elsewhere in the same district. 
C.  Non-conforming uses are declared to be incompatible with permitted uses in the district where the non-conforming use is located. 
D.  Nothing in Section 9.01.00 shall be construed to prevent the ordinary and routine maintenance and repair of non-conforming structures or structures which contain non-conforming uses provided that: 
1.  Repairs do not exceed ten (10) percent of the current fair market value of the non-conforming portion of the structure during any period of twelve (12) consecutive months; and 
2.  The cubic content of the structure is not increased. 
E.  A structure damaged or destroyed by any means to an extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its fair market value at time of destruction shall be reconstructed only in conformity with the provisions of this UDO. 
F.  A structure that is damaged to an extent less than fifty (50) percent of the fair market value may be restored and occupied as before the damage, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  Restoration shall be commenced within six (6) calendar months from the date damages were incurred. 
2.  If reconstruction is not commenced within six (6) months, the reconstruction and use of the land or structure shall thereafter conform to the provisions of this UDO. 
G.  Fair market value, where required, shall be determined by reference to current statutory provisions pertaining to real estate assessment and the records of the Carroll County Tax Assessor. 
H.  A non-conforming structure or a structure containing a non-conforming use that is declared by the City Manager to be physically unsafe or unlawful due to lack of repairs and maintenance shall not thereafter be restored, repaired, or rebuilt except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
9.01.02 - Non-[C]onforming Lots of Record 
A.  Any lot of record for which a plat or legal description has been recorded in the Office of the Clerk of Superior Court of Carroll County at the time of adoption of this UDO and which fails to comply with the dimensional requirements for the district in which it is located may, if vacant, be used for any of the uses permitted within the zoning district by this UDO, provided that: 
1.  The minimum requirements of the zoning district for front, side, and rear yard, open space, height, and floor area shall be complied with. 
2.  The lot may be used for duplexes or multi-family dwellings when allowed within the zoning district only if the lot meets the minimum lot area requirements for those uses in the district. 
B.  Permitted Modification of Setback Requirements. 
When a building is proposed on a lot and when on either or both lots which adjoin such lot at the street right-of-way line there exists a principal building which does not conform to the setback requirements of this UDO, the required setback for such building shall be as follows: 
1.  Where only one (1) said adjoining lot contains a principal building with a non-conforming setback, the setback shall be the computed average of the normal setback requirement and the non-conforming setback, or 
2.  Where both adjoining lots contain a principal building each with a non-conforming setback, the minimum setback shall be the computed average of the two (2) non-conforming setbacks. 
C.  Adjoining Lots. 
When two (2) or more adjoining lots of record with continuous street frontage are in one (1) ownership at any time after the adoption or amendment of this UDO and such lots, individually, have an area, width, or street frontage that is less than required by this UDO, such groups of lots may be considered as a single lot for purposes of the minimum width, area, and street frontage required in the district in which they are located. 
D.  Individual lot not meeting minimum lot size requirements. 
Except as set forth in subsection 9.01.02 (A) of this section, in any district in which single-family dwellings are permitted, any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this UDO which has an area, width or depth less than that required by this ordinance may be used as a building site for a single-family dwelling. In the case of such a lot, when it is not possible to provide the required side yards and at the same time build a minimum width single-family dwelling, the Board of Development Appeals is hereby authorized to reduce the side yard requirements for such lot the minimum amount necessary for a reasonable dwelling, but in no case shall each of the side yards be reduced by less than five (5) feet in width. 
E.  Individual lot not meeting street frontage requirements. 
Any lot of record existing at the time of the adoption or amendment of this UDO, which has street frontage that is less than is required by this UDO, may be used if access to a publicly dedicated and maintained street can be demonstrated through a recorded easement. 
9.01.03 - Non-[C]onforming Structures 
A lawfully established structure that becomes non-conforming at the time of adoption of this UDO may continue subject to the following requirements: 
A.  The structure is non-conforming with only the following site design standards: 
1.  Minimum lot area; 
2.  Maximum lot coverage or impervious surface ratio; 
3.  Maximum building height; 
4.  Minimum front, side, and rear yard setbacks; and 
5.  Other requirements regarding building location on the lot. 
B.  The non-conforming structure shall not be enlarged. 
C.  The structure or portion thereof may be altered to decrease its degree of non-conformity. 
D.  If a non-conforming structure is moved for any reason for any distance, it shall be brought into conformance with the site design standards of the zoning district to which it is moved. 
E.  When any use of a non-conforming structure is discontinued for a continuous period in excess of six (6) months, any future use of the structure is permissible only when the structure has been brought into compliance with the provisions of this UDO. Holding of an occupational tax certificate does not in itself constitute continuance of a business. 
F.  Any existing use of a non-conforming structure may be changed to another use upon the finding by City Manager that the proposed use: 
1.  Is similar in its operation and effect on surrounding properties; 
2.  Will not generate more automobile or truck traffic, create more noise, vibration, smoke, dust or fumes, is not a more intensive use of structures than the existing use, and is not in any way a greater nuisance to the adjoining properties than the existing use; and 
3.  Will not have a negative impact on the public health, safety, and welfare. 
9.01.04 - Non-[C]onforming Uses 
A lawfully established use that becomes non-conforming at the time of adoption of this UDO may continue subject to the following requirements: 
A.  A structure containing a non-conforming use shall not be enlarged, extended, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered except to change the use to a use permitted in the zoning district in which it is located. 
B.  A non-conforming use shall not be extended to occupy any land outside the existing structure devoted to the use. Any non-conforming use may be extended throughout any parts of a building which were manifestly arranged or designed for such use at the time of adoption or amendment of this UDO. 
C.  A non-conforming use which is superseded by a permitted use in a structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not be resumed. 
D.  A non-conforming use of a structure, or structure and land in combination, that is discontinued or abandoned for six (6) consecutive months (except when government action impedes access to the premises) shall not be resumed. The structure, or structure and land in combination, shall not thereafter be used except in conformity with the regulations of the zoning district in which it is located. 
9.01.05 - Termination of Detrimental Non-conforming Structures and Uses 
There are found to be certain uses of land and structures, as listed in Sections 9.01.05(A)(1) and (2), which have an adverse effect on the carrying out of the City of Carrollton Comprehensive Plan. Such uses shall be discontinued after the time periods set forth in Section 9.01.05(A) below, irrespective of the provisions for non-conforming uses set forth in Sections 9.01.01 through 9.01.04 above. 
A.  The following uses shall be removed or made conforming within the specified amortization period. Said amortization period shall commence upon the effective date of this UDO. 
1.  Fences, walls, and vegetation which constitute a hazard by virtue of impairing sight distances at a curve or intersection shall be made conforming within ninety (90) days. 
2.  Non-conforming open storage operations include activities such as truck parking, automobile wrecking, salvage material storage, and similar uses. Such non-conforming operations shall be made conforming with the site design requirements for fencing, screening, or buffering, as set forth in Articles 4 and 5 within two (2) years following adoption of this UDO. 
3.  All site design requirements for fencing, screening, or buffering of commercial or industrial uses, as set forth in Articles 4 or 5 of this UDO, shall be met within two (2) calendar years. 
9.01.06 - Regulation of Non-conforming Signs 
The following provisions shall apply to signs which were conforming immediately prior to the adoption of this UDO, but which became non-conforming at the time of adoption of this UDO. 
A.  New on-site signs related to legally established non-conforming uses may be erected, provided they comply with the sign regulations applicable to the use in the most restrictive district in which the use is permitted. 
B.  Non-conforming signs may stay in place until one (1) of the following conditions occurs: 
1.  The sign deteriorates or is damaged to the extent that it becomes a hazard; or 
2.  The sign has been damaged to such an extent that structural repairs are required to restore the sign. A structural repair is any repair necessary to maintain the stability and safety of the sign. 
C.  The owner of the sign shall obtain a permit for the continuation of the sign, subject to the restrictions of this section. Application for such permit shall be filed within ten (10) days of the notice of non-conformance. There shall be no charge for this permit. Failure to apply for such permit within ten (10) days shall result in waiver of the protections afforded non-conforming signs by this section and the display of such sign shall be thereafter unlawful. 
D.  Minor repairs and maintenance of non-conforming signs such as repainting, electrical repairs, neon tubing repairs shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this UDO. 
E.  A non-conforming sign damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its assessed value shall not be repaired or rebuilt except in compliance with the standards for the type and location of sign. 
F.  A non-conforming sign damaged by fire or other causes to the extent of more than fifty (50) percent of its assessed value which is not repaired or rebuilt in compliance with this section shall be removed from the lot, along with all associated debris, and disposed of appropriately. 
G.  A non-conforming sign shall not be replaced by another non-conforming sign, except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards, or dismountable material on non-conforming signs shall be permitted. 
9.02.00 - VARIANCES 

9.02.01 - Generally 
A.  The Board of Development Appeals (BDA) may authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variances from the terms of this UDO as will not be contrary to the public interest where, owing to special conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of this ordinance will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship. 
B.  A variance shall be authorized only so that the spirit of this UDO shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. 
C.  A variance shall not be granted for a use of land or structures that is prohibited by this UDO in the district in question. 
D.  The existence of a non-conforming use on adjacent land, buildings, or structures in the same or in other districts shall not constitute a reason for a variance. 
E.  The Board of Development Appeals (BDA) shall be responsible for consideration and a decision regarding requests for variances, pursuant to the notice and hearing requirements set forth in Section 10.03.04. 
9.02.02 - Types of Variances 
A request for a variance shall be limited to the following dimensional standards: maximum building height; minimum lot width; required spacing for driveways; minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks; or dimensional standards for parking or loading spaces. Furthermore, other requests for variances, as specified in this UDO, shall follow the procedures and requirements provided in this section. 
9.02.03 - Requirements for Variances 
A variance may be granted in such individual cases of unnecessary hardship upon finding by the BDA that all of the following conditions have been met: 
A.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular piece of property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
B.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
C.  Such conditions are not a result of any action of the property owner or applicant; 
D.  The application of this UDO to this particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
E.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good or impair the purposes and intent of this UDO; 
F.  A literal interpretation of the provisions of this UDO would deprive the applicant of rights commonly enjoyed by other properties of the zoning district in which the property is located; 
G.  Granting the variance requested will not confer upon the property of the applicant any special privileges that are denied to other properties of the zoning district in which the applicant's property is located; 
H.  The requested variance will be in harmony with the purpose and intent of this UDO and will not be incompatible with the neighborhood or to the general public welfare; 
I.  The variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the legal use of the land, building or structure; and 
J.  The variance is not a request to permit a use of land or structures which are not permitted by right in the zoning district involved. 
9.02.04 - Procedures for Variances 
A.  Applications. 
1.  An application for a variance shall include the information required for all applications, as set forth in Article 10. 
2.  An application for a variance shall include a statement explaining how the variance request conforms to all requirements listed in Section 9.02.03. 
B.  Review of applications. 
1.  An application for a variance shall be reviewed by the City Manager for compliance with the requirements set forth in Article 10. 
2.  A public hearing shall be scheduled before the BDA. 
3.  Notice of the public hearing shall be provided pursuant to the requirements of Article 10. 
4.  The BDA shall conduct the public hearing in accordance with the procedures set forth in Article 10. 
5.  The BDA shall approve, deny, or approve with conditions the application for variance, based upon findings regarding conditions set forth in Section 9.02.03. 
6.  The City Manager shall issue a written order to the applicant when the variance is approved or approved with conditions by the BDA. 
C.  Expiration of variance approval. 
Any variance authorized by the BDA, for which construction has not commenced within one (1) year from the date on which the decision of the BDA becomes final, shall be deemed abandoned and be void and of no further force and effect. 
D.  An appeal of a decision of the BDA shall be to the Superior Court of Carroll County. 
9.03.00 - ADMINISTRATIVE WAIVER 

9.03.01 - Authority and Limitations 
The City Manager is authorized to reduce specific site design and development standards of this UDO where the intent of the UDO can be achieved and equal performance obtained by granting a waiver of standards. The authority to grant a waiver shall be limited to the following: 
A.  A reduction in the minimum front, side, or rear yard setbacks for a single lot, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  The reduction is necessary because of geologic conditions, topography, or the inability to adhere to landscaping, buffer and tree protection standards of this UDO. 
2.  The reduction is limited to a maximum of twenty (20) percent of the minimum standard. 
B.  A reduction in the parking requirement, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  The reduction is necessary in order to implement landscaping, buffer, and tree protection standards of this UDO; and 
2.  The reduction is limited to either two (2) spaces or two (2) percent of the parking requirement, whichever is greater; and 
3.  The reduction does not limit the availability or location of required handicapped parking. 
C.  A reduction in landscaping or buffer requirements, provided the following standards are met: 
1.  The reduction is necessary due to particular physical conditions of the property, such as the shape of the lot, topography, presence of bodies of water, or other natural features; 
2.  The reduction is limited to ten (10) percent of the otherwise required width of the buffer; and 
3.  The reduction is limited to ten (10) percent of the otherwise required plant materials. 
9.03.02 - Annual Report Required 
An annual report shall be prepared by the City Manager and shall summarize the number and type of administrative waivers granted in the previous year. Such reports shall be prepared in January of each year for the previous calendar year. Annual reports shall be presented to the Planning Commission for review and comment. Annual reports, together with recommendations from the Planning Commission, if any, shall be forwarded to the Mayor and City Council. 
9.04.00 - VESTED RIGHTS 
The purpose of Section 9.04.00 is to provide a method to recognize vested rights and works-in-progress that were authorized prior to the adoption of this UDO. 

9.04.01 - Application 
In order to determine vested rights for a particular project, the affected party shall submit an application which shall include evidence that demonstrates entitlement to vested rights pursuant to applicable State law. The following information shall be provided: 
A.  Citation of the specific section(s) of the UDO that affect the development of the property. 
B.  Identification of the exact dates that specific ordinances or amendments to the UDO were passed by the Mayor and City Council. 
C.  Complete applications shall be submitted to the City Manager who will make a determination within thirty (30) days of the submittal of the application. 
9.04.02 - Expiration of Approval 
An approval for a work-in-progress shall automatically expire in one (1) year where no additional development activity is evident and/or a building permit has not been obtained. Any further work on the site shall require an application for a development plan in full compliance with the standards and procedures of this UDO. 
ARTICLE 10 - ADMINISTRATIVE PROCEDURES 
10.00.00 - GENERALLY 

10.00.01 - Purpose 
This article sets forth the procedures for receiving, reviewing, and rendering decisions on applications for permits, rezoning, subdivisions, multi-family and non-residential development, mixed use development, and planned developments. This article also sets forth the requirements for appealing decisions and for enforcement. It is the City's intent that the procedures and requirements set forth in this article shall be followed in order to seek approval for any development. 
10.00.02 - Approvals Required 
A.  No person shall develop any property within the City of Carrollton without first obtaining an approved subdivision plat, an approved development plan, and permits to perform such activities, as applicable. All development activities or site work conducted after approval of a development plan or subdivision plat shall conform to the specifications of such approved plat or plan. 
B.  A plat of a land subdivision shall be recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Carroll County when approved as required by this article. The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision without such approval is declared to be a violation of this UDO. 
C.  The transfer of, sale of, agreement to sell, or negotiation to sell land by reference to, exhibition of, or other use of a plat of a subdivision that has not been given final approval as required by this article and recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Carroll County is prohibited, and the description by metes and bounds in such an instrument of transfer or other document shall not exempt the transaction from prescribed penalties. 
D.  Building Permit. No building or structure shall be erected, moved, added to, demolished or structurally altered without a building permit being authorized and issued by the City Manager. 
1.  If the aggregate total cost of labor and material involved in such work is less than $500.00, as estimated by the City Manager using current average cost estimates, no building permit is required. 
E.  Major changes to an approved development plan, as defined below, shall require specific approval of an amended development plan. 
1.  Altering the amount and velocity of stormwater runoff from the site; 
2.  Increasing the amount of impervious surface within the development; 
3.  Altering the overall density of development; or 
4.  Substantially increasing the amount of excavation, fill, or removal of vegetation during construction. 
F.  The following are exempt from the requirement to obtain an approved development plan prior to the issuance of required permits: 
1.  Repairs to a facility that is part of a previously approved and permitted development; 
2.  Accessory structures, provided applicable permits are obtained; 
3.  Single-family detached homes constructed within an approved subdivision. 
G.  A change of use occurs when an existing use of land or a building is replaced by another use. When a change of use occurs, an application for a development plan is required. 
H.  Certificate of Occupancy. A Certificate of Occupancy authorized and issued by the City Manager shall be required in advance of: 
1.  The initial use or occupancy of a lot. 
2.  Any change in the use or occupancy of a lot. 
3.  The initial use and occupancy of a building erected after enactment of this ordinance. 
4.  Any change in the use of a building existing at the time of enactment of this ordinance. 
5.  The change in use, extension, alteration, or reconstruction of any non-conforming use existing at the time of the enactment of this ordinance or an amendment thereto. The Certificate of Occupancy shall specifically state how the non-conforming use fails to meet the provisions of this ordinance. 
I.  Except in the case of non-conforming uses existing at the time of the enactment of this UDO or an amendment thereto, no Certificate of Occupancy shall be issued unless the lot, building or structure complies with the provisions of this UDO. 
J.  A record of all Certificates of Occupancy shall be kept on file with the City of Carrollton and a copy shall be furnished on request, to any person having a proprietary or tenancy interest in the lot, building or structure involved. 
10.00.03 - Expiration of Approvals 
A.  Any building permit shall become void if the work involved has not begun within six (6) months after the date of issuance of the permit. 
B.  If construction described in a development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire six (6) months after the date that work ceased, unless construction re-commences within the six (6) month period. 
C.  The time period for which a permit is valid may be extended for up to six (6) months where an application for such extension is filed and such extension has been granted in writing by the City Manager. 
10.00.04 - Fees Required 
A.  The Mayor and City Council of the City of Carrollton shall establish a schedule of fees, charges, and expenses and a collection procedure for building permits, Certificates of Occupancy, appeals and other matters pertaining to this ordinance. 
B.  The schedule of fees shall be posted in the office of the City Clerk and may be altered and amended only by the Mayor and City Council. 
C.  All applications shall be accompanied by payment of application fees, as set forth in the City of Carrollton Fee Schedule as adopted by the Mayor and City Council. An application shall not be complete until all required fees are paid. Such fees shall include the filing fee, and where notice is required, shall include an additional fee to defray the expense of providing such notices. 
D.  For Land-disturbance permits, a fee in addition to local permitting fees will be assessed pursuant to Georgia statutes. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the Land-disturbance permit. 
10.00.05 - Requirements for Developments of Regional Impact (DRI) 
The Georgia Department of Community Affairs (DCA), pursuant to the Georgia Planning Act, has established criteria for the identification of certain large-scale developments, which have the potential to cause land use impacts beyond the boundaries of the respective local government where a project might be proposed. These developments, known as Developments of Regional Impact (DRIs), shall be submitted, based on established DCA standards, procedures, and format, to the Chattahoochee-Flint Regional Development Center for review and recommendation prior to issuance of any local building or development permit, utility tap, or rezoning, whichever occurs first. As such, these requirements establish an official delay in the local permitting and/or review process to allow for compliance with these requirements. 
10.00.06 - Procedures for Conducting Public Meetings 
The following rules of procedure shall govern public hearings pertaining to development subject to the provisions of this UDO: 
A.  The proposal or request to be considered shall be presented by the City Manager. 
B.  Public comments shall be heard in an orderly fashion. Comments and testimony shall be provided in the following order: 
1.  The applicant or applicant's agent; 
2.  Citizens speaking in favor of the proposal or request; 
3.  Citizens speaking in opposition to the proposal or request; and 
4.  Rebuttal. 
C.  Any party may appear at the public hearing in person, or by agent, or by attorney. 
D.  Each person who appears shall identify himself or herself by name and address; if the person is the applicant, he or she shall state whether he or she is the owner of the property or agent for the owner. 
E.  Each applicant or other interested party who submits documents at the hearing shall identify each document. Each document submitted shall be made a part of the official record of the hearing. 
F.  Time periods for testimony: 
1.  Opponents shall have a minimum of ten (10) minutes to present data, evidence, and opinions pertinent to the proposal. 
2.  Proponents, including the applicant and others speaking in favor of the proposal, shall have a minimum of ten (10) minutes to present data, evidence, and opinions pertinent to the proposal. 
3.  The chair of the board hearing the request or proposal may allow additional time in the chair's discretion. 
G.  The board hearing the request or proposal retains the privilege to ask any questions of the City Manager, other staff, or persons who have spoken on the matter. 
H.  At the conclusion of the hearing by the board hearing the request or proposal, the board hearing the request or proposal shall announce its decision. The City Manager shall notify an applicant in writing of the decision of the board hearing the request or proposal. The written notification shall be made a part of the record. 
I.  The board hearing the request or proposal may continue the public hearing where additional information is necessary in order to render a decision. The continuation shall be to a date certain. Where an application is remanded to the Planning Commission for consideration of additional conditions, it shall be heard by the Planning Commission on the next available meeting date. 
10.00.07 - Notice Requirements for Rezoning Applications 
A.  At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of hearing, notice shall be published in the legal organ of Carroll County stating the date, time, place, and purpose of the hearing. 
B.  Zoning decisions initiated by the Planning Commission or the Mayor and City Council shall require a public hearing on the proposed action; notice of said hearing to be published in the legal organ of Carroll County at least fifteen (15) days but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the hearing. The notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the meeting. 
C.  If the zoning decision is for the rezoning of property and the rezoning is initiated by a party other than the City, then: 
1.  The published notice shall also include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
2.  Notice shall be given by first-class mail to all property owners involved, including all contiguous property owners of record, at their last known address. Said notice shall be deemed sufficient when deposited in the U.S. Post Office; and 
3.  A sign shall be placed on the property not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the hearing notifying interested persons that a rezoning petition has been filed. 
a.  Said signs shall be located on private property but within one (1) foot of the public right-of-way upon which said business or proposed use fronts. 
b.  The signs shall be placed on the property at 500-foot intervals. If the property in question has 500 feet or less frontage, only one (1) sign is required. Where property does not front on an existing right-of-way, said sign shall be placed within one (1) foot of the right-of-way of the nearest street or road. Where the property borders more than one (1) public right-of-way, signs shall be posted on all contiguous rights-of-way. 
c.  The sign shall include the following: 
(i)  Notice of rezoning hearing. 
(ii)  Date, time and location of hearing. 
(iii)  Present zoning. 
(iv)  Proposed zoning. 
(v)  Property map. 
(vi)  Name and telephone number of City of Carrollton staff contact where additional information may be obtained. 
10.01.00 - APPLICATION REQUIREMENTS 

10.01.01 - Pre-Application Conference 
A.  A pre-application conference is a meeting between an applicant and the City Manager, or designated City staff, for the purposes of: 
1.  Exchanging information on the potential development of a site; 
2.  Providing information on permissible uses of the site proposed for development; 
3.  Providing information to an applicant regarding the design standards set forth in this UDO that are applicable to a potential application; 
4.  Providing information to an applicant regarding standards of regional, state, or federal agencies that may be applicable to a potential application; 
5.  Determining the need and requirements for supporting plans, documents, and studies; 
6.  Providing information to an applicant regarding infrastructure requirements and the construction of required improvements; and 
7.  Providing information to an applicant regarding the appropriate procedures and schedules for receiving and reviewing applications and rendering decisions regarding a potential application. 
B.  Before proceeding with a proposed land subdivision or rezoning application, applicants are invited and encouraged to consult early and informally with the City Manager or designated City staff including the City Engineer. 
C.  No fee shall be charged for this review, and no formal application is necessary. 
D.  The purpose of the pre-application conference is to afford the applicant an opportunity to avail himself of the advice and assistance of the City staff in order to facilitate the subsequent preparation and consideration of subdivision plans or rezoning applications. 
E.  It is the intent of the City of Carrollton that all requirements be identified during the pre-application conference. 
F.  However, no person may rely upon any comment concerning a proposed development, or any expression of any nature about the proposal, made by a participant at the pre-application conference, as a representation or implication that the proposal will be ultimately approved or rejected in any form. 
G.  A prospective applicant may bring members of his project team, such as, but not limited to, the project engineer, land planner, architect, surveyor, or other person who will assist in the preparation of an application. 
H.  A prospective applicant may provide an informal sketch plan to aid in the discussion. However, such an informal sketch plan shall not be reviewed in any way for compliance with the standards and requirements of this UDO, and shall be used only as an aid to the conduct of the pre-application conference. A proposed subdivision plat, improvement plan, development plan, or other such plan shall not be considered or discussed during a pre-application conference. 
10.01.02 - Submittal Requirements for All Applications 
A.  The following information shall be provided for all applications: 
1.  An application form provided by the City of Carrollton. 
2.  Proof of ownership. 
3.  When the applicant is a representative of the property owner, a notarized statement authorizing the representative to act as an agent of the property owner with regard to the application and associated procedures. 
4.  A property survey conducted no more than two (2) years prior to the filing of the application, containing the legal description, boundaries, land area, notation whether any portion of the property is within an environmental area regulated as set forth in Article 3, and existing improvements located on the site. Where two (2) or more parcels are included within a proposed development, the survey shall include all parcels that are part of the proposed development, including all phases. The survey shall be prepared and sealed by a surveyor registered in the State of Georgia. 
5.  A vicinity map indicating the location of the site proposed for development. 
6.  Proof of payment of fees. 
7.  Other information to support the application as specified in this chapter and as may be required by the City Manager. 
10.01.03 - Determination of Completeness 
A.  All applications shall be complete before acceptance for review and decision-making. A determination of completeness is a determination that all required documents and plans have been submitted in sufficient number, and that all fees have been paid. A determination of completeness is not a determination of compliance with substantive standards and criteria. 
B.  The City Manager shall determine, within five (5) days of receipt of an application, whether the application is complete. 
C.  If the City Manager determines that the application is not complete, the City Manager shall send notice to the applicant identifying the deficiencies. The applicant shall have thirty (30) days from the date of notice to correct the deficiencies. Until the applicant corrects the deficiencies, no further action shall be taken for processing the application. If the applicant fails to correct the deficiencies within the thirty (30) day period, the application shall be deemed withdrawn, and fees shall be returned. 
D.  If the City Manager determines that the application is complete, the application shall be processed for review and action in accordance with the procedural requirements set forth in this chapter. 
10.01.04 - Building Permit Application 
A.  All applications for building permits shall be made to the City Manager and shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, and showing: 
1.  The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon; 
2.  The sizes and location on the lot of any existing buildings or structures; 
3.  The shape, size, height, use, and the location on the lot of the building or structure proposed to be erected or altered; and 
4.  Setback lines, buffers, and such other information as may be necessary to provide for the enforcement of this ordinance. 
B.  In addition to the application materials specified in Section 10.01.02, plans submitted for a building permit shall include the following items: 
1.  Project name; 
2.  Project owner and address; 
3.  Date, scale, north arrow; 
4.  Owner and use of adjacent properties; 
5.  Property lines and dimensions; 
6.  Total project acreage; 
7.  Proposed use of property to be developed; 
8.  Required yard setbacks appropriately dimensioned; 
9.  Location of existing buildings and the square footage in each; 
10.  Location of proposed buildings and the square footage in each; 
11.  Existing and future right-of-way of adjacent street, including names of streets and width of pavement; 
12.  Topography at five-foot contour intervals for properties greater than one (1) acre, topography at two-foot contour intervals for properties less than one (1) acre; 
13.  Location of driveway ingress and egress including dimensions for curb radius, driveway width and distance to nearest street intersection; 
14.  All existing and proposed off-street parking spaces, loading stations, bays and walkways, including the type of servicing, angle of stalls, dimension of stalls, width of access aisle and schedule listing total number of parking stalls by type; 
15.  Location of buffers/screening, identifying the plant material by name, spacing of plant material and total number of plants by species; 
16.  Dumpster location; 
17.  Location of 100-year floodplain; and 
18.  Any other data requested in writing by the City Manager necessary to an understanding and evaluation of the project[.] 
10.01.05 - Submittal Requirements for Planned Developments 
In addition to the general rezoning submittal requirements, applications to rezone property to Planned Development (PD) shall include the following: 
A.  Concept Development Plan. This plan shall include a general site plan illustrating the following: 
1.  The location of proposed lots or structures; 
2.  Street systems, if applicable; 
3.  Setbacks; 
4.  Buffers; 
5.  Density broken down by housing type; 
6.  Greenspace and/or Open Space; 
7.  Phase lines; and 
8.  Any other site design or development standards deemed necessary by the City Manager, or his or her designee, for a complete review of the request. 
This concept development plan is binding to the development of the site once approved by the Mayor and City Council. 
B.  Written Narrative. The written narrative shall include the following: 
1.  The types of uses broken down by percent (%) of the overall site; 
2.  Description of the architectural characteristics of the proposed structures; 
3.  Examples of proposed signage, if applicable; 
4.  Description of the proposed amenities package and provisions for the permanent maintenance of proposed amenities; and 
5.  Preliminary traffic counts for the proposed uses. 
10.01.06 - Rezoning Application 
A.  In addition to the application materials specified in Section 10.01.02, applications for amendment of the City of Carrollton Zoning Map shall include the following: 
1.  The area of the land proposed to be reclassified, stated in square feet if less than one (1) acre, and in acres if one (1) acre or more. 
2.  The application file number, date of application, and action taken on all prior applications filed for the reclassification of the whole or part of the land proposed to be reclassified. 
3.  A statement of intent, describing the specific nature of the request, a detailed justification for the request, and a statement demonstrating compliance of the request with the City of Carrollton Comprehensive Plan. 
4.  The community or area in which the land proposed to be reclassified is located, the street address, the tax map-parcel number(s), and the location with respect to the nearby public streets or roadways in common use. 
5.  A list of all current owners of record for properties located immediately adjacent to or directly across a public street or railroad right-of-way from the subject property. The list shall include the current names, mailing addresses, and tax map-parcel numbers as reflected on the current tax roll of Carroll County. 
B.  A conceptual development plan may be submitted with an application for rezoning. A conceptual development plan shall demonstrate the ability of the proposed use(s) to be located on the site in compliance with the standards of this UDO. The conceptual development plan shall be of sufficient detail to bind the applicant to the features depicted on the conceptual development plan, and shall contain the following information: 
1.  Project name; 
2.  Vicinity map showing zoning districts and existing land use within 500 feet of the boundaries of the site; 
3.  Total area in acres and square feet; 
4.  Current and proposed zoning classification, together with a summary of the applicable development standards for the proposed zoning district. A planned development shall include drawing notes detailing the proposed standards for site design and development for the PD zoning district; 
5.  Natural features, including topography at ten (10) foot intervals, surface drainage, surface waters, floodplains, watershed areas, groundwater recharge areas, general location of wetlands, and the general location of wooded areas; 
6.  Location with respect to any designated overlay districts; 
7.  General location of existing and proposed roads and utility rights-of-way or easements; 
8.  Location of existing property lines within the development site, if applicable; 
9.  General location of existing and proposed development by type of use; 
10.  Proposed residential density and dwelling unit types, if applicable; 
11.  Location of proposed open spaces, recreational areas, and public buildings and uses, indicating those areas reserved or dedicated for public use; and 
12.  General plan for the provision of utilities and infrastructure. 
10.01.07 - Submittal Requirements for Amendments to the Unified Development Ordinance 
A.  Applications for amendment of this UDO shall be made in the form of proposals for amendments of the text, standards, and other criteria. Proposals to amend the City of Carrollton Zoning Map shall meet the requirements set forth in Section 10.01.06. 
B.  In addition to the application requirements set forth in Section 10.01.02, the following information shall be provided: 
1.  Identification of the specific provision proposed for amendment; 
2.  The proposed modifications in a strikethrough and underline format; 
3.  A detailed explanation of the rationale and justification for the requested amendment; and 
4.  A detailed explanation of the potential impacts of the modification on the development of the City of Carrollton. 
10.01.08 - Submittal Requirements for Amendments to Approved Development Plans and Zoning Conditions 
A.  Modifications to zoning conditions include any changes to allowable uses, maximum density, maximum intensity, or compatibility requirements attached to the zoning approval as conditions of approval. In addition to the application requirements set forth in Section 10.01.02, the application shall contain a statement outlining the details of the amendment requested, the situation giving rise to the need for an amendment, and accompanied by plans fully describing the nature and extent of the amendment. 
B.  Amendments to development plans include changes to dimensional design features as depicted on a conceptual development plan or on an approved development plan. The application shall include the information required by Section 10.01.02 and shall be accompanied by a detailed description of the site design features proposed to be modified and a detailed explanation of the need for the modification. 
10.01.09 - Preliminary Subdivision Plan 
The preliminary subdivision plan submittal consists of the preliminary land subdivision plat, the preliminary site plan, and an application for subdivision plan approval. 
A.  The preliminary land subdivision plat shall consist of a scale map or maps depicting the following: 
1.  Streets, street names, and right-of-way widths; 
2.  Other rights-of-way and easements; 
3.  Lot lines drawn to scale; 
4.  Lot and block identification; 
5.  Minimum building setback lines; 
6.  Subdivision boundary lines and total subdivision land area in acres; 
7.  Key plan (if more than one sheet), legend, and notes; 
8.  Dimensions, data, and lines as necessary to clearly indicate that all applicable requirements of the zoning ordinance are met. Where appropriate such information may be shown on the preliminary site plan; 
9.  Title, scale, north arrow, and date; 
10.  Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider; 
11.  Proposed name of subdivision; 
12.  The location of the subdivision and developments in its vicinity including land lot and district numbers and lines, and City and county names and limit lines; 
13.  Name of owners of record of adjoining land; and 
14.  Location of existing structures on the tract. 
B.  The preliminary site plan shall consist of a scale map or maps depicting the following: 
1.  Street right-of-way, street names, lot lines, easements; 
2.  Topography at suitable contour interval(s); 
3.  Pavement widths, spot elevations, approximate street gradients and outline of construction specifications; 
4.  Spot elevations and slope ratios for any heavy grading; 
5.  Proposed public or semipublic sites for parks, churches and other community facilities, if any; 
6.  Generalized storm drainage plan including catch basin locations, tentative sewer and culvert sizes, spot elevations of key system elements, final disposition of surface water, and outline of construction specifications; 
7.  Preliminary sanitary sewerage system plan including line locations and sizes, manholes, elevation of key system elements, location or method of final wastewater disposal, and outline of construction specifications; 
8.  Preliminary water system plan including line location, sizing and tie-in to existing City distribution; 
9.  Sequence and geographic limits of construction phases proposed for large scale development; and 
10.  Other data necessary to demonstrate that the subdivision can meet requirements of an acceptable subdivision plat of record. 
10.01.10 - Subdivision Construction Plan 
A.  The subdivision construction plan submittal shall consist of the following: 
1.  Engineered construction plans which shall include: 
a.  Street and drainage information; 
b.  Water and sewer plans; and 
c.  Erosion control plans. 
2.  A performance agreement letter, letter of credit, and/or a water/sewer installation agreement letter as required by the City Manager. 
B.  Qualified Engineers. Engineered construction plans for subdivisions shall be prepared by a qualified and licensed engineer regularly engaged in the design of such facilities. 
C.  General Information. Information shall be provided on the subdivision construction plan in accordance with the Design and Construction Standards on file in the office of the City Engineer. 
10.01.11 - Subdivision Record Plat 
The record documents consist of the final land subdivision plat also known as the plat of record, the required engineering plans of record, and a filing fee, together with other specific document requirements described in this chapter. 
A.  Record Plat Requirements. The land subdivision plat part of the record documents shall be prepared by a licensed surveyor and shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  The plat of record shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of fifty feet (50), 100 or 200 feet to one (1) inch. 
2.  The plat of record shall be prepared on heavyweight plastic drafting film. 
3.  The plat of record shall show: 
a.  Numeric and graphic scales, north arrow and date. 
b.  Name and address of owner of record and of subdivider. 
c.  Name of subdivision and its acreage. 
d.  Bearings and distances determined by field survey of the subdivision boundaries to the nearest street lines or other permanent monuments accurately described on the plat. In the event these monuments are not available, the subdivider shall have the required number of monuments constructed at locations and in a manner acceptable to the City of Carrollton. 
e.  Municipal, county and land lot lines accurately located in relation to subdivision boundaries by bearings and distances when such lines traverse or are reasonably close to the subdivision. 
f.  Bearings and distances determined by field survey of each lot boundary to an accuracy of at least 1:10,000. 
g.  Bearings and distances of street right-of-way lines with field determined curve and tangent data. 
h.  Street addresses assigned by the City Engineer. 
i.  Names of owners of record of adjoining land. 
j.  Names, location, and right-of-way width of streets on and adjacent to the tract. 
k.  Lot lines with accurately calculated dimensions and bearings, square footage, lot numbers, and block numbers or letters. 
l.  Sites, if any, to be used for purposes other than single-family dwellings. 
m.  Sites, if any, to be dedicated or reserved for parks, schools, playgrounds or other public use, together with the purpose and the conditions or limitations of such dedication, if any. 
n.  Minimum setback lines, as required under this UDO. 
o.  Easements on and adjacent to the tract with their locations, width and purpose. 
p.  Location of significant existing structures on the tract. 
q.  Location of significant watercourses on and adjacent to the property. 
r.  Location of any floodplain on the site. 
s.  A statement, either directly on the plat or in an identified attached document, of any private deed covenants, none of which shall stipulate lower standards than the minimum requirements of this UDO. 
t.  A surveyor's certification as follows: 
SURVEYOR'S CERTIFICATION 
This survey has been calculated for closure by latitudes and departures and is found to be accurate within one foot in ________ feet. 
In my opinion this plat is a correct representation of the land platted and has been prepared in conformity with the minimum standards and requirements of law. 
By: _____    Date: _____ 
u.  An owner's certification as follows: 
OWNER'S CERTIFICATION 
STATE OF GEORGIA 
COUNTY OF CARROLL 
The owner of the land described by this plat and whose name is subscribed hereto, in person or through a duly authorized agent, certifies that all state and county taxes or other assessments now due on this land have been paid, and that he dedicates to the use of the public forever all streets, alleys, parks and watercourses, drains, easements, and other public places hereon shown for considerations hereby acknowledged, except those public ways or places specifically indicated hereon as being excluded from such dedication. 
By: _____ 
Title: _____ 
Date: _____ 
v.  City Engineer's certification as follows: 
CITY ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION 
I hereby certify that this plat is officially approved for recording in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court, Carroll County, Georgia. 
By: _____ 
Date: _____________________________ 
4.  The proposed name of the subdivision shall not duplicate nor too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision in the Carrollton area. 
5.  Except where clearly indicated to the contrary on the approved final subdivision plan, streets, storm and sanitary sewerage, and water system improvements shall on satisfactory completion be dedicated to the City. Privately-owned water and sewer utilities where permitted by the City within shopping centers, apartment developments and similar developments shall conform with applicable subdivision regulations up to the point at which City-enforced building utility code(s) assume jurisdiction. 
B.  Engineering Plans of Record. The engineering plans of record shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Conform with the requirements of the engineered construction plans except where modified by this section. 
2.  Prepared on heavyweight plastic drafting film. 
3.  Show all data, dimensions, plans, profiles, stationing, elevations, materials, etc., corrected to conform with actually constructed improvements. 
4.  They shall include an engineer's certification as follows: 
ENGINEER'S CERTIFICATION 
It is hereby certified that these engineering plans have been corrected to accurately show improvements as actually constructed, that I have inspected these improvements during and on completion of construction, and that in my opinion such improvements are suitable for their intended purposes. 
By: _____________________________________________________________ 
Date: _____________________________ 
10.02.00 - PROCEDURAL REQUIREMENTS 

10.02.01 - Building Permits 
A.  If the City Manager determines that application for a building permit conforms to all of the provisions of this UDO, the building codes and other applicable ordinances of the City of Carrollton, and all required fees have been paid, the building permit shall be issued. 
B.  If the City Manager determines that application for a building permit is not in compliance, the application for the building permit shall be denied by the City Manager, with the reason(s) for such denial provided to the applicant in writing. 
C.  Applicable Development Standards. 
1.  Development standards and ordinance requirements in effect on the date of approval of development plans for a specific project shall remain in effect for a period of twenty-four (24) months. 
2.  Any work performed within the approved development under a building permit issued after the twenty-four (24) month period has expired shall be accomplished in accordance with the standards and ordinance requirements in effect as of that date. 
10.02.02 - Procedures for Amendments to the Official Zoning Map and Text of the Unified Development Ordinance 
    The procedure for amending the official Zoning Map and Articles 2 and 4 of this UDO shall be as outlined below: 
A.  Any person or persons desiring to submit a petition requesting a change in zoning shall file the following: 
1.  Rezoning Application; 
2.  Plat of the affected property; 
3.  Proof of payment of fees as established in Section 10.00.04. Fees shall not be refundable after the application has been submitted and deemed complete regardless of any future action under this UDO; and 
4.  The petitioner may also be required to submit additional information as requested by the City Manager as may be useful and necessary to deliberations regarding the zoning change. 
B.  Applications for rezoning must be submitted at least thirty (30) days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the Planning Commission. 
C.  All amendments shall be proposed by or shall first be submitted to the Planning Commission for review and recommendation prior to adoption by the Mayor and City Council. 
1.  The Planning Commission shall have sixty (60) days from the date of the public hearing within which to complete its review and submit a report and recommendations to the Mayor and City Council; 
2.  The Planning Commission shall hold a public hearing on the proposed amendment during the review period; 
3.  At least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of any such public hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Carrollton; and 
4.  If the Planning Commission fails to submit a report to the Mayor and City Council within sixty (60) days of the public hearing, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the proposed amendment. 
D.  Withdrawal of an application. An application for rezoning may be withdrawn subject to the following provisions: 
1.  Any applicant withdrawing his petition after the advertisement of the application but prior to the formal consideration by the Planning Commission may resubmit the petition but there can be no resubmission for consideration prior to a thirty (30) day waiting period; and 
2.  Any withdrawal after formal action of the Planning Commission shall require a ninety (90) day waiting period prior to resubmitting the petition for consideration. 
E.  After the Planning Commission review period, proposed amendments to this zoning ordinance shall be submitted to the Mayor and City Council for adoption or rejection. 
F.  Before the Mayor and City Council act on an amendment to this zoning ordinance, it shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least fifteen (15) days notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Carrollton. 
G.  The following procedures apply to all amendment hearings: 
1.  At all hearings, a quorum of the Planning Commission or Mayor and City Council members shall be present; 
2.  All hearings shall be open to the public; 
3.  Roberts' Rules of Order shall apply; 
4.  All decisions shall be by a majority vote; and 
5.  Transcripts, if desired, shall be the responsibility of the affected party. 
H.  There shall at all times be an attempt in making a decision to balance the interest in promoting the public health, safety, morality and general welfare against the right to the unrestricted use of the property of the individual citizen. The following criteria shall be considered in arriving at all rezoning decisions: 
1.  Is the proposed use suitable in view of the zoning and development of adjacent and nearby property? 
2.  Will the proposed use not adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property? 
3.  Is the proposed use compatible with the purpose and intent of the comprehensive plan? 
4.  Are there substantial reasons why the property cannot or should not be used as currently zoned? 
5.  Will the proposed use cause an excessive or burdensome use of public utilities or services, including but not limited to streets, schools, water or sewer utilities, and police and fire protection? 
6.  Is the proposed use supported by new or changing conditions not anticipated by the comprehensive plan or reflected in the existing zoning on the property or surrounding properties? 
7.  Does the proposed use reflect a reasonable balance between the promotion of the public health, safety, morality or general welfare and the right to unrestricted use of property? 
I.  In addition to the review criteria listed above, the following review criteria shall be utilized in the review of rezoning applications for two-family developments, duplexes, townhouse developments, and multi-family developments in excess of twelve (12) units: 
1.  Rezoning for two-family, townhouse, and multi-family uses should not be permitted on parcels that are surrounded on more than two (2) sides by property that is either used as or zoned for single-family residential uses. 
2.  The parcel shall have primary ingress and egress from either a major or a collector street. 
3.  The parcel shall be served with both public water and public sewer. 
4.  Rezoning for two-family, townhouse, and multi-family uses should be evaluated in the context of the following: 
a.  The comparatively greater impacts of multi-family housing on the delivery of City services when considered as a land development pattern, and 
b.  The City's policy to limit the amount of multi-family housing to the proportion that currently exists, approximately 50 percent (50%) of the total housing stock. 
J.  Reconsideration by Mayor and City Council. An application for rezoning property within the City of Carrollton shall not be considered if the property requested to be rezoned has been considered by the Mayor and City Council for that same rezoning within a period of twelve (12) months immediately preceding the application. 
(Res. No. 01-2013, 1-7-13) 
10.02.03 - Subdivisions - Generally 
A.  Platting authority. 
1.  The Planning Commission will tentatively approve preliminary subdivision plans as provided in Section 10.02.04. Based on the Planning Commission's recommendations, the City Engineer shall be designated as the platting authority. 
2.  Land subdivision plat recording. 
a.  The Clerk of the Superior Court of Carroll County shall not record or file a plat of a subdivision within the incorporated area of the City which is not a land subdivision plat of record and which does not have the approval of the City Engineer, as required by this UDO. 
b.  The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision which is not a land subdivision plat of record approved by the City Engineer is hereby declared a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punishable as provided by the law. 
B.  Use of plat. 
1.  The owner or the agent of the owner of any land to be subdivided in the incorporated area of the City of Carrollton who transfers or sells or agrees to sell or negotiates to sell land by reference to or exhibition or other use of a plat of a subdivision that is not the land subdivision plat of record that has been approved by the City Engineer and has been lawfully recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Carroll County shall be guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction, shall be punished as provided by law. 
2.  The description by metes and bounds in the instrument of transfer or other document used in the selling or transfer shall not exempt the transaction from penalties. The City Manager may take necessary and appropriate action to enjoin such transfer or agreement. 
C.  Acceptance of and improvements in unapproved streets. 
1.  The Mayor and City Council of Carrollton, Georgia, or other public authority shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave or light any street or lay or authorize the laying of any water mains, sewers, connections or other facilities or utilities in any street within the incorporated area of the City unless such street is approved on engineered construction plans by the City Engineer or unless the street had attained the legal status of a public street prior to the effective date of this UDO; 
2.  The Mayor and City Council of Carrollton, Georgia, may locate, construct or accept any street by resolution. 
D.  Erection of buildings. No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the incorporated area of the City unless the street on which the lot fronts corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on the subdivision plat of record of a subdivision that has been approved by the City Engineer and has been lawfully recorded in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Carroll County unless the specific building lot existed and street had attained the legal status of a public street prior to the effective date of this UDO or had been accepted as a public street by resolution of the Mayor and City Council of Carrollton, Georgia. 
E.  General Requirements. 
1.  Land subject to flooding, improper drainage or erosion, or land that is for topographical or other reasons unsuitable for residential use, shall not be platted for residential use nor for any other use that will continue or increase the danger to health and safety and of property destruction, unless the hazards can be and are corrected. 
2.  The subdivider shall preserve all trees and other natural growth to the maximum extent feasible. 
3.  Access to every subdivision shall be provided over a public street. 
4.  All streets and other features shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated and required by this UDO. 
5.  Dedications. 
a.  When features of other plans adopted by the Planning Commission, including schools, public building sites, parks or other land for public uses, are located in whole or in part in a land subdivision, such features shall be either dedicated or reserved by the subdivider for acquisition within a reasonable time by the appropriate public agency. 
b.  Whenever a subdivision plat proposes the dedication to public use of land that the Planning Commission finds not required or not suitable for such public use, the Planning Commission shall refuse to approve the plan and shall notify the land developer and the governing body of the reasons for such action. 
10.02.04 - Procedures for Preliminary Subdivision Plats 
A.  Review procedures. 
1.  The developer shall submit the following: 
a.  Two (2) copies of the preliminary subdivision plat, 
b.  Two (2) copies of the preliminary subdivision site plan, and 
c.  The application for subdivision plan approval to the City Engineer. 
2.  The City Engineer shall review the preliminary subdivision plan and coordinate with each City department having jurisdiction with respect to any land subdivision matter. 
3.  Each City department having jurisdiction shall thereupon analyze and acquaint themselves with the preliminary subdivision plan and forward comments to the City Engineer. 
4.  After review of the comments by the various City departments, the City Engineer shall notify the subdivider of the time and place at which the Planning Commission will act upon the preliminary subdivision plan. 
5.  The City Engineer shall advise the subdivider if an unfavorable report is to be made to the Planning Commission, and offer the subdivider the opportunity of making written withdrawal of his application and arranging for an early conference to discuss the reason for an unfavorable recommendation. 
6.  The Planning Commission shall be furnished review and comments of the City Engineer, after which the Planning Commission shall tentatively approve or disapprove the preliminary subdivision plat within thirty (30) days after the plat was submitted to the Planning Commission. The grounds for disapproval of any plat shall be stated upon the records of the Planning Commission. 
7.  The City Engineer shall promptly advise the subdivider in writing of the action taken on his application. 
B.  No construction work nor site clearance shall be deemed to have been authorized on a proposed land subdivision as a result of any action taken by the Planning Commission in connection with approving or disapproving a preliminary plat. 
C.  Expiration of approval. Approval of a preliminary plat shall expire and be null and void after a period of twelve (12) months unless an extension of time is approved by the Planning Commission. 
10.02.05 - Procedures for Subdivision Construction Plan 
A.  Review procedures for subdivision construction plans. 
1.  The developer shall submit the following: 
a.  Three (3) copies of the engineered construction plans; 
b.  A performance agreement letter; and 
c.  A water/sewer installation agreement letter. 
2.  The City Engineer shall review the engineered construction plans and coordinate with each City department having jurisdiction with respect to any land subdivision matter. 
3.  Each City department having jurisdiction shall review the plans and forward comments to the City Engineer. 
4.  The City Engineer shall promptly advise the subdivider in writing of the action taken on the submittal. 
5.  Upon approval of the subdivision construction plans, the developer may apply for a land-disturbing activity permit. 
6.  Prior to commencing work, the developer must coordinate with the City Engineer concerning the following inspection requirements: 
a.  Erosion control; 
b.  Water/sewer installation (if accomplished by the developer); 
c.  Storm drainage construction; 
d.  Subgrade preparation; 
e.  Curb and gutter installation; 
f.  Base preparation; and 
g.  Asphalt placement. 
B.  Required improvements. Prior to the commencement of construction of any building within a subdivision, the following items must be complete: 
1.  Storm drainage system including satisfactory stormwater discharge on or off the subdivision site; 
2.  Street grading; 
3.  Satisfactory erosion control; 
4.  All-weather surfacing of roads; 
5.  Concrete curb and gutters; 
6.  Bridges necessary to public access along any street proposed for public dedication; 
7.  Sanitary sewer system including satisfactory on- or off-site disposal of wastewater as per the Design and Construction Standards; 
8.  Water distribution system with fire hydrants and any off-site extension of the City water supply to the subdivision as per the Design and Construction Standards; 
9.  All streets, water mains, and sanitary sewer mains are required to be maintained for a period of two (2) years from the date the final plat is approved by the City Engineer; and 
10.  Approval and filing of the documents of record by the City Engineer. 
10.02.06 - Procedures for Subdivision Record Plats 
A.  Review procedures for the documents of record. 
1.  The subdivider shall submit the following to the City Engineer: 
a.  Plat of record with one (1) copy on heavy plastic drafting film and three (3) paper copies. 
b.  Engineering plans of record with one (1) copy on heavy plastic drafting film and one (1) paper copy. 
c.  Maintenance agreement letter acknowledging the responsibility of the subdivider for maintenance of all dedicated improvements for a two (2) year period. The agreement letter shall be guaranteed by a maintenance bond provided by the owner as a condition of acceptance. The City, at its sole discretion, may accept an irrevocable letter of credit in lieu of a bond. 
d.  Plat of record, water plans, sanitary sewer plans, sanitary sewer tap locations including the distance from manhole, in a digital format according to City of Carrollton standards. 
e.  Filing fees as established in the schedule of fees adopted by the Mayor and City Council. 
2.  The City Engineer shall review the documents of record and compare the data thereon with available field information. 
3.  The City Engineer shall approve the documents of record if the determination is made that all requirements of these regulations are met and that all improvements shown are satisfactorily completed. 
4.  The City Engineer shall thereafter promptly submit the approved plat of record for recording in the office of the Clerk of the Superior Court of Carroll County. 
B.  Authorized building construction. Until the land subdivision plat of record has been approved and filed by the City Engineer: 
1.  No street shall be deemed to have been accepted or to have otherwise been given legal status. 
2.  No building or other structure within the subdivision shall be erected, moved, added to, or structurally altered. 
3.  After such approval and acceptance, no building permit shall be issued by the City except in conformance with the provisions of this UDO. 
10.03.00 - APPEALS 

10.03.01 - Appeals to the Board of Development Appeals (BDA) 
A.  Appeals to the Board of Development Appeals (BDA) may be made by any person dissatisfied by a decision or interpretation made by the Planning Commission, the City Manager or his designee(s), or the City Engineer in the administration and enforcement of this UDO. 
1.  Such appeal shall be made within thirty (30) days from the date the appellant is notified of an adverse decision of the City by filing with the Secretary of the BDA a notice of appeal specifying the grounds thereof. 
2.  The Secretary shall transmit to the BDA all the documentation constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. 
10.03.02 - Stay of Proceedings 
An appeal stays all proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from, unless the City Manager certifies to the BDA after the notice of appeal shall have been filed with the Secretary of the BDA, that by reason of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in the City's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case proceedings shall not be stayed otherwise than by a restraining order which may be granted by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
10.03.03 - Powers of the Board of Development Appeals 
The Board of Development Appeals (BDA) shall have the following powers: 
A.  To hear and decide appeals where it is alleged there is error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the City in the enforcement of this UDO. 
B.  To authorize upon appeal in specific cases such variance from the terms of this UDO as provided in Section 9.02.00. 
C.  In exercising the above powers the BDA may, in conformity with the provisions of this UDO, reverse or affirm, wholly or partly, or may modify the order, requirement, decision or determination appealed from and may make such order, requirement, decision or determination as the BDA deems proper, and to that end shall have the powers of the officer from whom the appeal is taken. 
10.03.04 - Procedures of the Board of Development Appeals 
A.  Meetings of the BDA shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the BDA may determine. 
1.  The chairman, or in his absence the vice-chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoenas. 
2.  At all meetings of the board, a quorum of a minimum of three (3) members shall be present and Robert's Rules of Order shall apply. 
3.  The presiding officer shall be entitled to a vote on all issues. 
B.  The BDA shall fix a reasonable time for a hearing of an appeal or other matter referred to the BDA. Notice of the hearing shall be provided by the following: 
1.  A minimum of fifteen (15) days notice of the time, place and issue to be decided, published in a newspaper of general circulation in the City of Carrollton. 
2.  Adjacent property owners shall be given notice by first-class mail at their last known address as shown on the records of the Carroll County Tax Commissioner, and said notice shall be deemed sufficient when deposited in the U.S. Post Office with sufficient postage thereon to ensure delivery. 
C.  Any party with business before the BDA may appear in person or by agent or represented by an attorney. 
D.  The appeal shall be decided within a reasonable time by a majority vote of the BDA. 
E.  Transcripts, if desired, shall be the responsibility of the affected party. 
F.  The BDA shall keep minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if absent or failing to vote, indicating such fact, and shall keep records of its examinations and other official actions, all of which shall be filed in the office of the City Clerk and shall be public record. 
10.03.05 - Appeals from a Decision of the Board of Development Appeals 
A.  Any person aggrieved by any decisions of the Board of Development Appeals, may take an appeal by petition for certiorari to the Superior Court of Carroll County. 
B.  The appeal must be filed within thirty (30) days after the date of the decision of the Board of Development Appeals. 
C.  Upon failure to file said appeal within thirty (30) days the decision of the Board of Development Appeals shall be final. 
(Res. No. 19-2018, 11-5-18) 
10.04.00 - VIOLATIONS, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 

10.04.01 - Violations 
It shall be a violation of this UDO to: 
A.  Use or develop property without a permit required by this UDO for such use or development; 
B.  Use or develop any property for use that is not permissible in the applicable zoning district; 
C.  Use or develop property in violation of the conditions and limitations for such use or development set forth in this UDO; or 
D.  Construct or move any structure in violation of the applicable provisions of this UDO. 
10.04.02 - Enforcement 
A.  The City Manager shall be responsible for enforcement of the provisions of this UDO. 
B.  If any building or structure is erected, constructed, moved, added to, demolished, structurally altered, maintained or used in violation of this ordinance, any appropriate authority or any property owner whose property would be damaged by such violation may file a written complaint with the City Manager stating fully the causes and basis for the complaint. 
C.  The City Manager shall provide a written notice of an alleged violation of this UDO to the property owner. The written notice shall indicate the nature of the violation and the necessary action to correct or abate the violation. 
D.  The City of Carrollton, or any other owner of real estate who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation. 
10.04.03 - Penalties 
A.  Any person, firm or corporation or other legal entity violating any of the provisions of this UDO shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, and, upon conviction, shall be punished for each offense according to the Charter, codes, and ordinances of the City of Carrollton. 
B.  Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
C.  No further City permits shall be issued or inspections provided until all violations of this UDO are corrected and accepted by the City Manager. 
D.  No Certificate of Occupancy shall be granted unless and until all corrective actions have been completed or a performance bond satisfactory to the City is submitted and approved. 
APPENDIX A. - THE CITY OF CARROLLTON TREE SPECIES LIST 
The City of Carrollton Tree Species List 
The City of Carrollton Tree Species List is intended to support the development code, site planning and design activities for tree conservation and establishment, and tree maintenance planning and decision-making. Trees are arranged alphabetically by the tree's common name with the "genus" listed first. For example, red maple is listed as "Maple, Red" (maple is the genus name). The Latin name is also listed for more definitive species identification. In some cases, the commonly planted variety or cultivar of the species has also been included apart from the species. 
Key to Symbols and Tree Species Characteristic Descriptions 
TREE CHARACTERISTIC DESCRIPTION and ENTRY CHOICES Species Common Name Entered with genus common name first, then species, then cultivar if applicable. For some species an alternate common name is included in parentheses. Latin Name Genus, species, and variety or cultivar; always italicized or underlined. CANOPY AREA FOR DEVELOPMENT CODE Square Feet of Canopy The total area projection of the crown onto the ground in square feet as typically achieved in urban situations with less than optimal growing conditions. Parking Lot Canopy Tree Trees approved for planting in parking lots. 1 = trees that will project significant shade, intercept enough water, substantially filter out pollutants, and survive the conditions within a parking area to the extent they could be considered a "canopy" tree. 2 = the same as 1, except these trees are ONLY appropriate for large, expanded tree islands or landscape strips, swales, or moist soil conditions with plenty of rooting space. Canopy Size Category Very Small - 150 square feet with a 15 foot crown diameter 
The minimum open soil surface area is 25 sq. ft. Small - 400 square feet with a 25 foot crown diameter 
The minimum open soil surface area is 100 sq. ft. Medium - 900 square feet with a 35 foot crown diameter 
The minimum open soil surface area is 225 sq. ft. Large - 1,600 square feet with a 45 foot crown diameter 
The minimum open soil surface area is 400 sq. ft. RECOMMENDED USES Level of Use The level of use that the tree should receive. P = Plant New Trees and Conserve Existing Trees C = Conserve Existing Trees L = For Limited Planting or Conservation Only N = Do Not Plant Large Landscape Areas 
Road Frontages - Street 
Road Frontages - Yard 
Parking Lots 
Plazas and Downtown Settings 
Riparian Zones and Drainage Areas 
Utility Corridors Recommendations on the site situation where the tree may be planted and/or conserved; locations where the tree would adapt well. O = tree to avoid; not suitable 
Blank = may or may not be suitable 
X = good choice 
XX = excellent choice PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS Height Class in Urban Conditions Height class (ground to tip of leader or tallest branch) of a mature tree commonly achieved in urban situations with less than optimal growing conditions. S = Small: 15-25 feet M = Medium: 25-40 feet L = Large: 40 feet and taller Crown Class in Urban Conditions The width of the crown (at its widest point) commonly achieved in urban situations with less than optimal growing conditions. VS = Very Small (150 square feet with a 15 foot crown diameter) S = Small (400 square feet with a 25 foot crown diameter) M = Medium (900 square feet with a 35 foot crown diameter) L = Large (1,600 square feet with a 45 foot crown diameter) Mature Crown Form General shape of the tree crown (leaves and branches) when fully leafed out. Irregular Multi-Stemmed Oval (Columnar) Pyramidal Rounded Spreading Upright (Vase) Typical Range of Mature Tree Height Typical range of height of tree in feet from ground to bud at tip of leader or tallest branch under various conditions. Typical Range of Mature Crown Width Typical range of spread of branches in feet at the widest diameter across the crown under various conditions. Leaf Type Persistence and type of leaf on the tree. Deciduous trees lose their leaves in the fall. DB = Deciduous Broadleaf DC = Deciduous Conifer EB = Evergreen Broadleaf EC = Evergreen Conifer Leaf Texture Relative size and appearance of leaves. F = Fine M = Medium C = Coarse Fall Leaf Color The typical color of the tree's fall foliage. EV = evergreen BR = bronze or brown MA = maroon MU = multi-colored: maroon, red, orange, yellow OR = orange RE = red YE = yellow I = insignificant color change Flower Color For trees with showy flowers, indicates the typical flower color. B = blue L = purple M = multiple colors: white, pink, purple, red, or others P = pink R = red W = white Y = yellow I = insignificant flowers: small with an unremarkable color Flowering Time For trees with showy flowers, the general season of blooming for the species. Wildlife Value Indicates with an "X" if the tree produces flowers (nectar) or fruits that are consumed by insects, birds, or mammals. Excessive Litter Indicates with an "X" if the tree produces large or hazardous leaves, fruit, or other litter. ENVIRONMENTAL CHARACTERISTICS AND TOLERANCES Growth Rate Typical rate of growth under urban conditions. S = Slow: 1/2 to 11/2 feet/year M = Moderate: 11/2 to 21/2 feet/year F = Fast: 21/2 to 3+ feet/year Average Life Span The average life span (useful service life) of the species when growing under average urban conditions. A tree is at the end of its useful service life when its risk of failure becomes unacceptable and cannot be improved or when the tree is no longer an asset due to its appearance or condition. S = Short: less than 25 years useful service life. M = Moderate: 25 to 40 years useful service life. L = Large: 50 years or greater useful service life. Net Effect on Air Quality The net monetary effects in cents attributable to the species on air quality; listed as a benefit (positive) or cost (negative). Includes the species net effect on ozone, sulfur dioxide, nitrogen dioxide, particulate matter (PM10), and carbon monoxide. Soil Moisture The typical soil moisture conditions for the species in its native habitat. H = Hydric: wet and may be occasionally flooded for short periods M = Mesic: moist but moderately well- to well-drained X = Xeric: dry and very well-drained Drought Tolerance Tolerance of the species to infrequent rain, low soil moisture, full sun, and high temperatures. Low = not tolerant to drought conditions Moderate = tolerant to mild drought conditions; moderately tolerant to severe drought conditions High = very tolerant to mild to severe and prolonged drought conditions Preferred Soil pH Relative soil acidity or alkalinity preferred by the species. In many cases, a range of pH preference is given if it was available. In other cases, a general level is given. A pH of 7.0 is neutral, a pH of less than 7.0 is acidic, and a pH of greater than 7.0 is alkaline. ac = acidic (5.0 to 6.0) sl ac = slightly acidic (6.0 to 7.0) nu = neutral (7.0) sl al = sl alkaline (7.0 to 8.0) al = alkaline (8.0 to 8.5) n/a = no information available Light Requirement The amount of sunlight the species prefers or will tolerate. Trees that are typically found in the understory or are characteristic of late forest successional stages prefer shade or at least partial shade, while trees that typically form the overstory or are characteristic of early successional stages prefer full sun. FS = Full Sun PS = Partial Shade SH = Shade Construction Tolerance/Limitations The broad tolerance of the species in its home range to construction damage, and the limitations that constrain a species tolerance to damage. Tolerance P = Poor M = Moderate G = Good Limitations I = physical injury, wood compartmentalization and decay P = pest complications, including chronic and acute attacks S = soil conditions, including aeration and water availability C = limited climatic tolerances, including native range, hardiness, and micro-climate change A = all of the limitations described above Urban Tolerant Tree Based upon other characteristics and tolerances to urban conditions; an "X" indicates the species is suitable for planting under "tough" urban conditions.  
City of Carrollton Tree Species List SPECIES COMMON NAME LATIN NAME CANOPY AREA FOR DEVELOPMENT CODE RECOMMENDED USES PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS ENVIRONMENTAL CHARACTERISTICS AND TOLERANCES Square Feet of Canopy Parking Lot Canopy Tree Canopy Size Category Level of Use Large Landscape Areas Road Frontages - Street Road Frontages - Yard Parking Lots Plazas and Downtown Settings Buffers Riparian Zones and Drainage Areas Utility Corridors Height Class in Urban Conditions Crown Class in Urban Conditions Mature Crown Form Typical Range of Mature Tree Height Typical Range of Mature Crown Width Leaf Type Leaf Texture Fall Leaf Color Flower Color Flowering Time Wildlife Value Excessive Litter Growth Rate Average Life Span Net Effect on Air Quality Soil Moisture Drought Tolerance Preferred Soil pH Light Requirement Construction Tolerance/Limitations Urban Tolerant Tree Alder, Hazel (Tag) Alnus serrulata 150 Very Small P XX x XX x S VS Multi-Stemmed 10-20 10-20 DB M YE I F S n/a W M acidic FS G/ X Ash, Green Fraxinus pennsylvanica 1,600 2 Large P XX x XX x x x L L Rounded 60-100 40-50 DB M MU I X F M 0.090 W H sl ac-sl alk FS G/ Ash, White Fraxinus americana 1,600 2 Large P XX x XX x x x L L Rounded 50-80 30-60 DB M MA I X M M 0.100 M L sl ac-sl alk FS M/IS Baldcypress Taxodium distichum 900 2 Medium P x XX x XX XX L M Pyramidal 50-100 20-50 DC F BR I X M L 0.032 M H ac-sl alk FS G/ X Basswood, American (Linden) Tilia americana 1,600 Large C x x M L Irregular 60-100 35-50 DB C YE Y Summer X F M 0.144 M L ac-alk PS P/A Beech, American Fagus grandifolia 1,600 Large P XX 0 x L L Oval 80-100 50-70 DB M YE I X S L 0.160 M L acidic FS P/A Birch, River Betula nigra 900 2 Medium P XX x XX x XX XX XX 0 M M Pyramidal 50-90 40-60 DB F/M YE I F M 0.117 M L acidic PS G/ Birch, River 'Heritage' Betula nigra 'Heritage' 900 2 Medium P XX x XX x XX XX XX 0 M M Pyramidal 50-90 40-60 DB F/M YE I F M n/a M L acidic PS n/a Blackgum (Tupelo) Nyssa sylvatica 900 2 Medium P XX x XX x x M M Oval 50-100 20-35 DB M RE I X S M -0.053 M M sl ac-sl alk FS G/ X Boxelder Acer negundo 900 Medium C x x 0 L M Rounded 50-75 40-50 DB M YE I X F S 0.036 W M adapt FS G/ Buckeye, Bottlebrush Aesculus parviflora 150 Very Small P x S VS Multi-Stemmed 15-20 10-15 DB M YE W Summer X M S n/a M L ac-adapt SH n/a Buckeye, Painted Aesculus sylvatica 150 Very Small P x x x S VS Rounded 15-25 5-15 DB M YE P/Y Spring X M S n/a M L ac-adapt SH n/a Buckeye, Red Aesculus pavia 150 Very Small P x S VS Rounded 10-15 10-15 DB M YE R Spring X M S n/a M L ac PS M/I Buckthorn, Carolina Rhamnus caroliniana 900 1 Medium P x x x x x M M Oval 30-40 10-30 DB M OR I X M S n/a M M ac-alk FS M/IS Buckthorn, Common Rhamnus cathartica 900 1 Medium L x x S M Rounded 20-25 20-25 DB M YE I X M S n/a M H adapt FS n/a X Buttonbush, Common Cephalanthus occidentalis 150 Very Small P x x x S VS Multi-Stemmed 10-15 10-15 DB M YE W Late Summer X M S n/a W L n/a FS G/I Catalpa, Southern Catalpa bignonioides 900 Medium C x 0 0 x M M Rounded 30-40 30-40 DB C YE W Spring X X F S 0.014 M M sl ac-sl alk FS G/ Cedar, Deodar Cedrus deodara 900 Medium L x L M Pyramidal 40-100 40-100 EC F EV I M L -0.031 D H ac-sl alk FS g Cedar, Japanese Cryptomeria japonica 900 Medium >L x x x L M Pyramidal 40-60 15-20 EC F EV I S M 0.084 M H ac FS n/a X Chastetree (Vitex) Vitex agnus-castus 150 Very Small P x x x x x S VS Multi-Stemmed 15-20 10-20 DB M I B/L/W Summer X M S n/a D H ac-alk FS n/a X Cherry, Black Prunus serotina 900 Medium C x x x L M Oval 50-90 15-50 DB M YE W Early Spring X F M 0.083 M M sl ac FS M/I Cherrylaurel, Carolina Prunus caroliniana 900 Medium C 0 x 0 0 XX 0 M M Oval 20-40 15-25 EB M EV W Spring X M M n/a M H ac-sl alk FS G/ X Cherry, Japanese Flowering Prunus serrulata 400 Small L x x XX XX S S Rounded 20-30 20-30 DB M OR P Spring F S 0.013 M L ac-alk FS n/a Cherry, Yoshino Prunes x yedoensis 400 Small L XX XX XX XX S S Rounded 20-45 20-40 DB M YE P/W Spring X F S n/a M L ac FS n/a Chestnut, American Castanea dentata 1,600 Large N susceptible to chestnut blight L L - - - - Chestnut, Chinese Castanea mollissima 1,600 Large P x x L L Rounded 40-60 40-60 DB M BR W Summer X S L n/a D M ac-sl alk FS n/a X Chinaberry Melia azedarach 900 Medium N weed tree; brittle wood M M Chinquapin, Allegheny Castanea pumila 400 Small C x x S S Rounded 10-25 10-25 DB M BR I X S S n/a D H n/a FS P/P Cottonwood, Eastern Populus deltoides 1,600 2 Large C x x 0 x L L Pyramidal 50-100 20-75 DB C YE I X X F M -0.708 M M sl ac-sl alk FS G/ X Crabapple, Japanese Flowering Malus floribunda 400 Small L x x x XX XX S S Rounded 15-25 15-25 DB M YE P Spring X M S n/a M L sl ac-sl alk FS n/a Crabapple, Southern Malus angustifolia 400 Small C x x x x XX S S Spreading 20-25 10-20 DB M YE P Spring X X M S n/a M L sl ac-sl alk FS M/ICP Crapemyrtle, Common Lagerstroemia indica 150 Very Small P XX XX XX XX XX 0 XX S VS Multi-Stemmed 15-30 10-25 DB F RE M Summer F M 0.004 M H ac-sl alk FS n/a X Cypress, Leyland Cupressocyparis leylandii 400 Small L x 0 x x x 0 M S Pyramidal 50-60 20-30 EC F EV I F M 0.053 M M ac-alk FS g Devil's Walking Stick Aralia spinosa 150 Very Small N large thorns S VS Devilwood Osmanthus americanus 400 Small C x x S S Rounded 15-25 10-15 DB M YE W Spring X M M n/a M M PS M/I Dogwood, Flowering Cornus florida 400 Small P XX XX XX 0 0 XX XX S S Spreading 15-30 15-30 DB M RE W Spring X M M 0.021 M L ac-nu PS M/IP Dogwood, Flowering Pink Cornus florida var. rubra 400 Small P XX XX XX 0 0 XX x S S Spreading 15-30 15-30 DB M RE P Spring X M M n/a M L n/a PS n/a Dogwood, Kousa Cornus kousa 400 Small P x x x x S S Rounded 10-20 10-20 DB M RE W Spring X S S n/a M L ac PS n/a Dogwood, Swamp Cornus stricta 400 Small C x x x S S Rounded 10-25 10-25 DB M RE W Spring X S S n/a W L n/a PS G/I Elm, American Ulmus americana 1,600 Large C x x x L L Upright 50-100 30-70 DB M YE I X M M 0.143 M H sl ac-sl alk FS M/P Elm, Chinese (Lace Bark) Ulmus parvifolia 900 1 Medium L 0 XX XX XX XX 0 0 M M Upright 40-60 30-50 DB F/M YE I F M 0.058 M H sl ac-sl alk FS n/a X Elm, Siberian Ulmus pumila 900 Medium N pest susceptible; weed tree L M Elm, Slippery Ulmus rubra 1,600 Large C x x x x L L Upright 70-80 30-50 DB M YE I X F M 0.086 M M sl ac-sl alk FS M/P Elm, Winged Ulmus alata 1,600 1 Large P XX XX XX XX 0 0 L L Upright 70-80 30-50 DB F YE I M M 0.034 M H sl ac-sl alk FS G/ X Flametree, Chinese (Bougainvillea) Koelreuteria bipinnata 400 1 Small P x M S Rounded 20-40 20-40 DB M YE Y Summer M M n/a M H sl ac-sl alk FS n/a X Fringetree (Grancy Gray Beard) Chionanthus virginicus 150 Very Small P x x x x x S VS Oval 10-30 5-15 DB M/C YE W Spring X M S n/a M L acidic PS M/IS Fringetree, Chinese Chionanthus retusus 150 Very Small P x x x x S VS Rounded 15-25 10-15 DB M/C YE W Spring X S S n/a M M acidic PS n/a Ginkgo (Female) Ginkgo biloba 1,600 Large L x 0 x 0 0 0 M L Pyramidal 50-75 30-60 DB C YE I X S L 0.108 M H sl ac FS g X Ginkgo (Male) Ginkgo biloba 1,600 1 Large P x XX XX x XX 0 M L Pyramidal 50-75 30-60 DB C YE I S L 0.108 M H sl ac FS g X Goldenraintree Koelreuteria paniculata 400 1 Small P x x x x x M S Rounded 20-40 20-40 DB M YE Y Summer M M -0.087 M H sl ac-sl alk FS n/a Hackberry, Common Celtis occidentalis 1,600 Large C x x x L L Spreading 60-90 25-60 DB F/M YE I X M M 0.060 M H sl ac-sl alk FS n/a X Hackberry, Georgia Celtis tenuifolia 1,600 Large C x x x M L Spreading 25-35 25-35 DB F/M YE I X S M n/a D H sl ac-sl alk FS M/IS Hawthorne, Washington Crataegus phaenopyrum 400 Small P x x x x S S Rounded 10-30 5-25 DB F MU W Late Spring X S S 0.017 M M sl ac-sl alk FS g Hemlock, Eastern Tsuga canadensis 1,600 Large N not heat tolerant; out of range L L Hickory, Bitternut Carya cordiformis 1,600 Large C x 0 x 0 0 L L Oval 50-100 50-75 DB M YE I X F L 0.069 M L acidic FS P/S Hickory, Mockernut Carya tomentosa 1,600 Large C x 0 x 0 0 L L Oval 50-100 50-75 DB M/C YE I X X S L 0.059 D H sl ac FS MP/S Hickory, Pignut Carya glabra 1,600 Large C x 0 x 0 0 L L Oval 50-100 50-75 DB M YE I X S L 0.058 M H sl ac FS M/S Hickory, Sand Carya pallida 1,600 Large C x 0 x 0 0 L L Oval 40-90 20-40 DB M YE I X S M n/a D H sl ac FS M/ Hickory, Shagbark Carya ovata 1,600 Large C x 0 x 0 0 L L Oval 70-100 50-75 DB M YE I X S L 0.064 M M sl ac FS P/S Hickory, Southern Shagbark Carya ovata var. australis 1,600 Large C x 0 x 0 0 L L Oval 60-80 40-60 DB M YE I X S L n/a M M sl ac FS n/a Holly, American Ilex opaca 150 Very Small P x XX x XX 0 M VS Pyramidal 20-70 15-25 EB M EV I X S L 0.013 M H acidic PS G/ X Holly, Deciduous (Possumhaw) Ilex decidua 150 Very Small C x x x x S VS Rounded 10-20 10-20 DB F I I X M S n/a W H ac-alk PS G/ Holly, Fosters Ilex x attenuata 'Fosteri' 150 Very Small P x x x x S VS Pyramidal 15-25 10-15 EB F/M EV I X S S n/a M H sl ac FS n/a X Holly, Ornamental Variety Ilex species 150 Very Small L x x x x x S VS Rounded 10-20 10-15 EB M EV I S S n/a M H ac FS n/a Holly, Savannah Ilex x attenuata 'Savannah' 150 Very Small P x x x x x 0 M VS Pyramidal 30-45 10-15 EB M EV I X M S n/a M H ac-sl alk FS n/a Holly, Yaupon Ilex vomitoria 150 Very Small P x x x x x S VS Irregular 10-25 5-10 EB F EV I X S S n/a D H ac-alk FS G/ X Honeylocust Gleditsia triacanthos 900 Medium C x x 0 0 L M Irregular 60-80 30-50 DB F YE I F S 0.009 M H sl ac-sl alk FS G/ X Hophornbeam, American Ostrya virginiana 900 1 Medium P x x x x M M Oval 15-40 10-30 DB F/M YE W Summer X S M 0.032 M H ac-alk SH M/S X Hornbeam, Am. (Ironwood, Blue Beech) Carpinus caroliniana 900 1 Medium P XX XX XX x XX XX XX M M Oval 20-35 15-30 DB F/M YE I X S M 0.009 M M sl ac-sl alk PS M/SC Hornbeam, European Carpinus betulus 900 1 Medium P XX XX XX XX x M M Oval 40-60 35-40 DB F/M YE I X S M 0.037 M H ac-alk PS n/a X Hornbeam, Japanese Carpinus japonica 400 Small L x x x x x M S Oval 20-30 20-30 DB M RE I S M n/a M M adapt PS n/a Katsuratree Cercidiphyllym japonicum 900 1 Medium L x x x M M Spreading 40-60 35-60 DB M YE I F L n/a M L ac-sl alk FS pm Locust, Black Robinia pseudoacacia 900 Medium C x 0 0 x L M Spreading 40-90 20-40 DB F YE W Spring X F M -0.123 M H sl ac-sl alk FS G/P X Magnolia, Cucumber Magnolia acuminata 1,600 Large C x x 0 x L L Upright 60-80 20-60 DB C YE W Spring X F M n/a M L acidic PS M/I Magnolia, Japanese (Saucer) Magnolia x soulangiana 900 Medium L x 0 x M M Upright 20-30 10-30 DB C YE P Late Winter M S 0.009 M L acidic FS n/a Magnolia, Southern Magnolia grandiflora 1,600 Large P XX XX 0 XX 0 L L Pyramidal 80-100 30-50 EB C EV W Late Spring X X M L 0.002 M M acidic FS M/I Magnolia, Southern 'Little Gem' Magnolia grandiflora 'Little Gem' 150 Very Small P x 0 x XX M VS Pyramidal 40-60 20-30 EB C EV W Late Spring X X S M n/a M L acidic FS n/a Magnolia, Star Magnolia stellata 150 Very Small L x x x S VS Multi-Stemmed 15-20 15-20 DB M YE W Late Winter X S S n/a M M acidic PS n/a Magnolia, Sweetbay Magnolia virginiana 900 2 Medium P XX x x XX XX M M Oval 30-60 20-40 EB C EV W Summer X F M n/a W L acidic PS G/ Maple, Amur Acer ginnala 400 Small P x x x S S Rounded 15-25 15-25 DB M RE W Spring M M 0.008 M M adapt FS n/a Maple, Chalk Acer leucoderme 900 1 Medium P x x x x x M M Spreading 20-40 10-30 DB M I I M M n/a M H ac-sl alk FS P/A X Maple, Hedge Acer campestre 900 1 Medium P x x x x M M Rounded 25-35 25-35 DB M YE I S S 0.017 M H ac-alk FS n/a X Maple, Japanese Acer palmatum 400 Small L 0 x 0 x S S Oval 15-25 10-25 DB M RE I S S 0.008 M L sl ac-sl alk PS n/a Maple, Norway Acer platanoides 900 Medium N pest susceptible M M Maple, Red Acer rubrum 900 2 Medium P XX XX XX x XX XX XX 0 M M Rounded 40-90 20-35 DB M RE R Late Winter X F L 0.084 M L sl ac FS G/ Maple, Silver Acer saccharinum 1,600 Large L 0 x 0 0 L L Rounded 50-80 40-60 DB M YE I F S 0.084 M H ac FS P/A Maple, Southern Sugar (Florida Sugar) Acer barbatum 900 1 Medium P XX x XX x XX XX x M M Rounded 40-70 25-60 DB M OR I M M n/a M H ac FS M/IS X Maple, Sugar Acer saccharum 1,600 2 Large P XX XX XX x x 0 L L Oval 60-80 30-50 DB M OR I X M L 0.100 M M sl ac-sl alk PS pm Maple, Sugar 'Green Mountain' Acer saccharum 'Green Mountain' 1,600 2 Large P XX XX XX x 0 L L Oval 60-80 30-50 DB M OR I X F L 0.100 M M sl ac-sl alk PS n/a Maple, Sugar 'Legacy' Acer saccharum 'Legacy' 1,600 2 Large P XX XX XX x 0 L L Oval 60-80 30-50 DB M OR I X F L 0.100 M M sl ac-sl alk PS n/a Maple, Trident Acer buergeranum 400 1 Small P 0 XX XX XX XX XX XX S S Rounded 20-45 20-30 DB M MU I F M n/a M M ac-alk FS n/a X Mimosa Albizia julibrissin 900 Medium N pest susceptible; weed tree M M Mulberry, Red Morus rubra 900 Medium C x 0 0 0 x L M Rounded 40-70 20-50 DB C YE I X X F S 0.099 M H sl ac-sl alk FS G/ Oak, Black Quercus velutina 1,600 2 Large C x x x x L L Rounded 70-90 50-60 DB M RE I X M L -0.253 D H sl ac FS G/ Oak, Cherrybark Quercus falcata var. pagodifolia 1,600 2 Large P x x x x L L Rounded 60-100 30-50 DB M RE I X M L n/a M M ac FS G/ Oak, Chestnut Quercus prinus 1,600 Large P x 0 XX 0 0 0 L L Rounded 50-80 30-60 DB M RE I X X S L -0.342 D H acidic FS GM/S Oak, Diamond Leaf (Laurel) Quercus laurifolia 1,600 Large P x x x L L Rounded 60-80 50-60 DB M YE I X M L n/a M M ac-sl alk FS G/ Oak, English Quercus robur 1,600 Large L x x L L Rounded 40-60 40-60 DB M BR I X S M -0.275 M M sl ac-sl alk FS n/a Oak, Georgia Quercus georgiana 1,600 Large C x x L L Rounded 20-40 10-30 DB M BR I X M M n/a D H ac-alk FS n/a Oak, Laurel Quercus hemisphaerica 1,600 1 Large P x x x x L L Rounded 60-90 50-60 DB M BR I X F M -0.314 D H adapt FS n/a Oak, Laurel 'Darlington' Quercus hemisphaerica 'Darlington' 1,600 1 Large P x XX XX x L L Rounded 60-90 50-60 DB F BR I X F M n/a D H adapt FS n/a Oak, Live Quercus virginiana 1,600 Large N out of range L L Oak, Northern Red Quercus rubra 1,600 2 Large P XX x XX x L L Rounded 60-100 30-60 DB M RE I X F L -0.503 M M ac-sl ac FS GM/SC Oak, Nuttall Quercus nuttalli 1,600 1 Large P x x x x L L Rounded 60-80 35-50 DB M RE I X M L n/a M M ac FS n/a Oak, Oglethorpe Quercus oglethorpensis 1,600 Large C x x x M L Rounded 40-70 30-50 DB M RE I X S M n/a W M n/a FS n/a Oak, Overcup Quercus lyrata 1,600 2 Large P XX XX XX x x L L Rounded 30-45 30-45 DB M BR I X M L -0.159 W M ac-sl alk FS G/ Oak, Pin Quercus palustris 1,600 Large L 0 x x 0 0 0 L L Pyramidal 40-100 20-50 DB M RE I X M M -0.483 M M acidic FS mg Oak, Post Quercus stellata 1,600 Large C x x XX L L Rounded 40-50 35-40 DB M/C BR I X M L -0.327 D H ac-sl alk FS G/ Oak, Sawtooth Quercus acutissima 1,600 Large L 0 0 x 0 0 0 M L Oval 50-60 30-60 DB M YE I X X F M -0.159 M M ac-sl alk FS n/a Oak, Scarlet Quercus coccinea 1,600 2 Large P XX XX XX x L L Rounded 50-80 30-50 DB M RE I X M L -0.592 D H sl ac FS G/ Oak, Shumard Quercus shumardii 1,600 1 Large P XX XX XX XX XX L L Rounded 60-100 30-70 DB M RE I X F L -0.265 M H ac-alk FS G/ Oak, Southern Red Quercus falcata 1,600 2 Large P XX x XX x x L L Rounded 60-100 30-70 DB M OR I X M L -0.576 M H ac FS G/ Oak, Swamp Chestnut Quercus michauxii 1,600 Large P x 0 x 0 0 x L L Oval 70-90 30-60 DB M YE I X M L -0.544 M M n/a FS G/ Oak, Swamp White Quercus bicolor 1,600 Large P x x x x L L Oval 70-90 30-60 DB M YE I X M L -0.457 M M n/a FS G/ Oak, Water Quercus nigra 1,600 Large P XX x XX XX 0 L L Rounded 50-100 30-70 DB M YE I X F M -0.451 M M ac-sl alk FS G/ Oak, White Quercus alba 1,600 Large P XX x XX L L Rounded 60-100 30-80 DB M RE I X S L -0.348 M M acidic FS GM/S Oak, Willow Quercus phellos 1,600 1 Large P XX XX XX XX XX 0 XX 0 L L Rounded 40-100 30-60 DB F/M YE I X F L -0.314 M H acidic FS GM/S X Orange, Osage Maclura pomifera 900 Medium L x 0 x 0 0 0 M M Spreading 30-40 30-40 DB M/C YE I X X F L 0.000 D H sl ac-sl alk FS n/a X Parrotia Parrotia persica 400 Small L x x x S S Rounded 20-40 20-35 DB M OR R Spring F S n/a M M ac-sl alk n/a Pear, Bradford Pyrus calleryana 'Bradford' 900 Medium N defective branch structure M M Pear, Callery Variety Pyrus calleryana 900 Medium N defective branch structure M M Pecan Carya illinoensis 1,600 Large P x 0 x 0 0 0 L L Upright 60-100 30-75 DB M/C YE I X X S M 0.088 M L sl ac-sl alk FS mg Persimmon, Common Diospyros virginiana 900 Medium P x 0 x 0 0 x L M Oval 70-80 40-60 DB M RE I X X M S 0.058 M H ac-alk FS G/P X Pine, Eastern White Pinus strobus 1,600 Large N pest susceptible; not heat tolerant L L Pine, Loblolly Pinus taeda 1,600 Large P XX x x XX XX x 0 L L Pyramidal 80-100 20-40 EC F EV I X F M 0.016 M M acidic FS G/ Pine, Longleaf Pinus palustris 1,600 Large C x x x 0 L L Pyramidal 60-100 20-40 EC F EV I X M L 0.010 M H ac-sl alk FS GM/C Pine, Shortleaf Pinus echinata 1,600 Large P XX x x x x x 0 L L Pyramidal 60-100 20-40 EC F EV I X M L 0.008 M H ac PS GM/P Pine, Slash Pinus elliotii 1,600 Large C x x x 0 L L Pyramidal 60-100 20-50 EC F EV I X F M 0.010 M M ac-sl alk FS G/ Pine, Virginia Pinus virginiana 900 Medium P x x x XX x M M Pyramidal 15-70 10-35 EC F EV I X F S 0.003 M H ac FS G/ X Pistache, Chinese Pistacia chinensis 900 1 Medium P x XX XX x x 0 M M Rounded 60-80 40-50 DB M RE G Spring X M M n/a M H ac-alk FS n/a X Planetree, London Platanus x acerifolia 1,600 2 Large P x XX XX XX L L Irregular 60-100 20-80 DB C YE I F M -0.415 M H sl ac-sl alk FS pg X Plum, Chickasaw Prunus angustifolia 150 Very Small C x 0 x x x S VS Rounded 10-20 10-20 DB F I W Late Winter X M S n/a M H sl ac-sl alk FS M/IS Plum, Purpleleaf Prunus cerasifera 400 Small L x x XX x S S Rounded 10-25 10-25 DB F RE P/W Spring X M S 0.014 M M sl ac-sl alk FS mg Poplar, Lombardy Populus nigra var. italica 900 Medium N not heat tolerant L M Poplar, White Populus alba 900 Medium C x L M Oval 40-100 20-60 DB C YE I F M -0.417 M H ac-alk FS n/a Poplar, Yellow (Tuliptree) Liriodendron tulipifera 1,600 2 Large P XX x x XX 0 L L Oval 80-150 30-60 DB C YE Y Spring X M L 0.171 M L sl ac FS P/IS Redbud, Eastern Cercis canadensis 400 Small P XX XX XX XX XX x XX S S Spreading 25-50 15-25 DB M YE P Spring X F S 0.012 M M ac-sl ac PS M/S Redbud, Eastern White Cercis canadensis var. alba 400 Small P x XX XX XX x x XX S S Spreading 20-30 15-25 DB M YE W Spring X F S n/a M M ac-sl ac PS n/a Redbud, 'Forest Pansy' Cercis canadensis 'Forest Pansy' 400 Small P x XX XX XX x x XX S S Spreading 20-30 15-25 DB M YE P Spring X F S n/a M L ac-sl ac PS n/a Redbud, 'Oklahoma' Cercis reniformis 'Oklahoma' 400 Small P XX XX x XX XX S S Rounded 20-25 15-20 DB M YE P Spring X M S n/a D H ac-sl ac FS n/a X Redbud, 'Texas White' Cercis reniformis 'Texas White' 400 Small P XX XX x XX XX S S Rounded 20-25 15-20 DB M YE W Spring X M S n/a D H ac-sl ac FS n/a Redcedar, Eastern Juniperus virginiana 900 Medium P x XX x XX x 0 M M Pyramidal 40-60 10-20 EC F EV I X S M -0.010 M H ac-nu FS M/IS Redwood, Dawn Metasequoia glyptostroboides 900 Medium P x XX x XX L M Pyramidal 75-100 25-30 DC F BR I F L 0.163 M M n/a FS n/a X Royal Paulownia (Princess-Tree) Paulownia tomentosa 900 Medium L 0 x 0 0 0 M M Irregular 30-50 20-50 DB C YE P Spring X F S 0.022 M M ac-sl alk FS g Sassafras Sassafras albidum 900 Medium C x x x x M M Oval 30-60 20-40 DB M OR Y Spring X M M 0.069 M H sl ac FS G/ Serviceberry, Downy Amelanchier arborea 400 Small P XX XX XX XX XX x x S S Irregular 15-40 10-20 DB M OR W Spring X S M 0.004 M M acidic PS M/IS Silverbell, Carolina Halesia carolina 900 2 Medium P XX x x x x M M Irregular 30-60 20-35 DB M YE W Spring M M n/a M L ac-sl alk PS M/ISC Smoketree, American Cotinus obovatus 150 Very Small L x x S VS Oval 15-30 10-25 DB M MU P Spring M S n/a D H sl ac-sl alk PS n/a X Smoketree, Common Cotinus coggygria 150 Very Small L x x S VS Oval 10-15 10-15 DB M MU P Late Spring M S n/a D H sl ac-sl alk FS n/a X Sourwood Oxydendrum arboreum 900 2 Medium C XX x x M M Spreading 30-60 20-30 DB M RE W Summer M S 0.018 M M ac-sl ac FS P/A Sparkleberry, Tree Vaccinium arboreum 150 Very Small C x x x S VS Irregular 10-20 5-10 DB F RE W Late Spring X S S n/a M M ac-sl alk S M/A Spruce Varieties Picea species 900 Medium N not heat tolerant L M Sugarberry Celtis laevigata 1,600 Large C x x 0 x L L Spreading 60-80 25-60 DB F/M YE I X M M 0.118 M M ac FS G/I Sweetgum Liquidambar styraciflua 1,600 Large C x 0 x 0 0 x L L Oval 60-80 40-60 DB M MU I X X F L -0.488 M L sl ac FS G/ Sweetgum, Fruitless Liquidambar styraciflua 'Rotundiloba' 1,600 2 Large P x x x x L L Oval 50-70 35-45 DB C MU I M M n/a M L ac-sl alk FS n/a Sycamore Platanus occidentalis 1,600 2 Large P x x x x 0 L L Oval 70-100 30-70 DB C BR I X F M -0.789 M M sl ac-sl alk FS G/ Tallowtree, Chinese Sapium sebiferum 900 Medium N invasive M M Tree-of-Heaven (Ailanthus) Ailanthus altissima 900 Medium N brittle wood; weed tree M M Walnut, Black Juglans nigra 1,600 Large C x 0 x 0 0 x L L Rounded 60-70 50-70 DB M YE I X X M L 0.086 M L acidic FS P/IS Waxmyrtle, Southern Myrica cerifera 150 Very Small P x x x 0 x S VS Multi-Stemmed 10-30 10-30 EB F EV I X M S n/a M M ac-alk FS G/ Willow, Black Salix nigra 900 Medium C x 0 0 0 x 0 M M Irregular 30-40 30-40 DB F/M YE I F S -0.177 W L n/a FS G/ Willow, Weeping Salix babylonica 1,600 Large L x 0 x 0 0 0 L L Rounded 30-70 20-70 DB F/M YE I F M -0.096 W M acidic FS mg Winterberry, Common Ilex verticillata 150 Very Small P x x x x x x S VS Multi-Stemmed 5-15 5-10 DB M I I X M S n/a M L ac FS G/ Witchhazel, Common Hamamelis virginiana 400 Small P x x x x x S S Spreading 20-35 20-35 DB M/C YE Y Fall M M -0.009 M M sl ac PS M/IS Yellowwood, American Cladrastis kentukea 900 2 Medium L x x x M M Upright 30-50 40-50 DB M/C YE W Spring M M 0.013 M M n/a PS P/A Zelkova, Japanese Zelkova serrata 1,600 1 Large L x x x 0 0 L L Upright 40-80 30-75 DB M RE I M M 0.084 M H ac-sl alk FS n/a X  
1 = trees that will project significant shade, intercept enough water, substantially filter out pollutants, and survive the conditions within a parking area to the extent they could be considered a "canopy" tree. 
2 = same as 1, except that these trees are ONLY appropriate for large, expanded tree islands or landscape strips, swales, or moist soil conditions with plenty of rooting space. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - 1975 CODE 
This table gives the location within this Code of those sections of the 1975 Code, as updated through December 1980, which are included herein. Sections of the 1975 Code, as supplemented, not listed herein have been omitted as repealed, superseded, obsolete or not of a general and permanent nature. For the location of ordinances adopted subsequent thereto, see the table immediately following this table. 
1975 Code 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-1-4 1-1-1-4 1-5, 1-6 1-7, 1-8 1-7 1-10 2-2 2-221 2-19 2-61 2-38-2-48 2-26-2-36 2-50, 2-51 2-37, 2-38 2-63-2-65 2-81-2-83 2-66 2-39 2-78, 2-79 2-106, 2-107 2-92, 2-93 2-131, 2-132 4-3, 4-4 14-1, 14-2 4-16-4-19 14-26-14-29 5-1-5-115 18-26 7-1 42-1 8-2 54-1 8-19-8-21 54-26-54-28 8-25 54-29 9-1 78-31 9-2-9-14 50-26-50-38 9-27-9-45 78-33-78-51 9-47-9-51 78-52-78-56 11-1-11-3 18-26 13-61 22-151 13-64 22-152 13-95-13-97 22-106-22-108 13-106 22-121 14-1 90-1 14-3 90-2 14-5 90-4 14-6 90-56 14-19 90-57 14-20 30-1 14-21 90-58 14-37 90-3 14-38 90-59 14-54-14-65 50-51-50-62 15-1-15-3 50-76-50-78 16-1 66-1 16-7 66-3 16-9 66-4 16-11 66-5 16-12, 16-13 90-32, 90-33 17-1-17-7 70-26-70-32 17-19-17-26 2-176-2-183 18-1-18-3 2-196-2-198 21-1-21-3 82-1-82-3 21-4 90-31 21-5 66-2 21-17-21-27 82-31-82-41 21-39-21-44 82-66-82-71 22-4 86-1 25-1-25-3 94-1-94-3 25-16-25-18 94-4-94-6  
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE - ORDINANCES 
This table gives the location within this Code of those ordinances adopted since the 1975 Code, as updated through December 1980, which are included herein. Ordinances adopted prior to such date were incorporated into the 1975 Code, as supplemented. Ordinances, resolutions and motions adopted since December 1980, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded or not of a general and permanent nature. 
 Date Section  Section 
this Code  2-16-81(Ord.) 66-6 10-19-81(Mo.) 70-26  2-15-82(Mo.) 22-122, 22-123 11-21-83(Ord.) 1 86-56 2 86-57, 86-58  3- 4-85(Mo.) 42-2  2-16-87(Ord.) I, II 62-1, 62-2 III(A)-III(G) 62-31-62-37 IV(A)-IV(D) 62-101-62-104 V(A.1), V(A.2) 62-4, 62-5 V(A.3) 62-38 V(A.4) 62-7 V(B) 62-8 VI(A)-VI(N) 62-61-62-74 VII(A) 62-75 VII(B) 62-10 VII(C) 62-9 VIII 62-3  1- 4-88(Res.) 62-4, 62-5 62-8 62-33 62-103  9- 1-88(Res.) 1-6 86-31-86-36  7-16-90(Mo.) 86-32  8- 6-90(Ord.) 74-1 401 74-2 501(1)-501(4) 74-51-74-54 502-506 74-55-74-59 601-606 74-26-74-31 607 74-3 701 74-4  7-15-91(Res.) 2-26  9-16-91(Res.) 18-26 12-21-92(Ord.) 1(1-1)-1(1-3) 6-2-6-4 1(2-1)-1(2-11) 6-26-6-36 1(3-1)-1(3-3) 6-56-6-58 1(4-1)-1(4-8) 6-81-6-88 1(4-10), 1(4-11) 6-89, 6-90 1(5-1), 1(5-2) 6-111, 6-112 1(5-4)-1(5-6) 6-121-6-123 1(6-1) 6-136 1(7-1)-1(7-3) 6-156-6-158 1(7-4), 1(7-5) 6-160, 6-161 1(7-6) 6-159 1(7-7) 6-162 1(7-9)-1(7-15) 6-163-6-169 1(8-2)-1(8-4) 6-191-6-193 1(9-1) 6-37 1(9-2) 6-216 1(10-1)-1(10-3) 6-31-6-33 1(11-1) 6-35 1(11-2) 6-5  2- 1-93(Ord.) art. 1, § A-art. 1, § D 58-26-58-29 art. 2 58-30 art. 3, § A-art. 3, § H 58-31-58-38 art. 4, § A-art. 4, § D 58-51-58-54 art. 5, § A-art. 5, § E 58-66-58-70  5- 3-93(Res.) 78-1  6-21-93(1)(Ord.) 10-26-10-40 10-42-10-58  6-21-93(2)(Ord.) 1-2-1-8 82-96-82-102 1-9 82-104 2-1-2-12 82-121-82-132 3-1-3-3 82-151-82-153 4-3 82-103  7-19-93(Res.) 10-41  8- 2-93(Ord.) 30-26 30-39 A-I 30-27-30-35 J(1), J(2) 30-36, 30-37 K 30-38 10- 4-93(Res.) 74-57 10-18-93(Ord.) 6-121 10-19-93(Ord.) 1-10 94-31-94-40  2- 8-94(Res.) 86-2  5-16-94(Ord.) 1-4 46-1  8-19-94(Ord.) 90-60  1- 1-95(Ord.) 1-6 22-81-22-86  9-18-95(Ord.) 82-103 10-16-95(Ord.) II-IV 50-101-50-103 V(A) 50-151 V(B)(1), V(B)(2) 50-152, 50-153 V(C) 50-154 V(D)(1), (2) 50-155 V(D)(3) 50-158 V(D)(4), V(D)(5) 50-156, 50-157 VI(A)-VI(C) 50-121-50-123 VI(D), (E) 50-124 VII(A)-VII(D) 50-125-50-128 VIII(A)-VIII(C) 50-129-50-131 12- 4-95(Ord.) 19-36 22-27 19-37 22-26 19-38, app. A 22-29 19-39 22-28 19-40-19-72 22-30-22-62 12-18-95(Rules) I-VIII 98-31-98-38  2-19-96(1)(Ord.) 22-28  2-19-96(2)(Ord.) 1, 2 78-111, 78-112 3-11 78-81-78-89 12-14 78-113-78-115 15 78-90 16-20 78-116-78-120 22, 23 78-121, 78-122  6- 3-96(Res.) 18-1 10-21-96(Ord.) 18-26  1- 6-97(1)(Ord.) App. B  1- 6-97(2)(Ord.) 1 App. A, § 1102B 2 App. A, § 1112 3 App. A, § 1111 4 App. A, § 1102A  2- 3-97(Ord.) I 90-5 IV 90-5  4- 7-97(Ord.) 1 App. A, § 1102B 2 App. A, § 1102A  5- 5-97(Ord.) App. B, § 600 App. B, § 811  5-19-97(Ord.) 50-101-50-103  8- 4-97(Ord.) App. B, § 1002  8- 4-97(Ord.) 1.1-1.8 94-61-94-68 2.1-2.7 94-81-94-87 3.1-3.4 94-101-94-104 4.1-4.7 94-116-94-122 5.1-5.8 94-138-94-143 6.1-6.13 94-156-94-168 7.1, 7.2 94-181, 94-182 8 94-196 9 94-206 10.1-10.8 94-216-94-223 11.1-11.4 94-236-94-239 12.1-12.3 94-251-94-253 13 94-266 14 94-276 11-17-97(Ord.) 22-36(a), 22-43 12- 1-97(Ord.) 6-121(2) 12-15-97(Ord.) 6-3, 6-34(c) 6-56(a), 6-156, 6-159.5, 6-159.6 12-15-97(Ord.) 18-61-18-67  1- 5-98(Ord.) 1-7 Adopting ordinance, p. xi  6- 1-98(Res.) 90-4  6- 1-98(Ord.)       Added 1801-1810  6-15-98(Res.)       Added 22-109  8-17-98(Ord.)       Added 6-6  9-21-98(Ord.) App. A, §§ 1202, 1210 11-13-98(Amd.) App. B, §§ 301, 506-509, 512, 600, 810, Rnbd 1300-1307, 1400-1404, 1500-1505, 1600-1607       As 1400-1407, 1500-1504, 1600-1605, 1700-1707       Added 1300-1317  2- 1-99(Res.) 6-34(c)(1)  2- 1-99(Amd.)       Added App. B, 
§§ 1900-1908  2-15-99(Res.)       Rpld 70-46-70-65       Added 70-46-70-58  3- 1-99 App. B, § 1001  4- 5-99       Rpld 50-101-50-103, 50-121-50-131, 50-151-50-158       Added 50-101-50-109  4- 5-99 App. B, 
§§ 301.49, 400, 512, 513, 600       Added App. B, 
§§ 501A, 501B  6- 7-99 App. B, 
§§ 301.91, 1505  7-19-99 App. B, § 501.3.c. 10- 4-99(Ord.) 30-1 30-26-30-34       Added 30-35       Rnbd 30-35-30-40       as 30-36-30-41  2- 7-00(Ord.)       Rpld 86-31-86-36       Added 86-31-86-40  7-19-00(Amd.) App. B, § 501.3.c  8- 7-00(Ord.) 50-102 50-103(1)d., g., h., (c)(1), (3)j., (d)(1) 50-106(a), (b) 50-107(b), (d)       Added 50-109(c)(3)6  9-18-00(Ord.)       Rpld 14-1, 14-2 14-26-14-29       Added 14-1-14-15 11- 6-00(Ord.) 6-121(6)  4- 2-01(Amd.)       Added 90-6  6-18-01(Amd.) 94-85       Added 94-88, 94-89  8- 6-01(Amd.)       Added 6-59  1- 7-02(Amd.) 18-26  3- 4-02(Amd.) 30-35  6-17-02(Ord.)       Added 50-121-50-130  7- 1-02(Amd.) 70-46(2)  8- 5-02(Amd.) 6-58  9-16-02(Ord.) I, II, IV-X       Added 86-81-86-89 10- 7-02(Ord.) 6-121(6) 11- 4-02(Amd.) I-IX 50-101-50-109  2-17-03(Amd.) App. A, §§ 302 803, 1101 1107, 1109 1201, 1202       Rnbd 707-710       as 709-712       Added 707, 708 1113, 1114  2-17-03(Amd.) App. B, §§ 301, 600,       Added App. B, § 707 App. B, § 810       Added App. B, § 813 App. B, §§ 1101, 1105 1304, 1502  7- 7-03(Ord.)       Added 6-57(e), (f)  9-15-03(Amd.) 1107  1- 5-04(Ord.) 2 App. A, § 1209 3       Added App. A, § 1019  1- 5-04(Ord.) 2 App. B, § 1101  4- 5-04(Res. 04-10) 2-26  5- 3-04(Ord.) I-X       Rpld 50-101-50-109       Added 50-101-50-110  5- 3-04(Res. 04-11) 6-58       Rpld 6-121-6-123 10- 4-04(Res. 04-13) 74-57 12- 6-04(Amd.)       Rpld 6-1-6-6, 6-26-6-37, 6-56-6-59, 6-81-6-90, 6-111, 6-112, 6-136, 6-156-6-169, 6-191-6-193, 6-216       Added 6-1-6-6, 6-26-6-38, 6-56-6-59, 6-81-6-91, 6-111, 6-112, 6-136, 6-156-6-169, 6-181, 6-191-6-193, 6-216  2- 7-05(Mo.) 6-157  2- 7-05(Ord.) 2 App. B, §§ 514-516  5- 2-05(Res. 04-2005) 6-58  5- 2-05(Res. 05-2005)       Rpld 74-1-74-4, 74-26-74-31, 74-51-74-59       Added 74-1-74-3, 74-21-74-27, 74-31-74-37, 74-41  6- 6-05(Res. 06-2005) 86-31  9- 6-05(Mo.) 86-83 11- 7-05(Res. 12-2005) 6-26  1- 3-06(Res. 02-2006) 50-28-50-31  2- 6-06(Res. 03-2006) App. B, § 902  2- 6-06(Res. 04-2006) 6-57  2- 6-06(Res. 05-2006)       Rpld 14-1-14-15       Added 14-1, 14-2 14-26 14-51-14-64  3- 6-06(Res. 06-2006)       Added 6-39  4-17-06(Res. 08-2006)       Added 66-9  5- 2-06(Res. 09-2006) 70-46  5- 2-06(Res. 10-2006)       Added 74-28  8- 7-06(Amd.)       Rpld App. B, § 1103  9-12-06(Res. 14-2006) 78-34, 78-39 78-49, 78-52 78-56       Added 78-57 12- 4-06(Res. 15-2006) 70-26  9-10-07(Res. 07-2007) 70-26  9-10-07(Res. 09-2007) 1       Rpld 50-101-50-110 2       Rpld 50-121-50-130 3       Rpld 58-26-58-38 58-51-58-54 58-66-58-70 4       Rpld 62-1-62-10 62-31-62-38 62-61-62-75 62-101-62-104 5       Rpld 74-1-74-3 74-21-74-28 74-31-74-37 74-41 6       Rpld App. A, §§ 301, 302 401-405 601-604 701-712 801-804 901-904 1001-1019 1101, 1102A., 1102B. 1103-1114 1201-1210 1301-1306 1401-1403 1501-1505 7       Rpld App. B, §§ [100], [200] 300, 301 400-405 500, 501 501A., 501B. 502-517 600, 601 700-707 800-813 900-905 1000-1002 1100-1105 1200-1210 1300-1317 1400-1407 1500-1505 1600-1605 1700-1707 1801-1810 1900-1908 12- 1-08(Res. 19-2008) 6-26  1- 5-09(Res. 01-2009)       Rpld 22-181-22-186 Exh. A       Added 22-181-22-191  9-14-09(Res. 08-2009) 70-46 12- 2-09(Res. 09-2009) 6-165  4- 5-10(Res. 01-2010) Exh. A 98-31-98-33 98-36  6- 7-10(Res. 02-2010) 66-7  7-12-10(Res. 03-2010)       Added 22-110  7-10-10(Res. 04-2010)       Added 6-170-6-172  9- 7-10(Memo.) 94-85  9-13-10(Res. 05-2010) 6-6  6- 6-11(Res. 04-2011) 6-167  8- 1-11(Res. 07-2011) 14-53(b)  2- 6-12(Res. 12-2011)       Rpld 22-106-22-110       Added 22-106-22-117 12- 5-11(Res. 13-2011)       Dltd 22-121-22-123       Added 22-121-22-130  1-10-12(Res. 03-2012)       Added 70-70-70-90  4- 9-12(Res. 05-2012)       Added 66-10  6- 4-12(Res. 06-2012) 6-6 6-167  6- 4-12(Res. 07-2012) 6-58 11- 5-12(Res. 12-2012) 70-26  1- 7-13(Res. 02-2013)       Added 86-90-86-100  9- 9-13(Res. 05-2013) 6-40 11- 6-13(Res. 08-2013) 6-87  5- 5-14(Res. 06-2014)       Added 22-141-22-143  5- 5-14(Res. 08-2014) 70-77 82-100  7- 7-14(Res. 07-2014)       Added 98-51-98-85  7- 7-14(Res. 10-2014)       Added 66-7(a)(24)  9- 8-14(Res. 09-2014)       Added 90-61  9- 8-14(Res. 11-2014) 50-30 12- 1-14(Res. 13-2014) 2-26(a)  4- 6-15(Res. 01-2015)       Added 90-7  5- 4-15(Res. 03-2015) 2-26(a)  5- 4-15(Res. 04-2015)       Added 50-101-50-104  1- 4-16(Res. 01-2016) 2-26(a)  1- 4-16(Res. 02-2016) 2-30  1- 4-16(Res. 04-2016) 2-32  2- 1-16(Res. 11-2016) Exh. A       Added 50-80-50-90  6- 6-16(Res. 12-2016) Exh. A 6-1(c), (e) 6-2(a)(3) 6-3(a)       Added 6-6(h) 6-26 6-27(a), (c) 6-28(f) 6-56(a)(1), (3) 6-58(a), (d), (j) 6-89(a), (b) 6-156 6-159.5(6)       Added 6-159.8 6-167(a), (c)       Added 6-167(f) 6-169  8- 1-16(Res. 20-2016)       Added ch. 54, art. III, §§ 54-30-54-39 12- 5-16(Res. 28-2016) 30-32, 30-33 30-40  1- 9-17(Res. 01-2017)       Rpld 30-40  2-17-17(Res. 04-2017)       Added ch. 22, art. VII, §§ 22-200-22-206  5- 1-17(Res. 05-2017)       Rpld ch. 70, art. II, §§ 70-26-70-32       Added ch. 70, art. II, §§ 70-26-70-31, art. III, §§ 70-36-70-41       Rnbd ch. 70, arts. III, IV       as ch. 70, arts. IV, V  6- 5-17(Res. 07-2017) 86-31, 86-32 12- 4-17(Res. 13-2017) 22-28(c)(1)  2- 2-18(Res. 03-2018)       Added ch. 38, art. III, 38-40-38-47 11- 5-18(Res. 20-2018) 6-167(e)  1- 7-19(Res. 01-2019-A) 54-35  2- 4-19(Res. 09-2019)       Added 66-11  
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE COMPARATIVE TABLE - RESOLUTIONS 
This table gives the location within the Unified Development Ordinance of those ordinances, resoultions or motions adopted after adoption of the 1975 Code of Ordinances. Ordinances, resolutions or motions adopted after the adoption of the 1975 Code of Ordinances, and not listed herein, have been omitted as repealed, superseded, or not of a general and permanent nature. 
Resolution 
Number  Date Section  Section 
this Code 12-2007 11- 5-07 5.05.03(A) 11-2008  5- 5-08 1 Art. 4, § 4.03.01(A) 2 Art. 5, § 5.03.02(A) 3 Art. 4, § 4.06.03(F) 4       Added Art. 5, § 5.02.01(B)(13) 5       Added Art. 2, § 2.03.03(Tbl) Art. 2, § 2.03.02(E)       Added Art. 2, § 2.04.24 07-2011  8- 1-11       Added Art. 2, 
§ 2.04.02.C 08-2011  8- 1-11 Art. 1, 
§ 1.09.01 Art. 5, 
§ 5.04.02 Art. 5, 
§ 5.04.04 Art. 8, 
§ 8.01.05 09-2011  9-12-11       Rpld Art. 3, 
§§ 3.01.00- 
3.01.22       Added Art. 3, 
§§ 3.01.00- 
3.01.25 11-2012 11- 5-12 Art. 5, 
§ 5.04.04(A)(7)       Added Art. 5, 
§ 5.04.15 01-2013  1- 7-13 Art. 10, 
§ 10.02.02 01-2014  2- 3-14       Rpld Art. 3, 
§§ 3.04.01- 
3.04.10       Added Art. 3, 
§§ 3.04.01- 
3.04.10 03-2014  3-28-14 Art. 2, 
§ 2.04.05 05-2014  5- 5-14 2.01.02 2.03.03 2.04.02 2.04.04 2.04.08 2.04.19 2.04.22 4.01.01 4.01.02 4.07.04 06-2015  7-17-15 Art. 4, 
§ 4.06.02(D)(2), (F)       Added Art. 4, 
§ 4.06.03(G) 07-2015 12-14-15       Added 2.04.20.M 2.04.24 21-2016 11- 7-16 2.01.02 G. 4.02.03 E., F. 22-2016  9-12-16 8.01.02 Res. 06-2017  5- 1-17 1.09.01 2.01.02 G.       Added 2.01.02 H., I.       Rnbd 2.01.02 H.       as 2.01.02 J.       Added 2.02.04       Added 2.02A.00, §§ 2.02A.01, 2.02A.02 2.03.03       Added 2.04.25 Tbl. 4.01.01(H) Tbl. 4.01.02(E) 4.02.01 B.6. 4.02.02 A.3. 4.02.03 E. 4.02.04 A.3.b. Tbl. 4.03.01(A) 5.02.02 E. 01-2018  2- 2-18 Tbl. 4.01.01(H)       Added 4.02.01 C.       Added 4.02.03 B.4.-6. 02-2018  2- 2-18 2.04.16 B. 05-2018  3- 5-18 2.02.01       Added 2.02.05 2.03.03 4.01.01 H. 4.01.02 E.       Added 4.02.05       Added 5.04.04.1 09-2018  6- 4-18       Added 2.02.06 2.03.03 4.01.01 H. 4.01.02 E.       Added 4.02.06       Added 5.04.04.2 12-2018  7-26-18 2.03.03       Added 2.04.27 16-2018 11- 5-18 1.09.01 2.03.03       Added 2.04.27 17-2018 11- 5-18       Added 4.04.01 19-2018 11- 5-18 10.03.05 02-2019  1- 7-19 5.03.02 5.04.02 C. 5.04.05 E. Table 5.04.11(A) 03-2019  1- 7-19 4.02.01 B.6. 04-2019  1- 7-19 4.02.01 B.5. 05-2019  1- 7-19 6.12.00 06-2019  2- 4-19 1.09.01 2.01.02 E.-K. 2.03.03 Table 4.01.01(H) Table 4.01.02(E) Table 4.07.04(C) 07-2019  2- 4-19 2.03.03 Table 2.04.06(C) 2.04.19 C.1. 08-2019  2- 4-19 Table 4.01.01(H) 4.02.03 A. 4.02.04 A. 4.07.04 5.02.02 D. 5.02.03 B.  
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Related Laws and Code, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-1-3 1-7 1-1-7 1-3 1-3-1-1-3-3 1-2 1-4-1 1-2 2-10-105 22-45 3-1-1 et seq. Ch. 6 6-3 3-3-2 6-27, 6-28 3-3-2(a) Ch. 6, Art. II 6-37 3-3-2(b)(1) Ch. 6, Art. II 3-3-21 6-57 3-3-22 6-88 3-3-23 6-86 3-3-26 Ch. 6, Art. VI 3-4-3 Ch. 74 3-4-80 6-216 3-5-36 6-3 3-5-80 6-216 4-8-20 et seq. 14-26 4-11-1 et seq. Ch. 14 5-3-28 50-85 tit. 8, ch. 2 50-80 8-2-3 Ch. 18, Art. III 8-2-20 18-26 8-2-25 Ch. 18, Art. II 18-26 Ch. 54 8-2-26 Ch. 18, Art. II 8-2-26(d) 18-1 8-2-50 Ch. 54 8-2-200 et seq. Ch. 54, Ch. 62 9-11-6 1-2 9-13-1 et seq. Char. § XXXV 12-3-1 et seq. Ch. 70 12-5-280-12-5-293 5-127 12-5-440-12-5-457 5-127 12-8-2 Ch. 94, Art. III 12-8-20 et seq. Ch. 78 78-1 12-8-31.1 Ch. 78 12-8-40.1 Ch. 78 12-8-60 et seq. Ch. 78 15-7-80 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 15-21-73 1-11 15-21-93 1-11 15-21-95 1-11 15-21-100 1-11 15-21-112 1-11 16-1-1 et seq. Ch. 66 16-7-20 et seq. Ch. 30 16-7-40 Ch. 78 16-10-1 et seq. Char., § XXXIII 16-10-23 Ch. 54 16-10-24.1 Ch. 54 16-10-27 Ch. 54 16-11-34 Ch. 90 16-11-43 Ch. 82 16-12-4 Ch. 14 tit. 16, ch. 13, art. 2 50-80 17-6-11 1-11 Ch. 90 17-7-22 Ch. 38, Art. II 17-10-3 1-11 17-10-3(e) 1-11 21-1-1 66-5 21-3-1 et seq. Ch. 42 21-3-30 et seq. Char., § V 21-3-95(b) 42-1 21-3-120 et seq. Char., § X 21-3-125(d) Ch. 42 21-3-163 42-2 21-3-313 Char., § VI 21-3-400 et seq. Char., § VII tit. 25, ch. 2 50-80 25-2-1 et seq. Ch. 54 25-2-13 Ch. 62 25-2-40 Ch. 54 25-3-1 et seq. Ch. 54 25-3-4 Ch. 54 25-4-1 et seq. Ch. 54 25-6-1 et seq. Ch. 54 25-7-1 et seq. Ch. 54 25-10-1 et seq. Ch. 54 31-7-72 Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 2 31-19-1 et seq. Ch. 14 31-21-20 et seq. 30-34 32-1-1 et seq. Ch. 82 32-1-8 Ch. 82 32-4-1 et seq. Ch. 82 32-4-92 Ch. 82 32-4-92(7) et seq. 90-6 32-6-1 et seq. Ch. 82 32-6-51 66-5 Ch. 74 32-6-70 et seq. 66-5 Ch. 74 33-3-5 22-81 33-3-5(1) 22-85 33-8-4 22-84, 22-85 33-8-8 et seq. 22-45 33-8-8.1 Ch. 22, Art. III 22-84 33-8-8.2 Ch. 22, Art. III 22-85 36-1-16 Ch. 78 36-18-3 Ch. 26 36-30-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-30-2 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-30-10, 
36-30-11 Ch. 82 36-31-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-32-1 et seq. Ch. 38, Art. II 36-32-10 Ch. 6, Art. V 36-34-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-34-2 Ch. 2 36-34-2(7) Ch. 94 36-34-3 Ch. 70 Ch. 82 36-34-5 Ch. 94 36-35-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-35-3 2-38 36-35-6(a)(2) Ch. 66 36-37-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 36-37-6 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-38-7 86-100 36-39-1 et seq. Ch. 82 36-40-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 36-60-1 et seq. Ch. 2 36-60-4 Ch. 50, Art. II, 
Div. 2 36-60-13 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-64-1 et seq. Ch. 70 36-69-1 et seq. Ch. 34 36-70-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. IV, 
Div. 4 36-71-2(8) 22-26 36-72-1 et seq. Ch. 30 36-80-2 et seq. Ch. 2 36-81-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 36-81-3 Ch. 2, Art. V 2-221 36-81-4-36-81-6 Ch. 2, Art. V 36-81-7 86-100 36-88-4 86-83 36-88-6 86-82 36-88-7(a)(1) 86-84 38-3-1 et seq. Ch. 34 38-3-70 Ch. 34 40-1-1 90-1 40-5-100- 
40-5-105 6-86 40-6-2-40-6-395 90-1 40-6-7 Ch. 90 40-6-14 Ch. 50, Art. II, 
Div. 3 40-6-76 Ch. 90 40-6-97(b) 22-123 40-6-183 Ch. 90 90-60 40-6-206 Ch. 50, Art. II, 
Div. 2 40-6-247, 
40-6-248 Ch. 54 40-6-249 Ch. 78 40-6-276 Ch. 98, Art. II 40-6-290 et seq. Ch. 90 40-6-371 Ch. 90 90-32 40-6-371(a)(19) Ch. 34 40-6-372- 
40-6-376 90-1 40-8-71(c) Ch. 50, Art. II, 
Div. 3 40-11-1 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II, 
Div. 2 40-13-1 et seq. Ch. 90 40-13-21(a) Ch. 90 41-1-1 et seq. Ch. 50, Art. II 41-2-5 Ch. 50, Art. II 41-2-7 50-82 41-2-7-41-2-17 50-80 50-81 50-82 50-90 41-2-8 50-80 41-2-11 50-83 42-8-35 66-9 43-1-1 et seq. 22-39 43-17-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV 43-17-5 22-122 22-125 43-17-9 22-122 22-125 43-32-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV 22-108 43-38-1 et seq. 6-172 tit. 43, ch. 39A 50-85 43-46-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. IV 44-1-13 Ch. 50, Art. II, 
Div. 2 44-1-14 66-4 44-3-130 et seq. Ch. 30 44-12-130 22-181 45-8-1 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 45-11-1 1-10 45-16-45 30-35 tit. 46, ch. 3 22-45 46-5-2 Ch. 26 46-5-120 et seq. Ch. 46 46-7-15 22-45 46-8-128 90-32 46-8-190 et seq. 90-31 46-8-197 90-32 47-17-60 et seq. 1-11 48-3-9 50-80 tit. 48, ch. 4 50-85 48-4-78 50-85 48-4-80 50-85 48-4-81 50-85 48-5-40 R L Art. § 1 48-5-48.2 86-2 48-5-50.1 R L Art. II, § 4 48-5-355, 
48-5-356 22-45 48-5-358 Ch. 82 48-5-359(a), (c), (f) Char., § XXXI 48-5-359.1 50-85 48-6-93 22-45 Ch. 86, Art. III 86-56 48-6-93(d) 86-57 tit. 48, ch. 8 86-93 48-8-1 86-93 86-97 48-8-3(92) 86-94 48-8-3.2 86-93 86-94 86-97 48-8-3.2(c)(4) 86-94 48-8-30 86-97 48-8-32.2 86-96 48-8-80 et seq. 86-1 48-13-1 et seq. Ch. 22, Art. II 48-13-5- 
48-13-26 22-35 48-13-6 86-91 86-99 48-13-7 22-27, 22-28 48-13-9 22-29 48-13-9(c)(1)-(18) 22-33 43-13-17 22-28 48-13-50 et seq. Ch. 86, Art. II 48-13-51(a)(3) 86-31 48-13-55 22-45 48-13-110 86-92 48-13-112 86-99 48-3-112(a)(3) 86-94 48-13-112(b) 86-94 48-13-112(c) 86-95 86-98 48-13-112(d) 86-94 48-13-115(a)(1) 86-99 48-13-115(b)(2) 86-99 50-5-100 et seq. Ch. 2, Art. V 2-222 50-12-40 et seq. Ch. 70 50-14-1 2-26 50-14-1(d) 2-26, 2-27 50-14-3 2-27  
UNIFIED DEVELOPMENT ORDINANCE STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 
This table shows the location within this Unified Development Ordinance, either in the text or notes following the text, of references to the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
O.C.G.A. 
Section Section  
this Code 1-3-3 3.04.03 1-4-1 1.08.05 5-4-1 3.01.23 tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 2 3.04.04 tit. 12, ch. 5, art. 5, pt. 6 3.04.04 12-2-8 3.03.03 3.04.04 12-4-72 3.04.03 12-5-20 3.04.02 12-5-20 et seq. 1.09.01 12-5-23(a)(5) 3.04.05 12-5-30(f) 1.09.01 3.04.02 3.04.04 12-5-280-12-5-293 1.09.01 12-5-372(4) 7.13.08 12-5-440 et seq. 1.09.01 3.04.02 12-5-440-12-5-457 1.09.01 12-7-1 et seq. 3.04.04 12-7-6 3.04.03 12-7-6(b) 1.09.01 3.04.04 12-7-6(c) 3.04.04 12-7-7(e) 3.04.06 12-7-7(f)(1) 3.04.05 12-7-7.1 3.04.03 12-7-8 3.04.02 12-7-8(a) 1.09.01 3.04.05 3.04.06 12-7-17(9) 3.04.05 12-7-17(10) 3.04.05 12-7-19 1.09.01 3.04.05 12-7-19(b)(1), (4) 3.04.08 12-7-20 3.04.05 3.04.08 36-1-20(a) 3.01.01 36-18-1 3.04.03  
