COVINGTON - MUNICIPAL CODE 
____________ 
A Codification of the General Ordinances of 
Covington, Georgia 
____________ 
Beginning with Supp. No. 18, 
Supplemented by Municipal Code Corporation 
____________ 

> 
PREFACE 
    The Covington, Georgia Municipal Code, originally published by Book Publishing Company, has been kept current by regular supplementation by Matthew Bender & Company, Inc., its successor in interest. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 18, Municipal Code Corporation will be keeping this code current by regular supplementation. 
    During original codification, the ordinances were compiled, edited and indexed by the editorial staff of Book Publishing Company. 
    The code is organized by subject matter under an expandable three-factor decimal numbering system which is designed to facilitate supplementation without disturbing the numbering of existing provisions. Each section number designates, in sequence, the numbers of the title, chapter, and section. Thus, Section 2.12.040 is Section .040, located in Chapter 2.12 of Title 2. In most instances, sections are numbered by tens (.010, .020, .030, etc.), leaving nine vacant positions between original sections to accommodate future provisions. Similarly, chapters and titles are numbered to provide for internal expansion. 
    In parentheses following each section is a legislative history identifying the specific sources for the provisions of that section. This legislative history is complemented by an ordinance disposition table, following the text of the code, listing all ordinances by date passed, their subjects, and where they appear in the codification; and beginning with Supplement No. 18, legislation can be tracked using the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
    A subject-matter index, with complete cross-referencing, locates specific code provisions by individual section numbers. 
    This supplement brings the Code up to date through Ordinance dated May 6, 2019(1). 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
800-262-2633 
HOW TO USE YOUR CODE 
    This code is organized to make the laws of the city as accessible as possible to city officials, city employees and private citizens. Please take a moment to familiarize yourself with some of the important elements of this code. 
Numbering System. 
    The numbering system is the backbone of a Code of Ordinances; Municipal Code Corporation uses a unique and versatile numbering structure that allows for easy expansion and amendment of this code. It is based on three tiers, beginning with title, then chapter, and ending with section. Each part is represented in the code section number. For example, Section 2.04.010 is Section .010, in Chapter 2.04 of Title 2. 
Title. 
    A title is a broad category under which ordinances on a related subject are compiled. This code contains about 15 to 20 titles. For example, the first title is Title 1, General Provisions, which may contain ordinances about the general penalty, code adoption and definitions. The titles in this code are separated by tabbed divider pages for quick reference. Some titles are Reserved for later use. 
Chapter. 
    Chapters deal with more specific subjects, and are often derived from one ordinance. All of the chapters on a related subject are grouped in one title. The chapters are numbered so that new chapters which should logically be placed near certain existing chapters can be added at a later time without renumbering existing material. For example, Chapter 2.06, City Manager, can be added between 2.04, City Council, and Chapter 2.08, City Attorney. 
Section. 
    Each section of the code contains substantive ordinance material. The sections are numbered by "tens" to allow for expansion of the code without renumbering. 
Tables of Contents. 
    There are many tables of contents in this code to assist in locating specific information. At the beginning of the code is the main table of contents listing each title. In addition, each title and chapter has its own table of contents listing the chapters and sections, respectively. 
Ordinance History Note. 
    At the end of each code section, you will find an "ordinance history note," which lists the underlying ordinances for that section. The ordinances are listed by date passed and section (if applicable) and year. (Example: (Ordinance dated 6/16/08, § 1)) 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 18, a secondary ordinance history note will be appended to affected sections. Ordinance history notes will be amended with the most recent ordinance added to the end. These history notes can be cross-referenced to the code comparative table and disposition list appearing at the back of the volume preceding the index. 
Statutory References. 
    The statutory references direct the code user to those portions of the state statutes that are applicable to the laws of the municipality. As the statutes are revised, these references will be updated. 
Cross-Reference Table. 
    When a code is based on an earlier codification, the cross-reference table will help users find older or "prior" code references in the new code. The cross-reference table is located near the end of the code, under the tabbed divider "Tables." This table lists the prior code section in the column labeled "Prior Code Section" and the new code section in the column labeled "Herein." 
    As of Supplement No. 18, this table will no longer be updated. 
Ordinance List and Disposition Table. 
    To find a specific ordinance in the code, turn to the section called "Tables" for the Ordinance List and Disposition Table. This very useful table tells you the status of every ordinance reviewed for inclusion in the code. The table is organized by the date the ordinance passed and provides a brief description and the disposition of the ordinance. If the ordinance is codified, the chapter (or chapters) will be indicated. (Example: (2.04, 6.12, 9.04).) If the ordinance is of a temporary nature or deals with subjects not normally codified, such as budgets, taxes, annexations or rezones, the disposition will be "(Special)." If the ordinance is for some reason omitted from the code, usually at the direction of the municipality, the disposition will be "(Not codified)." Other dispositions sometimes used are "(Tabled)," "(Pending)," "(Number Not Used)" or "(Missing)." 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 18, this table will be replaced with the "Code Comparative Table and Disposition List." 
Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 18, a Code Comparative Table and Disposition List has been added for use in tracking legislative history. Located in the back of this volume, this table is a chronological listing of each ordinance considered for codification. The Code Comparative Table and Disposition List specifies the date the ordinance passed, description of the ordinance and the disposition within the code of each ordinance. By use of the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List, the reader can locate any section of the code as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
Index. 
    If you are not certain where to look for a particular subject in this code, start with the index. This is an alphabetical multi-tier subject index which uses section numbers as the reference, and cross-references where necessary. Look for the main heading of the subject you need, then the appropriate subheadings: 
BUSINESS LICENSE 
See also BUSINESS TAX 
Fee 5.04.030 
Required when 5.04.010 
    The index will be updated as necessary when the code text is amended. 
Instruction Sheet. 
    Each supplement to the new code will be accompanied by an Instruction Sheet. The Instruction Sheet will tell the code user the date of the most recent supplement and the last ordinance contained in that supplement. It will then list the pages that must be pulled from the code and the new pages that must be inserted. Following these instructions carefully will assure that the code is kept accurate and current. Removed pages should be kept for future reference. 
Page Numbers. 
    When originally published, the pages of this code were consecutively numbered. As of Supplement No. 18, when new pages are inserted with amendments, the pages will follow a "Point Numbering System". (Example: 32, 32.1, 32.2, 32.2.1, 32.2.2, 33.) Backs of pages that are blank will be left unnumbered but the number is "reserved" for later use. 
Electronic Submission. 
    In the interests of accuracy and speed, we encourage you to submit your ordinances electronically if at all possible. We can accept most any file format, including Word, WordPerfect or text files. If you have a choice, we prefer Word, any version. You can send files to us as an e-mail attachment, by FTP, on a diskette or CD-ROM. Electronic files enable us not only to get you your code more quickly but also ensure that it is error-free. Our e-mail address is: ords@municode.com . 
For hard copy, send one copy of all ordinances passed to: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
P.O. Box 2235 
Tallahassee, FL 32316 
Customer Service. 
    If you have any questions about this code or our services, please contact Municipal Code Corporation at 1-800-262-2633 or: 
Municipal Code Corporation 
1700 Capital Circle SW 
Tallahassee, FL 32310 
SUPPLEMENT HISTORY TABLE 
    The table below allows users of this Code to quickly and accurately determine what ordinances have been considered for codification in each supplement. Ordinances that are of a general and permanent nature are codified in the Code Book and are considered "Included." Ordinances that are not of a general and permanent nature are not codified in the Code Book and are considered "Omitted." 
    In addition, by adding to this table with each supplement, users of this Code of Ordinances will be able to gain a more complete picture of the Code's historical evolution. 
Date 
Adopted Included/ 
Omitted Supp. No.  5- 7-12 Included 32  5-21-12 Included 32  7- 2-12 Included 32  7- 2-12 Included 32  8- 6-12 Included 32  8- 6-12 Included 32  9-17-12 Included 33 10- 1-12(1) Included 33 10- 1-12(2) Included 33 10- 1-12(3) Included 33 10- 1-12(4) Included 33 10-15-12(1) Included 33 10-15-12(2) Included 33 11-19-12(1) Included 33 11-19-12(2) Included 33 11-19-12(3) Included 33 11-19-12(4) Included 33 11-19-12(5) Included 33 12- 3-12 Included 33  1- 7-13 Included 34  2- 4-13(1) Included 34  2- 4-13(2) Included 34  2-18-13 Included 35  4-15-13 Included 35  4-15-13(1) Included 35  6- 3-13 Included 36  6- 3-13(1) Included 36  6-17-13 Included 36  7- 1-13 Included 36  9- 3-13 Included 37  9-16-13 Included 37  9-16-13(1) Included 37 10-21-13 Included 37 11- 4-13 Included 37  1- 6-14 Included 38  2- 3-14 Included 38  2-17-14 Included 38  4- 7-14 Included 39  4-21-14 Included 39  5-19-14 Included 40  7- 7-14 Included 40  7-15-14 Included 40  8-18-14(1) Included 41  8-18-14(2) Included 41  9-15-14(1) Included 41  9-15-14(2) Included 41  9-15-14(3) Included 41  9-15-14(4) Included 41 10- 6-14(1) Included 41 10-20-14 Included 41 12-15-14(1) Included 42 12-15-14(2) Included 42  1- 5-15 Included 42  3- 2-15 Included 42  3-16-15(1) Included 43  3-16-15(2) Included 43  3-16-15(3) Included 43  4- 6-15(1) Included 43  4- 6-15(2) Included 43  4-20-15(1) Included 43  5- 4-15(1) Included 43  5-18-15(1) Included 44  5-18-15(2) Included 44  9-21-15(1) Included 45  9-21-15(2) Included 45  9-21-15(3) Included 45 10- 5-15(1) Included 45  1-20-16(1) Included 46  2- 2-16(1) Included 46  2- 2-16(2) Included 46  3- 7-16(1) Included 46  6- 1-15(1) Included 47  5- 2-16(1) Included 47  5- 2-16(2) Included 47  5- 2-16(3) Included 47  5- 2-16(4) Included 47  6- 6-16(1) Omitted 48  6- 6-16(2) Included 48  6-20-16(1) Included 48  7- 6-16(1) Included 48  7- 6-16(2) Included 48  8-15-16(1) Included 48 10- 3-16(1) Included 49 12-12-16(1) Included 49 12-12-16(2) Included 49  1- 4-17(1) Included 49  1-18-17(1) Included 50  1-18-17(2) Included 50  1-18-17(3) Included 50  2- 6-17(1) Included 50  2-20-17(1) Included 51  3-20-17(1) Included 51  3-20-17(2) Included 51  4- 3-17(1) Included 51  6- 5-17(1) Included 52  7- 3-17(1) Included 52 10-16-17(1) Included 53 12- 4-17(1) Included 53 12-18-17(1) Included 53  2-19-18(2) Included 53  2-20-18(1) Included 53  3- 5-18(1) Included 54  3- 5-18(2) Included 54  4- 2-18(1) Included 54  4- 2-18(2) Included 54  4- 2-18(3) Included 54  7- 2-18(1) Included 55  7-23-18(1) Included 55  8- 6-18(1) Included 55  8- 6-18(2) Included 55  8- 6-18(3) Included 55  8-20-2018(1) Included 56  9- 4-2018(1) Included 56 10- 1-2018(1) Included 56 11-13-2018(1) Included 56 11-13-2018(2) Included 56 11-13-2018(3) Included 56 12-17-2018(1) Included 57  1-22-2019(1) Included 57  1-22-2019(2) Included 57  4- 1-2019(1) Included 58  4-15-2019(1) Included 58  5- 6-2019(1) Included 58  
CHARTER CITY OF COVINGTON, GEORGIA[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- An ordinance dated May 7, 2012, amended the Charter in its entirety to read as set out herein, consisting of §§ 1-75 inclusive, and derived from §§ 1-84 of Act No. 531, approved January 30, 1962, as amended. The numbering and catchlines of all sections are set out as adopted in said ordinance. 

Article I - INCORPORATION AND POWER 

Sec. 1. - Incorporation, name and style. 
    The City of Covington, in Newton County, Georgia, is hereby incorporated as a city under the name and style of the City of Covington, hereinafter referred to as "the city." 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 2. - Continuation of existing laws, rights and liabilities. 
    All ordinances and resolutions of said city not inconsistent with this Charter shall remain in full force and effect for the city until altered, amended or repealed. All property and property rights held, owned or possessed by the city and all pending suits or claims by or against said city are preserved and unaltered. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 3. - Corporate seal. 
    The city shall have a corporate seal which shall consist of a round metal stamp with the words "City of Covington, Newton County, Georgia, Corporate Seal" so fixed and arranged in such metal stamp that said seal can be impressed on documents and written instruments to which the city is a party. The city clerk shall have custody of the corporate seal and he or, she or their duly authorized assistant shall impress documents therewith when duly authorized. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 4. - Territorial boundaries. 
    The corporate limits of the city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of the city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the director of the Department of Planning and Zoning or such office as designated by the city manager from time to time. Such map shall be designated "Official Map of the corporate limits of the City of Covington, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the director of the Department of Planning and Zoning or city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. The corporate limits of the city shall also include all property contiguous to the corporate limits now or hereinafter annexed into the corporate limits by the city council of the city pursuant to annexation ordinances duly adopted by the city council pursuant to applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 5. - Legal publication. 
    After being read in the city council meeting all ordinances shall be published at least once in a newspaper of general circulation within the city and, in addition, a copy shall be posted on the bulletin board in the lobby of the city hall for a period of at least five (5) days; the newspaper publication of such ordinances may be by title only, but in such event it shall give notice that a complete copy of such ordinances shall be posted as hereinabove provided; no ordinance shall come up for passage prior to the expiration of the aforementioned five-day period; provided however, that the changing of property located within the corporate limits of the City of Covington from one use district to another use district pursuant to the zoning regulations of the City of Covington shall be expressly exempt from the foregoing publication and posting requirements. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 6. - Fire limits. 
    The city council shall by ordinance establish fire limits, enlarge or reduce same as the safety of the city requires. When fire limits are established it shall be lawful to prohibit the erection of any structure therein of any substance except incombustible material, or such as may be allowed by ordinance. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 7. - Real estate. 
    The city shall have power and authority to rent, lease, buy, sell, hold in trust or otherwise hold, dispose of or contract for the use, operation, or management of any or all buildings, parks or other real estate, whether inside or outside of the property limits of the city. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 8. - Conveyance of franchise. 
    No franchise granted by said city may be sold, transferred, leased, or assigned to or used by anyone other than the grantee without adequate compensation and written consent of the city council. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 9. - Specific powers enumerated. 
    The city shall have power and authority to: 
(a)  Buy and sell water, gas, electricity and other public utilities at cost or for a profit, both within and without the territorial boundaries of the city. 
(b)  Adopt ordinances binding on everyone within the city to protect the health, peace, safety, good order, dignity and general welfare of the city and the inhabitants thereof. 
(c)  Exercise complete control over all the public streets, roads, ways, drives, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, crossings, and parks of the city. They shall have full and complete power and authority to open, curb, locate, relocate, replace, work, straighten, abandon, close, drain, pave and repave the same or cause the same to be done. 
(d)  Establish a system of numbering houses in the city, and to assign appropriate street numbers to the various houses on the various streets, alleys, roads, lanes, drives and ways of the city, and to compel said houses to be properly numbered. 
(e)  Control by ordinance the time, manner, terms, conditions, and places of all sewer connections and how much surface or drainage water may flow into such sewers, and the terms and conditions on which it will be permitted, and at what points, and generally all matters relating to the construction, use, control, maintenance, repair, replacement, improvement and removal of sewers and sewer connections, and the cutting and replacing of pavement and other adjacent structures shall at all times be under the control and regulation of the city council in its fair and legal discretion. 
(f)  Control by ordinance the construction, maintenance and removal and replacement of all city culverts, pipes, sewers, drains, private drains, water closets, urinals, privies, toilets, and the like, and provide for their location, structure, size and use, and pass such ordinances concerning them and their use, in all particulars, as may be deemed best for the health, comfort and general welfare of the inhabitants of the city. The city council shall have power and authority to prescribe by ordinance the kind of water closets, urinals, privies and plumbing which shall be used in the corporate limits, and to condemn and compel the disuse of same when they do not conform to such requirements, or when they shall become and are declared a nuisance by a court having jurisdiction. The city council shall also have power and authority to compel the owner or owners of property within the city to connect water closets, sinks, commodes and urinals on their property with the sewers and sanitary system of said city when such property is located within a reasonable distance of such sewer, and under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by ordinance. If any property owner shall fail or refuse to make connections as required by city ordinance or resolution, such owner shall be punished as provided by ordinance. 
(g)  Contract with other municipalities and political subdivisions, and to cooperate with other municipalities and political subdivisions, in acquiring, establishing, constructing, building, maintaining and/or operating such garbage disposal, water, sewage, electric and/or gas plants, lines and/or facilities, and streets, sidewalks and parks within and/or without the limit of the city, as well as library and other institutions, utilities and/or services, in addition to existing plants, systems, buildings, facilities, lines and services as the city council may at any time deem for the best interest of said city. 
(h)  Levy, assess and collect taxes to raise sufficient revenue to pay for the improvements, services, equipment and/or facilities provided for in any contract or agreement to which the city is or may become a party. 
(i)  Issue and sell bonds for the purpose of paying bonds of the city and interest thereon, and for any public or other purpose allowed by the Constitution and laws of this state, and to issue and sell revenue anticipation certificates as now or hereafter allowed by law. 
(j)  Provide by ordinance for reporting all property in the city subject to taxation by the city, whether such property be realty or personality, tangible or intangible, and to require all persons owning such property to file a written statement and description of such property with the fair market value thereof under oath. 
(k)  Prescribe by ordinance a penalty for failure to make such return or report within the time prescribed by ordinance; provided such penalty shall not exceed the sum of double the amount of tax levied against such person or taxpayer failing to make or file such return. Such penalty shall be a lien upon property of the defaulter and shall be collected in the same manner as the taxes of the city. 
(l)  Assess the costs of sewers (storm sewers and sanitary sewers) against abutting lots of real estate and the owners thereof on each side of a street in which such sewers are laid or constructed, when laid or constructed in a street right-of-way, and the owners of such abutting real estate shall have the right to have their drains, water closets, commodes, urinals, sinks, and toilets connected with such sewers at their cost under such rules and regulations, as the city council may prescribe by ordinance. (Ga. L. 1966, H.B. No. 73, § 2) 
(m)  Control and/or prohibit the manufacture and/or sale of all alcoholic beverages, and to tax, license, regulate and control hotels, boardinghouses, apartments, restaurants, theaters, dance halls, athletic and sporting events and places, and all other entertainment activities and places, regulate the operation of all vehicles used for pleasure or business, and garages; mills, factories, ginneries, gas and water companies; regulate the use of its streets for all purposes, and prevent their use for business, or regulate business use by taxation and otherwise, including the right to impose a reasonable license tax for the use of streets for business purposes; to prevent stock and poultry from running at large, and to seize and impound any domestic or wild animal or fowl found at large within the city limits; and to provide by proper ordinance for the redemption or sale of the same; and to adopt such ordinances as may be considered necessary to carry out the provisions of this Act. 
(n)  Grant franchises, easements and rights-of-way over, in, under and on public streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks and other property of said city on such terms and conditions and for such lengths of time as it may fix; provided, franchises shall not be granted without fair and adequate compensation provided for in the franchise ordinance; and provided further, that no such franchise shall be granted until notice has been published at least one time one week preceding the week in which the city council meets to consider such application, stating the nature of the franchise, the streets, lanes, alleys, sidewalks, parks or other property on or through which it is desired, the terms of such grant and the time at which the city council will act upon such application. 
(o)  Employ or cause to be employed a certified public accountant to examine and audit all books of account and pertinent records of all officers, employees, and agencies of said city relative to the financial affairs of the city whenever and as often as the city council shall consider proper, and shall fix his compensation. The compensation of such accountant may be fixed on an hourly or other basis before, after, or at the time of his employment. It shall require at least one examination and report every year. 
(p)  Pave or otherwise improve the whole or any part of any street, sidewalk or alley of said city, without giving any railroad company, or other property holder or occupant on the street the option to pave or otherwise improve the same or any part thereof by themselves or by contract. 
(q)  Provide for the abatement of nuisances. The municipal court of the city shall have jurisdiction of all nuisance abatement proceedings in the city. 
(r)  Remove any building, stall, booth, tent, awning, steps, gate, fence, post, wire, stump, tree, structure, pole, other obstruction or nuisance in a public street, sidewalk or way or so near thereto as to constitute a defect or render the city liable in damages for not removing it, or cause the aforesaid to be removed at the owner's expense if the owner shall fail or refuse to remove the same within such reasonable time as may be fixed by order of the city municipal court judge, and execution shall issue against said owner for the expense thereof as in case of executions for unpaid taxes, and said owner shall also be subject to punishment for maintaining a nuisance. 
(s)  Regulate, lay out, open, relocate, straighten, improve, grade, and control old and new streets, lanes, alleys, street curbing, street crossing and sidewalks, and no person or corporation shall at any time hereafter lay out, locate, relocate, open, extend, or close any street, lane, road, alley, way, sidewalk, park or square contrary to the plan of the city nor without the consent of the city council and any application for this purpose shall, with an appropriate plat, first be filed with the city engineer or such officer as the city council may designate by ordinance, and notice thereof shall be given the public or parties in interest by publication of notice as required by law and the ordinances of the city. If such application is granted, the owner shall relinquish all rights and title to the area involved and the same shall pass to and become vested in the city, and all management and control over the same shall pass unequivocally to the city. 
(t)  Impose and collect a license and a tax on dogs within the city in such a manner and mode as it may deem best. 
(u)  License practitioners of occupations not otherwise regulated by this state and to require examinations as conditions precedent to granting of such license; create examining boards and prescribe by ordinance the minimum requirements in such examinations, and to appoint the members of such boards. 
(v)  Condemn or cause worn out sewers (storm sewers and sanitary sewers), street pavement, street curbing or sidewalks within the city to be condemned, reconstructed, replaced or repaired, as the case may require, at the expense of owners of lots of real estate abutting thereon (or against the real estate and owner or owners thereof for whose sole benefit such improvement exists in case of sewers laid solely for the benefit of persons other than owners of real estate abutting thereon) and assess the cost thereof (or in case of street paving such part of the costs as the city council shall deem just and proper) against such abutting lots of real estate and the owners thereof (or cases of sewers constructed solely for the benefit of a person or persons other than abutting lot owners, against such real estate and the owners thereof for the sole benefit of which such sewer exists), as in the case of original construction of the same kind of improvements, and subject to the provisions of section 42 hereof, below. 
(w)  Provide, by ordinance, a civil service system for city officers and employees and/or provide by ordinance for a system of retirement for city officers and employees, which retirement system may be that of old age and survivor's insurance. 
(x)  Regulate the subdivision of land in the city by requiring and regulating the preparation and presentation of preliminary plats, by establishing minimum improvements to be made or to be guaranteed to be made by the subdivider by setting forth the procedure to be followed by the planning commission in applying rules, regulations, and standards, and by providing for penalties for violation of aforesaid rules, regulations and standards. 
(y)  Other Powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary or desirable to carry into execution all powers granted in this charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated herein; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the Constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 10. - Regulating vehicular traffic; parking facilities. 
    The city shall have the power and authority to regulate vehicular traffic and relieve congestion of the same by use of devices commonly known as parking meters, which are coin-operated devices to measure the time a vehicle occupies a designated parking area on a public street, and to use the funds derived from such devices for such purposes as the city council may deem advisable. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 11. - Utilities-Furnishing services and facilities. 
    The city shall have the power and authority to operate, enlarge, expand, extend, improve, construct, lay, maintain, remove, repair and replace water, electric and natural gas lines, sewer and sanitary systems and facilities, within and without the city, and to charge, contract for and receive compensation for such service, and on such terms and conditions as may be prescribed by the city ordinance, and for such purposes the city shall have the power of eminent domain which it is hereby authorized to exercise to acquire by condemnation any lands, easements, rights-of-way and other properties or rights therein deemed needful or convenient for any purposes when necessary to acquire the same; provided, however, nothing contained herein shall prohibit the city from passing utility rate ordinances incidental to the operation of the city's electric and natural gas systems that automatically adjust the city's billings for natural gas and/or electricity sales for fluctuations in product costs charged to the city by its electricity and/or natural gas suppliers. The city is expressly authorized to establish from time to time, by ordinance, a procedure for imposing a product cost adjustment that will automatically adjust the city's billings for natural gas and/or electricity sales for fluctuations in the product cost charged to the city by its electricity and/or natural gas suppliers. Former Sec. 16. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 12. - Owning, maintaining and operating cable television system. 
    The city is hereby authorized to purchase, construct, operate and maintain a system for reception, transmission and distribution of television impulses and television energy (including audio signals and video images by means of electrical impulses) within the city limits as they now exist or shall hereafter exist and throughout the current unincorporated areas of Newton County and in the other municipalities located in Newton County but subject, however, to the conditions hereinafter specified; and in connection therewith, the city is authorized to acquire by contract or purchase all equipment, towers, receivers, lines, related apparatus, all rights-of-way, easements and other property necessary to carry out these purposes including the hiring of engineering services and other consulting services incidental thereto and including the right to use all existing city rights-of-way easements and other property. The city is further authorized and empowered to furnish and supply the distribution of television impulses and television energy as aforesaid to any person, firm or corporation at the point of reception thereof by the city or at any point where the city may hereafter have means of distribution thereof. The city is further authorized and empowered to fix reasonable rules and regulations under which the same may be furnished and distributed and likewise to fix the terms upon which the same are to be furnished and the manner of payment there for; and the charges to be paid therefore will be the rate of charges to be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, as a condition precedent to the city's construction and operation of what is commonly called a cable television system in accordance with the foregoing provisions in the unincorporated areas of Newton County or within any other municipality located in Newton County, the city must have previously entered into a franchise agreement with the governing body of Newton County, Georgia (for the unincorporated areas of Newton County) and with the governing bodies of the respective municipalities in which such services are sought to be provided by the City of Covington. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the City of Covington from granting franchises in accordance with Charter Section 9(n) for the private operation of such a system of reception, transmission, and distribution of television impulses and television energy aforesaid within the corporate limits of the city. Former Sec. 16A. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 13. - Telecommunications. 
    The City shall have the power and authority to acquire, own, hold, lease, sell, resell, build, maintain, operate and contract with respect to a telecommunications system network in order to provide telecommunications services and similar other services, to establish and charge rates, fees, tolls and charges for the services, facilities or commodities furnished or made available by such undertaking; to interconnect its system or services or both with the systems or services of consumers and other providers, to use telecommunications to respond to community needs, encourage the development of information-based organizations in the city, to finance from time to time any such telecommunications systems through the issuance of revenue bonds as then permitted by the Constitution and laws of the State of Georgia; and to make any contract with respect to and furnish the services of any such systems to consumers within or outside the corporate limits of the city. Former Sec. 16B. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 14. - Owning, maintaining and operating electric plants, waterworks and gas system. 
    The city shall have the right, power and authority to own, maintain and operate a system of waterworks, a natural gas system, and an electric plant and distribution system and to purchase, generate and sell electric energy and to sell water and gas and to fix rates for all the aforementioned and to develop, maintain and operate parks and recreation facilities. Former Sec. 17. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 15. - Contracting to furnish. 
    The city council shall have power and authority to make or cause to be made contracts to furnish customers with electric energy, lights, water and gas within and without the territorial limits of the city when this can be done without adversely affecting the inhabitants of the city. Former Sec. 18. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 16. - Jurisdiction. 
    The city shall have complete power, authority and jurisdiction for all purposes over all of the lands on, over, or through which trunk or intercepting sewer, gas, water and/or electric transmission lines and/or facilities have heretofore been or may hereafter be constructed and maintained by the city or over which an easement is secured by the city and which it is the duty of the city to inspect, improve and maintain within or without the limits of the city; said power, authority and jurisdiction shall extend the full distance of said lines or facilities and a specified number of feet, to be determined by the city council, in all directions from same as well as over the land purchased by said city for the location and maintenance of such facilities, and all such lands are hereby incorporated in and made a part of said city, except such as is located within the corporate limits of another municipality. Former Sec. 19. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 17. - Lien for charges. 
    For electricity, water and gas furnished, and for all storm water, sewerage and sanitary utility services rendered, the city shall have a lien against all property of the consumer. Such lien shall run from the date the contract is made or the services commenced, up to and until all charges therefore shall have been paid in full. Executions issued on any such liens shall be issued and enforced as provided by section 59 hereof, above. Former Sec. 20. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 18. - Sale of facilities. 
    No sale, conveyance or disposition by the city of its water, electric or gas properties and franchises, or of its sewer system, or of any interests therein shall ever be of any force or effect unless or until approved by the duly qualified voters of the city voting at an election specially called for this purpose; a notice of which election shall be published once a week in the official newspaper of the city for four weeks next preceding such election, which notice shall state the name of the proposed buyer, the terms and conditions of the proposed sale, the date of the election, the location of the voting precincts, and such other information as the city council may order. Former Sec. 21. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Article II - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE 

Sec. 19. - Form of government. 
    The legislative authority of the government of said city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this charter, shall be vested in a city council composed of a mayor and six (6) council members who shall hold their respective offices in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Chapter 2 of Title 21, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. For the purpose of electing council members, the City of Covington is hereby divided into two (2) wards, the West Ward and the East Ward. The division line between the two (2) wards shall be as follows: Commence at the point of intersection of the northwestern boundary of the corporate limits of the City of Covington and the center line of the Georgia Railroad right-of-way and run thence in a southeasterly direction along the center line of the said Georgia Railroad right-of-way to the point of intersection thereof with the center line of Emory Street; running thence in a southerly direction along the center line of Emory Street to the point of intersection thereof with the center line of Clark Street; running thence in an easterly direction along the center line of Clark Street to the intersection thereof with the center line of Monticello Street; thence in a southerly and southeasterly direction along the center line of Monticello Street which is also known as Georgia Highway Number 36 and/or the Jackson Highway, to the point of intersection thereof with the southern boundary of the corporate limits of the City of Covington. A map indicating the location of the division line in relation to city streets shall be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk or such office as designated by the city manager from time to time. Such map shall be designated "Official Ward Map of the City of Covington, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as with the original map or description. The West Ward shall be those portions of the City of Covington lying southerly and westerly of the aforedescribed division line. The East Ward shall be those portions of the City of Covington lying northerly and easterly of the aforedescribed division line. The six (6) council seats shall be designated by six (6) numbered council posts as follows: Post 1 West, Post 2 West, Post 3 West, Post 1 East, Post 2 East and Post 3 East. The council members for Council Post 1 West, Post 2 West, and Post 3 West shall be elected by the qualified electors of the West Ward only; the council members for Council Post 1 East, Post 2 East, and Post 3 East shall be elected by the qualified electors of the East Ward only; and the mayor shall be elected at large by all of the qualified electors of the City of Covington. Former Sec. 22. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 20. - Vacancy in office of mayor or council. 
    In the event there shall occur a vacancy in the office of mayor or any council post caused by death, resignation or removal of the incumbent, the city council shall immediately call a special election to fill such vacancy, to be held in accordance with the special election provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Chapter 2 of Title 21, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Former Sec. 23. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 21. - Qualifications of mayor and council. 
(a)  No person shall be eligible to qualify or hold the office of mayor or council member of the City of Covington unless he shall have the following qualifications: 
(1)  He shall be at least twenty-one (21) years of age on the day the term of office for which he is a candidate begins. 
(2)  A candidate shall have been a resident of the City of Covington for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding the election in which he is to be a candidate and, further, candidates for council posts 1 West, 2 West, and 3 West must be residents of the city's West Ward as of the date of qualification for election and candidates for council posts 1 East, 2 East, and 3 East must be residents of the city's East Ward as of the date of qualification for election. 
(3)  He shall not have been convicted of any felony. 
(4)  He shall be qualified to vote in the municipal elections of the city. 
(5)  A candidate shall not be indebted for any tax to the city which is more than twelve (12) months past due; provided, however, if the reason for the nonpayment of city taxes is the poverty of the candidate and the candidate executes an affidavit to that effect and, further, the candidate executes the pauper's affidavit provided for in the Georgia Election Code, Chapter 2 of Title 21, Official Code of Georgia Annotated in lieu of paying the qualifying fee specified in said section, then in such event such indebtedness to the city shall not disqualify a candidate from seeking office. 
(6)  He shall qualify as a candidate by filing his name with the city clerk and by giving to the city clerk, in writing, the oath prescribed in subsection (b) of this section. 
(b)  Any person desiring to qualify as a candidate for mayor or council member shall take the following written oath setting forth the information called for therein, which oath shall be kept on file in the city clerk's office: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I am twenty-one (21) years of age, or will be on the date of taking office; that I have resided in the City of Covington for a period of not less than one year immediately preceding the election in which I am a candidate; that I am a resident of the West Ward/East Ward (strike through the incorrect ward); that I have never been convicted of a felony; that I am a qualified voter for municipal elections in the City of Covington; and that (1) I am not indebted to the City of Covington for any tax which is more than twelve (12) months past due, or (2) the reason for my indebtedness to the City of Covington for any tax which is more than twelve (12) months past due is my poverty and financial inability to pay such taxes." 
(c)  Continued residency in the City of Covington shall be a condition of the mayor and each council member remaining qualified to continue in their respective offices; and upon any such elected official removing his residency from the City of Covington, the council shall declare the office of each such elected official who has removed his residency from the City of Covington as vacated. Continued residency in the ward represented by council members holding council posts 1 West, 2 West, 3 West, 1 East, 2 East, and 3 East shall be a condition of each such council member remaining qualified to continue in his respective office; and upon any such council member moving from his respective ward, the city council shall declare that council member's council post vacated. Any vacancy in council member seats or in the office of mayor under the foregoing provisions shall be filled in accordance with the provisions of section 21 of this Charter. Former Sec. 23. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 22. - Oath of office. 
    Before January 1 of the year next following the election of the mayor and/or any council members, and before they enter upon the discharge of their official duties, the mayor shall, before some officer authorized to administer oaths in the State of Georgia, take and subscribe the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear or affirm that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties of the mayor of the City of Covington during my continuance of office, so help me God," and the mayor, after being so qualified, shall have full power and authority to administer a like oath to each of the council members. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12; Ord. dated 5/18/15(2), § 1) 
Sec. 23. - Mayor's duties and powers. 
    The mayor shall have the same power as a justice of the peace to witness and attest papers, to administer oaths, The mayor shall: (a) preside at all meetings of the city council; (b) be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes, and be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; (c) have the power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; (d) sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing and not otherwise capable of execution by other agents of the City; (e) fulfill such other executive and administrative duties as the city council shall by ordinance establish. The mayor shall be vested with the power of veto and it shall be the mayor's right to veto any and all ordinances, resolutions, permits, and privileges passed on or granted by the city council if the mayor sees fit to do so. Such veto shall be exercised by the Mayor either in a meeting of the city council or in writing; provided notice of such veto is received by the City clerk within seven days of the action of the city council; and the mayor's veto may be overridden by a vote of at least a majority of the members of the city council then in office. The mayor's veto may be overridden by a vote of at least a majority of the members of the city council then in office provided such vote is taken at the next meeting of the city council following notice of such veto. Former Sec. 26. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 24. - Mayor pro tem. 
    By a majority vote, the city council shall elect a council member to serve as mayor pro tem. The mayor pro tem shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor during the mayor's physical or mental disability, suspension from office or absence. Any such disability or absence shall be declared by a majority vote of the city council. The mayor pro tern shall sign all contracts and ordinances in which the mayor has a disqualifying financial interest as provided in Section 36- 30-6 of the Code of Georgia as amended. When acting as mayor, the mayor pro tem shall continue to vote as a council member and shall have no veto powers. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 25. - Salaries. 
    The mayor of the City of Covington shall receive an annual salary of eighteen thousand dollars ($18,000.00) per annum payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of the City of Covington. Council members shall receive an annual salary of nine thousand dollars ($9,000.00) payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of the City of Covington. Any municipal court judge of the City of Covington shall receive an annual salary payable in equal monthly installments from the funds of the City of Covington and such expense allowances as may be approved by the city council from time to time. Former Sec. 27. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 26. - Personal liability of mayor and council members; method of relieving. 
    As provided by section 68 hereof, below, the city budget shall not include, in its anticipated revenue for the year, a sum in excess of the normal revenue collections by the city from all sources during the preceding year. If this provision should be violated in the adoption of any budget, the mayor and councilmen shall be personally liable for any deficiency resulting there from, except: any member of the council may relieve himself of such personal liability by voting against any budget violating such limitation, and the mayor may relieve himself of such personal liability by vetoing any such budget before passage. Former Sec. 28. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 27. - Officers; election; bonds; duties; oaths. 
    The mayor and council members at their first meeting in January of each year, or as soon thereafter as practicable, shall elect the following officers, a majority of the votes cast being in the every case sufficient to elect, to wit: one or more municipal court judges, and a city attorney, and the city council shall by ordinance prescribe the duties, fix any bonds to be required, and fix the compensation of said officers; and each of said officers, before entering upon the discharge of his duties, shall give such bond as may be required of him and take and subscribe any oath required of him for the faithful discharge of the duties of the office to which he was been this elected. At such meeting, the mayor and council members shall also so elect a city physician or group of physicians. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12; Ord. dated 8/20/18, § 1) 
Sec. 28. - City manager. 
    The city council shall select and appoint a city manager who shall be the chief executive and administrative officer of the city and whose salary shall be fixed by council and whose term of office shall be indefinite and whose duties, powers and qualifications shall be as hereafter provided. The mayor and council members shall not be eligible for the office of city manager for the period of two years from the time of the expiration of their term of office, nor shall they be eligible for employment in any capacity by the city within such period. 
    It shall be the duty of the city manager to execute and administer the policies of the city government fixed by the city council and the city manager shall be vested with sole authority over all administrative matters of the city, and he shall be accountable only to the city council. The city manager first appointed under the provisions of this Charter and all persons subsequently appointed to such offices shall be selected by the council on the basis of ability, experience, training, and character, with special reference to his actual experience in, or his knowledge of, acknowledged practice in respect to the duties of his office. During his tenure of office he shall devote his entire time to the duties of his office and shall not engage in any other business or profession. Former Sec. 30. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 29. - Administrative duties and powers. 
    The city manager shall be responsible to the city council for the administration of all city affairs placed in the city manager's charge by or under this charter. As the chief executive and administrative officer, the city manager shall: 
(a)  appoint and, when the city manager deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers the city manager appoints, except any city municipal court judge, city physician, city attorney, any city board of tax assessors or as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this charter. The city manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to the city manager's direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office or agency; 
(b)  direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this charter or by law; 
(c)  do all the buying for the different departments of the City of Covington; said department heads shall make written requisition for the needs of their department and present the same to the city manager; the city manager shall then make such purchases not exceeding amounts prescribed by ordinance and for which funds are provided in the budget; perform such other duties and exercise such other authority as city council may fix by resolution or ordinance. 
(d)  attend all city council meetings except for closed meetings held for the purposes of deliberating on the appointment, discipline or removal of the city manager and have the right to take part in discussion but not vote; 
(e)  act as chief conservator of the peace within the city and see that all laws, provisions of this charter, and acts of the city council, subject to enforcement by the city manager or by officers subject to the city manager's direction and supervision, are faithfully executed; 
(f)  prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the city council; 
(g)  submit to the city council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year; 
(h)  make such other reports as the city council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices and agencies subject to the city manager's direction and supervision; 
(i)  keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city, and make such recommendations to the city council concerning the affairs of the city as the city manager deems desirable; and 
(j)  perform other such duties as are specified in this charter or as may be required by the city. Neither the city council nor any of its committees shall direct or request the appointment of any person to, or his removal from office by the city manager, or in any manner take part in the administrative service of the city. Except for the purpose of inquiry, the city council and its members shall deal with the administrative service solely through the city manager, and neither the city council nor any member thereof shall give orders to any subordinate of the city manager, either publicly or privately. All formal contracts on behalf of the city, the stated consideration for which is in excess of twenty thousand dollars, shall be executed by the mayor and attested by the city clerk after an approving resolution of the city council. Former Sec. 30-B. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 30. - Compensation of employees. 
    The salary or compensation of heads of departments and other administrative employees shall be fixed by the city manager to provide uniform compensation for like services except that an increase in compensation of any department head or employee may be granted upon the basis of seniority and efficiency. Former Sec. 30-C. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 31. - Removal of city manager. 
    While city council has the right to remove the city manager at any time and unless otherwise provided for by employment contract, at least thirty days before such removal becomes effective, the city manager shall be furnished with a formal statement in the form of a resolution passed by a majority vote of the members of city council, stating city council's intention of removing him and the reason therefore. If requested in writing by city manager so to do the city council shall fix a time for a public hearing upon the question of his removal, giving a notice of the time and place of same by publishing said notice in some local newspaper of general circulation, and the final resolution, removing the city manager shall not be adopted until such public hearing shall be had. The action of city council removing the city manager shall be final. In the case of the absence or disability of the city manager, city council may designate a qualified administrative officer of the city to perform the duties of the city manager during such absence or disability. Former Sec. 30-D. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 32. - Combination of officers, authorized. 
    The city manager is authorized at his discretion to combine two or more of the city offices so that one person may hold and discharge the duties of more than one office, provided, however, that no member of the city council shall be eligible to hold any other municipal office during the term for which he was elected. Former Sec. 31. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 33. - Contract, etc., interest prohibited. 
    No council member, the mayor, nor any official or employee of the city, nor any person having held such position within the prior 24 months, shall be interested directly or indirectly in any contract, sale of merchandise, service with or for the city, or in the profits or emoluments there from; and any contract on the part of the city which violates this section shall be null and void. Provided, however, the aforesaid prohibition shall not apply to: 
(a)  Sales of personal property or a contract for services; provided such sales and the payment for services total less than $800.00 per calendar quarter; 
(b)  Sales of personal property or a contract for services made pursuant to sealed competitive bids made by the council member, mayor, official or employee of the city, either for himself or herself or on behalf of any business entity; or 
(c)  Sales of real property in which disclosure has been made: 
(1)  To the judge of the probate court of Newton County, provided that if the sale is made by the judge of the probate court, then to any judge of the superior court of Newton County; 
(2)  Not less than 15 days prior to the date such sale will become final and binding on the parties thereto; and 
(3)  Which shows that the council member, mayor official or employee of the city has a personal interest in such sale, which interest includes, but is not limited to, any commission, fee, profit or similar benefit and which gives the name of such person, his or her position in the city, the purchase price and location of the property. 
    No council member, the mayor, nor any officer or employee of the city shall accept any gift, frank, pass, or other emolument from any person, firm or corporation operating any public utility, or engaged in any business of a public nature within the city, or from any person, firm or corporation seeking to sell or which may desire to sell supplies to the city, perform service for or make a contract with the city, other than a gift of nominal value; nominal value being defined in this instance as less than seventy-five dollars ($75.00). Prizes, gifts or favors that are won, received, or awarded at an official training conference or city sponsored event are not subject to the nominal value restriction. 
(Ord. dated 12/3/12; Ord. dated 5/7/12; Ord. dated 4/3/17, § 1) 
Sec. 34. - City council meetings, time and place; presiding officer and quorum. 
    The city council shall meet for the transaction of business at such times and places as they may prescribe. At all meetings of the city council, the mayor, if present, shall preside and, except as hereinafter provided, he may vote only in cases of a tie. The mayor may also vote in all elections for officers who are elected by the city council, whether there is a tie or not and as otherwise provided in this charter. Five members of the city council, one of whom must be the mayor or mayor pro-tem, shall constitute a quorum for transaction of business; however, a lesser number in the absence of a quorum may adjourn a regular meeting to a future time. Former Sec. 33. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 35. - Power to enact ordinances; maximum penalty. 
    Said city council shall have full power to pass all ordinances, bylaws and regulations which they may deem necessary to the good government of said city, the protection of property, peace, good order, health, comfort and convenience of the citizens thereof, and to fix suitable penalties for the violation of the same. 
    They may provide for punishing violators of city ordinances or resolutions by fine, confinement or confinement at labor; the fines in no case to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and the confinement or confinement at labor in no case to exceed a period of 30 days, and either one or all of said penalties may be imposed at the discretion of the municipal judge. Former Sec. 34. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 36. - Failure or refusal to vote on measure. 
    The failure or refusal of a member of the city council or of any commission, committee, board, bureau or agency of the city to vote when the proper time comes to vote, on a question pending before such city council, commission, committee, board, bureau, or agency, at a meeting legally held and at which such member is in attendance, shall be construed as a vote in favor of the pending proposal. The failure or refusal of a majority of the members of any body duly convened shall be counted as votes in favor of the measure under consideration and amounts to its adoption. Former Sec. 38. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 37. - Regulating use of streets. 
    The city council shall have power and authority by ordinance, to tax, license and regulate the operation of automobiles, railroad trains, steam engines, locomotives, street cars, buses, trolley cars, bicycles, motorcycles and other vehicles within the city limits and fix maximum and minimum speed limits for them and to prescribe both minimum qualifications of operators of such vehicles and the manner in which the same may be operated, and to require such machines and their owners to be registered, and the city council may make such other provisions as may seem prudent for the safety of the driver, passengers and the public. Former Sec. 39. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 38. - Regulating charitable solicitations; inflammables and explosives. 
    Soliciting charity or relief campaigns within the city shall be subject to ordinance regulation by the city council, which shall likewise regulate the storage and keeping of gasoline, kerosene, gunpowder, dynamite, nitroglycerine and other inflammable or explosive materials within the city limits. Former Sec. 40. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 39. - Providing off-street parking facilities, authority. 
    The city council shall have the power and authority to construct, maintain and operate off-street parking facilities, and to acquire land and other necessary property for such purposes and to charge, contract for and receive rentals and parking fees for the use of such facilities and parking spaces therein. Former Sec. 41. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 40. - Power of eminent domain; procedure. 
(a)  The city shall have full power and authority to acquire, by exercise of the power of eminent domain, property for use as streets, alleys, sidewalks, ditches, playgrounds, parks, libraries, waterworks, sanitary systems, storm sewers, electric lines, gas lines, cemeteries, jails, or for any other such public facility, utility or use, all as provided by the laws of this state. 
(b)  The procedure to be followed by the city in acquiring property by exercise of the power of eminent domain shall be as provided by the laws of this state. Former Sec. 51. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 41. - Control of streets, sidewalks and bridges. 
    The city council shall have exclusive control of the streets, sidewalks and bridges of the city; they may enact such ordinances as they may deem best for the regulation of traffic upon said streets, sidewalks and bridges, and provide suitable punishment for the violation of these ordinances. Former Sec. 54. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 42. - Streets and public utilities; powers generally; assessments. 
    The city shall have the power and authority to lay out, open, grade, construct, pave, curb, gutter, drain, widen, repave, repair, relocate, extend, replace, remove and maintain all streets, alleys, sidewalks and all other public ways, and shall have the power and authority to lay out, construct, maintain, extend, repair and replace all storm sewers, curbs, gutters, drains and other accessory features of such ways, including water mains and sanitary sewer mains when laid in the right-of- way of such streets or other ways; and to provide funds for these purposes, the city may assess the costs of all such public improvements against the abutting real estate and the owners thereof, provided: 
(a)  Each assessment shall be fairly determined, in proportion to the number of feet fronting on the public way where any such improvements are made; 
(b)  If any such improvements are made only on one side of any such public way, the costs of such improvements shall be assessed only against the abutting real estate and the owners thereof on that side; 
(c)  Where any such improvements, such as storm sewers or culverts, are made for the sole benefit of a person or persons other than the abutting property owners, the cost of such improvements shall not be assessed against the abutting property owners; 
(d)  As to the costs of the construction, paving, widening, repaving, or repairing of streets only (excluding sidewalks, curbs, gutters, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, water lines, and all other such improvements in the street right-of-way), only one-third of such costs may be assessed against the abutting real estate and the owner thereof on each side, with the remaining one-third to be paid from the city treasury; 
(e)  As to the costs of the construction, paving, installing, repairing or replacing of curbs, gutters, sidewalks, storm sewers, sanitary sewers, and water lines in the right-of-way of any street, only one-half of such costs may be assessed against the abutting real estate and the owners thereof, with the remaining one-half to be paid from the city treasury; and 
(f)  All such assessments shall constitute liens against the abutting real estate thus assessed and against all other property of the owner thereof, such liens to run from the time of the assessment until paid in full, and all such executions to issue and be enforced as provided by section 59 hereof, above. Former Sec. 55. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 43. - Bond issues authorized for street improvements. 
    The city may, in the manner prescribed by law, provide by ordinance for the issuing of bonds for enlarging or extending the public utilities of the city, including waterworks, sewerage, electric lights, natural gas, street and/or other public improvements. Former Sec. 56. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 44. - Franchises. 
    The city council is hereby vested with the right to exercise and control franchise rights within the corporate limits of the city over all public utility corporations, to charge for the use of streets and alleys, and to control the use of poles, wires and other equipment used by the grantee of the franchise right. Former Sec. 57. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 45. - Utilities, referendum required for sale of; rights-of-way, easements, etc. 
(a)  The city shall continue to supply all the public utilities of said city; and for such purposes the city council shall be invested with all the authority to enlarge such systems of public utilities as they may deem necessary, and they may have authority to prescribe by ordinances for the government and regulation of all public utilities. Provided, that before said city council shall dispose of any one or all of the herein named public utilities by absolute sale in fee simple, an election shall be called submitting the matter to the qualified voters of said city for their approval or disapproval, said election to be called, held, and the result determined under the election laws now in force, or that may be hereafter prescribed for creating a bonded indebtedness against said city. 
(b)  The city shall have the power and authority to extend, construct, maintain and operate its water, sewerage, electric light and power lines and systems for a distance of not over twelve miles in all directions beyond the corporate limits of said city, as the same now exist or may hereafter be established; and the city shall have authority to furnish water, lights, power and sewerage connections to person, firms, and corporations within and without the corporate limits of said city, and, to charge for the same; to purchase electrical current from any source, either within or without the city limits; to make reasonable rules and regulations; and the city may make different charges for the use of such utilities within and without the corporate limits of said city. Provided, that nothing shall permit the city to erect any new power lines that will parallel the power lines of Snapping Shoals Electric Membership Corporation, or serve members of said corporation within said area. 
(c)  The city is hereby authorized and empowered to acquire, by contract, purchase or condemnation, rights-of-way, easements and privileges for water, sewerage, electric lights and power lines and systems within the corporate limits of the city, and without the corporate limits of the city within a distance of twelve miles in any direction beyond the corporate limits of the city as the same now exist or may be hereafter established. 
(d)  The city is hereby authorized and empowered to furnish and supply electric power to any person, firm or corporation, at its distribution plant in the city, or at the point from which said city acquires its electric power, for serving non-residents of said city, and to fix the rules and regulations on which the same may be furnished, and likewise to fix the terms on which the same are to be furnished, the manner of payment therefore, and the charges to be paid therefore. 
(e)  The city is hereby authorized to purchase, construct, operate and maintain a system for the sale and distribution of natural or other gas within the city limits and for a distance of twelve miles in any direction beyond such corporate limits as now exist or as shall hereafter exist, and in connection therewith the city is authorized to acquire, by contract, purchase or condemnation, all rights-of-way, easements and property necessary to carry out these purposes; provided, that the power of condemnation granted in this section shall not apply to property within the limits of any other municipality, except with the prior approval of the city council of said municipality. The city is hereby authorized and empowered to furnish and supply gas and gas services to any person, firm or corporation at its distribution plant in the city or at the point from which said city acquires its supply of gas for serving nonresidents of said city, and to fix the rules and regulations under which the same may be furnished, and likewise fix the terms on which the same are to be furnished, and the manner of payment therefore, and the charges to be paid therefore. 
(f)  Nothing heretofore shall give the city the right to operate, maintain or construct any of the systems or services enumerated herein within the limits of Rockdale County. 
(g)  The city is hereby authorized to purchase, construct, operate and maintain a system for reception, transmission and distribution of television impulses and television energy (including audio signals and visual images by means of electrical impulses) within the city limits as it now exists or shall hereafter exist; and in connection therewith, the city is authorized to acquire, by contract or purchase, all equipment, towers, receivers, lines and related apparatus, all rights-of-way, easements and other property necessary to carry out these purposes, including the use of all existing city rights-of-way, easements and other property. The city is further authorized and empowered to furnish and supply the distribution of television impulses and television energy as aforesaid to any person, firm or corporation at the point of reception thereof by the city or at any point where the city may hereafter have means of distribution thereof and to fix rules and regulations under which the same may be furnished and distributed and likewise, to fix the terms upon which the same are to be furnished and the manner of payment therefore and the charges to be paid therefore will be the rate of charges to be established from time to time by resolution of the city council. Nothing contained herein shall prohibit the city from granting franchises in accordance with Charter section 9(n) for the private operation of such a system of reception, transmission and distribution of television impulses and television energy aforesaid. Former Sec. 58. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 46. - Zoning powers. 
    The city council shall have power and authority to establish zoning regulations and to provide the use, height, and construction of buildings or structures within said city; to provide plans for the future growth, development and improvement of the municipality, especially with regard to its public and private buildings, works, streets, parks, grounds and vacant lots, looking toward the proper sanitation and proper service by utilities; to make and adopt a master plan which shall provide for the comprehensive zoning of the city. The city shall have all other zoning powers granted by the laws of this state. Former Sec. 68. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 47. - Contracts for supplies. 
    The city shall have the authority to make contracts for supplies, including electric current for electric lights and power for all of the public utilities of said city, which contracts may be for a term of years from the date thereof; provided only, that the compensation for such supplies to be paid by said city shall be paid by the city monthly or annually and the amount of such compensation for any one year shall not exceed the amount which may be lawfully levied therefore as prescribed by law. Former Sec. 75. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 48. - Donations for public institutions. 
    The city council shall have authority to make donations out of the funds in the city treasury, not otherwise appropriated, for the support of government entities assisting the poor, for public libraries, and for public hospitals, public restrooms and other government institutions of like character. Former Sec. 76. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 49. - Building regulations. 
    The city council may prescribe by ordinance such rules and regulations as they see fit for the regulation of all buildings erected within the corporate limits of said city, or for the repair of such buildings, they may prescribe the materials to be used and the manner of erecting or repairing the same. Former Sec. 78. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 50. - Regulation of public entertainment; shows, etc. 
    The city council may prescribe by ordinance for the regulation of all public entertainments, shows, circuses, parades, may prescribe when such entertainments, etc., may be held, as well as the manner in which the same may be conducted. Former Sec. 79. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Article III - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 

Sec. 51. - City clerk-Secretary to agencies. 
    The city clerk may be required to act as clerk or secretary to any board, commission, committee, agency or authority of said city. Former Sec. 42. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 52. - Committees of city council. 
    The city council may provide by ordinance for such committees as they may deem fit for the best interest of said city, prescribing the duties of such committees, and define their authority. Former Sec. 35. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 53. - Group insurance for city officers and employees, authorized; deductions, etc. 
    The city council of said city are hereby authorized and empowered to make deductions periodically from the wages and salaries of its employees and officers, with which to pay the premium for life, health, accident, hospitalization or annuity of such officers or employees, upon a group insurance plan, and to that end to enter into agreements with insurance companies whereby the kind of group insurance desired by the employees may be furnished to them and the premiums therefore remitted periodically by said city. 
    The participation in such group insurance by such officers or employees shall be entirely voluntary on the part of such persons at all times. Any officer or employee, upon any payday, may withdraw or retire from such group plan upon giving notice in writing to his employer directing the discontinuance of deductions from his wages or salary in payment of such plan. 
    The city council of said city, in carrying out any provision of this section, shall have the right to pay out of the general funds of the city one hundred percent (100%) of the premium due for such health insurance coverage afforded the mayor and not less than seventy-five percent (75%) of the premium due for such group health insurance coverage afforded its other officers and employees. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12; Ord. dated 6/6/16(2), § 1) 
Sec. 54. - Fire department. 
    The city council shall provide by ordinance for the establishment and maintenance of a fire department for said city, and for this purpose they may acquire property and equipment therefore to be paid out of the revenues of said city or by municipal bonds properly voted and validated therefore, as now prescribed by law. They may provide either for a voluntary service or for a paid service if the revenues of said city authorize such payment, and they may provide by ordinance such rules and regulations as they may deem necessary for the government and control of said fire department, which ordinance shall provide officers therefore and prescribe their duties, authority terms of office, manner of election and compensation. Former Sec. 80. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 55. - Board of health, authorized. 
    The city council shall also have authority to provide by ordinance for a board of health to be composed of such members as may be provided for in said ordinance; to prescribe their terms of office and define their powers, authority and compensation. The city council in their discretion may provide for a joint city-county board of health. Former Sec. 81. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Article IV - JUDICIARY 

Sec. 56. - Nuisances-Jurisdiction; powers; procedure; executions. 
(a)  The municipal court of the city shall have jurisdiction to hear nuisance proceedings and abate the same under the provisions of Section 41-2-5 of the Code of Georgia as amended (Laws 1833, Cobb's 1851 Digest, p. 817; Code 1933, Sec. 72-401; Ga. L. 1981, p. 1739, Sec. 1; Ga. L. 1987, p. 3., Sec. 41; Ga. L. 1988, p. 1419, Sec. 1), notwithstanding any provision thereof to the contrary. In addition, as cumulative of such other laws of this state regarding the abatement of nuisances, the city may by ordinance provide for any building, structure or condition maintained in violation of any valid law of this state or any valid ordinance of the city to be adjudged a nuisance, and for the abatement of the same at the owner's expense upon the failure or refusal of the owner to abate the same after written notice from the city to do so; provided, however, that such written notice must specify the time in which such nuisance must be abated, and such time must be reasonable under the circumstances. All such abatement proceedings in the city shall be in the municipal court. 
(b)  Where a nuisance is abated at the expense of the owner of the property where such nuisance exists, as hereinabove provided, the city clerk of the municipal court shall in such cases issue execution in the name of the city and against such property owner in the amount of such expenses, which execution shall issue and be levied in the same manner as executions for municipal taxes. Such execution shall constitute a lien against such property and all other property of such property owner. Such property owner shall have the right to contest such execution, or the amount thereof, or the levy thereof, in the same manner as provided by the laws of this state governing illegalities and claims where executions are levied. Former Sec. 11. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 57. - Nuisances-Notice, residents and nonresidents. 
    All notices to persons or corporations owning property in the city and on which a nuisance has been found to exist, or on which a complainant has stated that a nuisance exists, may be given in person or by mail. If given by mail, such notice shall be addressed to the last known address of such owner, and notice shall be deemed effective beginning one (1) day after the same is deposited in a receptacle maintained by the United States Post Office Department for the deposit of mail, bearing sufficient postage and the last known address of the person or persons or corporation to whom or which such notice is directed. This provision for notice shall apply equally to residents and nonresidents of the city. Former Sec. 12. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
    The city council, municipal court, all boards, commissions, committees or other agencies of the city charged with the administration of the affairs of the city (excluding individual officers, except in cases in which they are specially authorized by law or ordinance) shall have power and authority to compel the attendance of witnesses and the production of relevant and admissible documents in proper cases, and any person failing or refusing to attend as a witness or to produce relevant and pertinent documentary evidence within his power, custody or control when duly notified or called upon to do so in a proper case shall be subject to punishment prescribed by ordinance of the city. Former Sec. 13. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 59. - Executions-Issuance; enforcement. 
(a)  All executions for taxes (including penalties) or license fees which are not paid when due shall be issued by the person designated by the city council by ordinance, acting in the capacity of ex officio tax collector. 
(b)  All executions for assessments, public improvement costs, forfeitures, fines, utilities, and all other such executions for whatever purpose, except those executions named in paragraph (a) hereof, immediately above, shall be issued by the person designated by the city council by ordinance and bear teste in the name of the mayor or mayor pro tem (or such other official as may be provided by the city council). 
(c)  All such executions issued by the city shall be directed to the chief of police and all other policemen of said city, and shall state the purpose or purposes for which issued, and shall be made returnable to the city council ninety (90) days after the date of issue. 
(d)  It shall be and is hereby declared to be the duty of the chief of police, or other policeman of said city in whose hands any such execution is placed, to levy the same, to advertise the property so levied upon, and to sell the same at the time and place and in such manner as prescribed by the laws of this state for the sale of property by sheriffs to satisfy executions for unpaid state and county taxes, except that such sale may be conducted before the front door of the city hall. 
(e)  The chief of police or other policeman of said city conducting any such sale shall have the power and authority to execute a deed or bill of sale to such property in favor of the purchaser at such sale, and to place such purchaser in possession of such property, and the title acquired by such purchaser under such deed or bill of sale shall be just as perfect, valid and binding as if made by the sheriff under an ordinary execution issuing from the superior court. 
(f)  All such sales, and the title acquired by the purchaser at any such sale, shall be subject to the rights of redemption by the defendant in execution, as provided by the laws of this state. 
(g)  At any such sale, the city, acting by and through any designated officer, may bid and buy any property being sold at any such sale, as provided by the laws of this state, and subject to the terms and conditions prescribed by the laws of this state; and the right of redemption of the defendant in execution, and the rights of the city to convey such property, shall be as provided by the laws of this state. 
(h)  In any such case, the defendant in execution or any other person claiming any interest in any such property levied upon by the city may proceed by filing an affidavit of illegality or a claim against said property, as applicable, and all such issues shall thereupon be tried and determined in the Superior Court of Newton County as provided by the laws of this state, subject to all provisions of the laws of this state regarding such cases. Former Sec. 14. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 60. - Executions-Forms. 
    The forms for all executions issued by the city or municipal court shall be as may be prescribed by the city council; and in the absence of any provision by the city council, no prescribed form shall be required so long as the execution shows the following information, to wit: 
(a)  Name of issuing authority; 
(b)  Name of defendant in execution; 
(c)  Amount claimed to be due, and for what such amount is due; 
(d)  To whom directed; 
(e)  Description of property, where execution is against specific property; 
(f)  Date of issue; and 
(g)  Date of return. 
Former Sec. 15. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 61. - Municipal court. 
    There is established a court to be known as the municipal court of the City of Covington which shall have jurisdiction and authority to try offenses against the laws and ordinances of said city and to punish for a violation of the same. Such court shall have the power to enforce its judgments by the imposition of such penalties as may be provided by law, including ordinances of the city; to punish witnesses for nonattendance and to punish also any person who may counsel or advise, aid, encourage, or persuade another whose testimony is desired or material in any proceeding before said court to go or move beyond the reach of the process of the court; to try all offenses within the territorial limits of the city constituting traffic cases which, under the laws of Georgia, are placed within the jurisdiction of municipal courts to the extent of, and in accordance with, the provisions of such laws and all laws subsequently enacted amendatory thereof. When convened, the municipal court shall be presided over by a judge of the court. 
(a)  Judges. No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as judge of the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 25 years and shall have been a member of the State Bar of Georgia for a minimum of three years. All judges shall be appointed by resolution by the city council and shall serve until a successor is appointed and qualified. Judges serve at-will and may be removed from office at any time by the city council, with or without cause, unless otherwise provided by ordinance. The position of judge shall not be a full-time position, and the person serving in this position may engage in the practice of law; provided, however, a judge may not appear and represent a client before the court. Before entering on duties of his office, the appointed judge(s) shall take an oath before an officer duly authorized to administer oaths in this state declaring that he or she will truly, honestly, and faithfully discharge the duties of his office to the best of his ability without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the city council. 
(b)  Administration. The position of clerk of the court is created. The clerk of the court shall be appointed by the city manager and shall serve at the pleasure of the city manager. The clerk of the court shall be responsible for all record keeping of the court and the bill keeping and collection of all fines received by the court. In addition, the clerk of the court shall serve as administrator of the court, supervising all personnel of the court, setting times and dates for convening of the court, preparing the court docket, scheduling of judges to preside over the court sessions, and for such other services as may be assigned by resolution or ordinance of the city council. 
(c)  Jurisdiction; powers. 
(1)  The municipal court shall try and punish for crimes against the City of Covington and for violation of its ordinances. The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or imprisonment for 7 days per contemptuous act, for a total not to exceed 20 days. The municipal court may impose punishment for offenses to the full extent allowed as now, or hereafter provided by state law. 
(2)  The city council shall have authority to establish a schedule of reasonable fees to defray the cost of operation. 
(3)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to insure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as security for appearances of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, the bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his sureties with a rule nisi at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be on order of the judge declared forfeited to the City of Covington or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited. 
(4)  The municipal court shall have the authority to bind prisoners over to the appropriate court when it appears, by probable cause, that a state law has been violated. 
(5)  The municipal court shall have the authority to administer oaths and to perform all other acts necessary or proper to the conduct of said court. 
(6)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summons[es], subpoena[s], and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by state law. 
(7)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all of the judicial jurisdiction and judicial powers throughout the entire area of the City of Covington granted by state laws generally to municipal courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances. 
(d)  Certiorari. The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the superior court of Newton County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari. 
(e)  Rules for court. The judges, by majority vote, shall have authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper for addressing the operations of the municipal court. The clerk of the court, as administrator of the court, shall prepare reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court. All rules shall be subject to the approval of the city council. Former Sec. 44. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 62. - Police arrests without warrants, authorized. 
    It shall be lawful for the chief of police or any special policeman lawfully appointed to arrest, without warrant, any and all persons violating the ordinances and laws of said state and city, in the city limits, and to confine such person or persons so arrested in the city prison, until a hearing can be had before the proper officer; said chief of police or policeman shall have power and authority to call his assistance to arrest and detain such offenders any bystander, and such person when summoned shall be bound to aid and assist said officers; should such person fail to do so, he shall be liable to prosecution pursuant to section 61. The chief of police or policeman may call sheriffs and their deputies, constables, and other state or counties' officers for assistance, in the arrest, detention, investigation and conviction of offenders. Former Sec. 45. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 63. - Appearance bonds; forfeitures; fines; enforcement by execution. 
    The city council of Covington may provide by ordinance for the taking of appearance bonds to be made by persons charged with the violation of any of the laws or ordinances of the city. They may prescribe by ordinance for the taking of cash collateral bond or have bonds issued by personal, solvent sureties, and they may provide for the summary forfeiture of all cash bonds and for the summary forfeiture of all other appearance bonds by order of the municipal court. All forfeitures and unpaid fines shall constitute liens against all property of the person or persons obligated to pay the same, which liens shall issue and be enforced as provided by section 59 hereof, above. Former Sec. 46. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Article V - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE 

Sec. 64. - Election for mayor and council members. 
    Any person desiring to run for a council post shall designate the council post for which he is offering. As specified under the Charter, section 21(a)(2), candidates for council posts 1 West, 2 West, and 3 West must be residents of the West Ward and candidates for council posts 1 East, 2 East, and 3 East must be residents of the East Ward. All council members shall be elected by a majority of the qualified electors voting in the elections for the respective officials. As specified in Charter section 19, the council members holding council posts 1 West, 2 West and 3 West shall be elected by the qualified electors of the West Ward only; the council members holding council post 1 East 2, East and 3 East shall be elected by qualified electors of the East Ward only; and the mayor shall be elected by all of the qualified electors of the City of Covington. The qualification of candidates, terms of office for the mayor and council members and the dates and procedures for the conduct of elections and runoff elections for mayor and council posts shall be governed by the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Chapter 2 of Title 21, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Former Sec. 47. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 65. - Impeachment-Causes. 
    If the mayor or any member of the city council of said city shall be guilty of malpractice, willful neglect of their duties, abuse of their powers, or any other unbecoming conduct, they shall be subject to impeachment by the city council, and upon conviction, shall be removed from office. Former Sec. 36. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 66. - Impeachment-Trial. 
    In impeachment trials before the city council, the affirmative vote of at least four members shall be required to convict, and the mayor shall be entitled to vote, except in case he is on trial, in which case he may not vote. The municipal court judge shall preside in all impeachment trials unless he is disqualified, in which case the presiding judge of the Superior Court of Newton County shall designate some qualified lawyer to preside over such trial, but such officer presiding over said impeachment trial shall not vote, even in case of a tie. The municipal court judge shall not be qualified to preside over such impeachment trial unless he shall have been engaged actively in the practice of law for at least five years next preceding such trial. On an impeachment trial, a tie-vote shall acquit the accused. An impeachment resolution against the mayor shall not be subject to his veto. A judgment of conviction in an impeachment proceeding shall vacate the office of the convicted mayor or council member. Former Sec. 37. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Article VI - FINANCE 

Sec. 67. - Fiscal year. 
    The fiscal year for the City shall be from the first day of July through the thirtieth day of June of the next succeeding calendar year. The city council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency and activity of the city government unless otherwise provided by state or federal law. Former Sec. 59. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 68. - Budget. 
(a)  The city council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement plan and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content and form of such budgets and plans. On or before a date fixed by the city council but not later than forty five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other pertinent comments and information. The operating budget and the capital budget hereinafter provided for the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection. No money shall be expended by the city council during any year until a budget has been prepared and adopted, as herein provided. The budget shall include in its anticipations for the year a sum not to exceed the normal revenue collections by the city from all sources during the preceding year. The city council shall appropriate a sum sufficient to cover the debt service, including the sinking fund and interest on bonded indebtedness, which sum shall not be diverted to any other department or departments by the city council during the year. Should the income of the city be decreased by law or otherwise, it shall be the duty of the city council to immediately adjust its budget so as to comply with such decreased revenue. In the event of an increase in revenue, which increase has become definite and reasonably certain by an increase in tax rate or the schedule of changes for city services, the city council may revise the budget accordingly and take such anticipated receipts into consideration in the budget. 
(b)  The city council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager; except, that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(c)  The city council by ordinance shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the second Monday of June of each year. If the city council fails to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with all items prorated accordingly until such time as the city council adopts a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 68 (a). 
(d)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof, to which it is chargeable. Former Sec. 60. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 68-A. - Capital budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the city council but no later than forty five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the city council a proposed capital improvements plan with a recommended capital budget containing the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The city council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed plan and proposed budget. The city council shall not authorize any expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work or improvement, unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided by law. 
(b)  The city council shall adopt by ordinance the final capital budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the second Monday of June of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, the city manager may submit amendments to the capital budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 69. - Transfer of funds. 
    The city council by ordinance may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget, at any regular meeting, special or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus. After the budget has been adopted, the city council may transfer or reallocate funds, with the exception of appropriations for debt services. Former Sec. 61. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 70. - Deficit. 
    Should at any time during any year the expenditures exceed the revenue collected, and a deficit be created, it shall be the duty of the city council, before appropriating any other sum for any other purpose, to appropriate a sufficient sum to immediately discharge any such deficit which has accrued during the preceding year. Former Sec. 62. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 71. - Borrowing money authorized; when. 
    The city council shall have the power and authority, on the terms and conditions as provided by the Constitution and laws of this state, to borrow money to meet casual deficiencies in the revenues of said city. Former Sec. 63. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 72. - Audit of finances. 
    There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the city council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted auditing principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal governments may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this charter. Copies of annual audit reports shall be available at printing costs to the public. The city council are hereby required, at the end of each fiscal year, to have an annual audit made covering all of the financial transactions made and entered into by said city council for that year. When said audit is completed, it shall be published by the city the council, either in the official newspaper or by posting upon the public bulletin board at the city hall, the method of publication being made within the discretion of the city council. Former Sec. 64. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 73. - Taxes; powers to levy and collect; liens; enforcement. 
    The city council may levy and collect for city purposes a tax on the taxable value of real estate, stock in trade and all other property within the City of Covington that may at the time be taxable under the laws of the State of Georgia. The city council shall also have the power to levy and collect out of the property aforesaid such additional tax as may be necessary to provide for the payment of principal and interest of any bonded debt of the city now existing or hereafter to be created by the city. In all cases, the order levying taxes shall specify for which of the purposes aforesaid it is levied, and how much for each purpose. The lien of such taxes, the rank of such lien, and the enforcement and collection thereof by execution and sale shall be as provided by the laws of the state and section 59 hereof, above. Former Sec. 65. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 74. - License tax, authority to levy, etc. 
    The city council shall have full power and authority to license, regulate and control theatrical exhibitions, merry-go-rounds, circuses, dance halls, skating rinks, shows and exhibitions of all kinds, drays, automobiles jitneys, trucks, taxis and public or private vehicles of all kinds, traveling vendors of patent medicines, soaps, notions and all other articles; also hotels, boardinghouses, restaurants, lunch stands, fish stands or markets, meat markets, mercantile establishments, chain stores, laundries, billiard, pool and other kinds of tables, tenpins, shooting galleries, and bowling alleys, slot machines or any games operated by "coin-in-slot" devices for carrying on games, as well as vending machines, generally; also bakeries, dairies, barbershops, livery stables, sale stables, slaughterhouses, tan yards, garage or motor vehicle repair shops, blacksmith shops, gins, sawmills, planing mills; also auctioneers, peddlers and pawnbrokers; all agents of fire, health, accident, indemnity, casualty and life insurance companies; the sale of all kind of beverages, cigars, cigarettes and tobacco products of all kinds; also retailers of malt, vinous and spirituous liquors; also dealers in and/or dispensers of gasoline, either at wholesale or retail, from tanks or otherwise; and all businesses, occupations, professions, callings, trades or avocations which, under the laws of the state, are subject to license. The city shall have the power to require registration of, to assess and to collect a license tax on, all such businesses, etc., and all other businesses, trades, professions, occupations or callings conducted or engaged in within the corporate limits of the city, and such occupation tax or license tax shall constitute a lien upon all the property of the taxpayer or person liable and shall take rank and be enforceable in the same manner as ad valorem taxes due the city; and the city may require the registration of, and payment of license tax on, all such businesses, etc., as a prerequisite to the right to operate or engage in said business in the city; and the city shall have power to punish anyone conducting or engaging in any such business, etc., without first registering and paying said license taxes. The city shall have full and complete power to provide by ordinance for classification of all classes and businesses, and all other rules and regulations necessary and proper in the premises. Former Sec. 66. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Article VII - GENERAL PROVISIONS 

Sec. 75. - Severability. 
    If any provision of this Charter shall be held to be unconstitutional, such provision alone shall be invalid, and the other parts of this Charter shall be unaffected thereby and shall remain in full force and effect. Former Sec. 82. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 76. - Legal advertisement. 
    Public notice containing a synopsis of this Charter has been duly published and a copy of this Charter has been filed in the office of the city clerk and in the office of the clerk of the superior court of Newton County in accordance with the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965 (Ga. L. 1947, p. 1118, Sec. 1; Ga. L. 1951, p. 116, Sec. 1; Ga. L. 1965, p. 298, Sec. 1), and it is hereby declared that all the requirements of the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965 relating to publication of notice of intention to adopt this Charter have been complied with for the enactment of this municipal charter. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Sec. 77. - Prior acts repealed. 
    An act granting a new charter to the City of Covington, approved January 30, 1962 (Ga. L. 1962, Act No. 531, p. 2003), as amended, is hereby repealed in its entirety in accordance with the Municipal Home Rule Act of 1965 (Ga. L. 1947, p. 1118, Sec. 1; Ga. L. 1951, p. 116, Sec. 1; Ga. L. 1965, p. 298, Sec. 1). All laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are hereby repealed. 
(Ord. dated 5/7/12) 
Title 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Chapters: 
Chapter 1.01 - CODE ADOPTION 
Sections: 

1.01.010 - Adoption. 
A.  The Covington Municipal Code, a codification of the general ordinances of the city of Covington, be and the same is enacted and adopted, superseding all other general and permanent ordinances, resolutions and motions passed by the city council prior to October 16, 2001, except such as by reference thereto herein are expressly saved from repeal or continued in force and effect for any purpose. 
B.  All provisions of such code shall be in full force and effect on and after adoption, and all ordinances, motions or resolutions of a general and permanent nature of the city of Covington enacted by final passage on or before October 16, 2001, and not in such code or recognized and continued in force by reference therein are repealed from and after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section, except as hereinafter provided. 
C.  The repeal provided for in subsection B of this section shall not affect any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of the ordinance codified in this section; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance or resolution of the city promising or guaranteeing the payment of money by or to the city, or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city, or any evidence of the city's indebtedness, or any contract or obligation assumed by the city; nor shall such repeal affect the administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city council not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of such code; nor shall such repeal affect ordinances fixing positions, classifications, and salaries; nor shall such repeal affect any right of franchise granted by any ordinance or resolution of the city council to any person, firm or corporation; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, paving, widening, vacating, etc., any street or public way in the city; nor shall such repeal affect the annual appropriation ordinance; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance levying or imposing taxes; nor shall such repeal affect any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor; nor shall such repeal be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this section. 
D.  Any and all additions or amendments to such code, when passed in such form as to indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part thereof, shall be deemed to be incorporated into such code so that reference to the "Covington Municipal Code" shall be understood and intended to include such additions and amendments. 
E.  A copy of such code shall be kept on file in the office of the city clerk, and preserved in looseleaf form, or in such other form as the city clerk may consider most expedient. It shall be the express duty of the city clerk or someone authorized by him, to insert in their designated places all amendments or ordinances which indicate the intention of the city council to make the same a part of such code, when the same have been printed or reprinted in page form, and to extract from such code all provisions which may be from time to time repealed by the city council. Such copy shall be available for all persons desiring to examine the same and shall be considered the official Covington Municipal Code. 
(Ord. dated 11/18/02 §§ 1-5) 
Chapter 1.04 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
Sections: 

1.04.010 - Rules of construction. 
    In the construction of this code, and of all ordinances, the following rules shall be observed, unless such construction would be inconsistent with the manifest intent of the governing body: 
    City. The words "the city" or "this city" mean the City of Covington, Georgia. 
    City Code. The reference to city code shall mean the code of Ordinances of the city of Covington, Georgia, as amended from time to time. 
    County. The words "the county" or "this county" mean the county of Newton, Georgia. 
    Gender. A word importing the masculine gender only shall extend and be applied to females and to firms, partnerships and corporations as well as to males. 
    Governing Body. Whenever the words "governing body" are used, they mean the mayor and council of the city of Covington, Georgia. 
    Number. Words used in the singular include the plural, and the plural includes the singular number. 
    Oath. The word "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases the words "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the words "affirm" and "affirmed." 
    Or, and. "Or" may be read "and," and "and" may be read "or" if the sense requires it. 
    Other officials or officers, etc. Whenever reference is made to officials, boards, commissions, departments, etc., by Title only i.e., "city clerk," "chief of police," etc., they shall be deemed to refer to the officials, boards, commissions and departments of the city of Covington, Georgia. 
    Person. The word "person" shall extend and be applied to firms, partnerships, associations, organizations and bodies politic and corporate, or any combination thereof, as well as to individuals. 
    "Signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
    States. The words "the state" or "this state" shall be construed to mean the state of Georgia. 
    Street. The word "street" shall be construed to embrace streets, avenues, boulevards, roads, alleys, lanes, viaducts and all other public streets and ways in the city and shall embrace all parts thereof constituting the designated right-of-way. 
(Prior code § 1-2) 
1.04.020 - Catchlines of sections. 
    The catchlines of sections of this code printed in boldface type, italics, or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or re-enacted. 
(Prior code § 1-3) 
1.04.030 - Effect of repeal of ordinances. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not revive any ordinances in force before or at the time the ordinance repealed took effect. 
    The repeal of an ordinance shall not affect any punishment or penalty incurred before the repeal took effect, nor any suit, prosecution or proceeding pending at the time of the repeal, for an offense committed under the ordinance repealed. 
(Prior code § 1-4) 
1.04.040 - Severability of parts of code. 
    It is declared to be the intention of the governing body that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph, or section of this code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of a court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this code. 
(Prior code § 1-5) 
1.04.050 - Amendment to code-Effect of new ordinances-Amendatory language. 
    All ordinances passed subsequent to this code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this code, may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this code and printed for inclusion therein. When subsequent ordinances repeal any chapter, section or sub-section or any portion thereof, such repealed portions may be excluded from said code by omission from reprinted pages. 
    Amendments to any of the provisions of this code should be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section of this code in substantially the following language: That section _______ of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Covington, Georgia is hereby amended to read as follows: _______ (Set out new provisions in full) _______." 
    When the governing body desires to enact an ordinance of a general and permanent nature on a subject not heretofore existing in the code which the governing body desires to incorporate into the code, a section in substantially the following language shall be made a part of the ordinance: 
    "Section _______ It is the intention of the governing body, and it is hereby ordained that the provisions of this ordinance shall become and be made a part of the Code of Ordinances of the City of Covington, Georgia, and the sections of this ordinance may be re-numbered to accomplish such intention." 
    All sections, articles, chapters or provisions of this code desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Prior code § 1-6) 
1.04.060 - Altering code. 
    It unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions, any part or portion of this code, or to insert or delete pages or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the City of Covington, Georgia, to be misrepresented thereby. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Prior code § 1-7) 
Chapter 1.08 - ARREST PROCEDURE 
Sections: 

1.08.101 - Handling of prisoners-Disposition of weapons and stolen property. 
    All persons taken into custody by the city police department shall be treated courteously and in such a manner as to always ensure that the rights of such persons are not in any way violated. Stolen property received by the police department and weapons seized shall be disposed of in accordance with state law in such a manner as to ensure the constitutional rights of all parties having an interest therein. The chief of police shall be responsible for establishing policies and procedures to ensure detailed records for the inventory of property received and reflecting the disposition thereof. The proceeds of all sales of confiscated property shall be turned over to the city treasury. 
(Prior code § 2-8.1) 
1.08.020 - Authority of officers to arrest for violation of state laws. 
    Any person who commits any offense against the penal laws of this state within the city limits and in the presence of a police officer shall be arrested by such officer and carried before a justice of the peace or other proper officer for examination; and if such police officer is ordered by the mayor or any member of the city council to arrest such offender, it shall be the duty of the officer to do so and to prosecute the same. 
(Prior code § 2-9) 
Chapter 1.12 - GENERAL PENALTY 
Sections: 

1.12.010 - General penalty. 
    Whenever in this code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in such code or ordinance, the doing of any act is required or the failure to do any act is declared to be unlawful, where no specific penalty is provided therefor, the violation of any such provision of this code or any ordinance shall be punished by a fine not exceeding one thousand dollars ($1,000.00), by confinement or confinement at labor for a term not exceeding thirty (30) days, any or all of such penalties in the discretion of the municipal judge. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 1; prior code § 1-8) 
Title 2 - ADMINISTRATION AND PERSONNEL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 2.04 - CITY GOVERNMENT GENERALLY 
Sections: 

2.04.010 - Mayor and council, form of government-Term-Election-Mayor pro tem-Mayor pro tem elect-Compensation-Regular meeting dates. 
A.  The government of the city shall be vested in the mayor and six council members who shall hold their respective offices for four years and until their successors are elected and qualified, all in accordance with the provisions of Sections 22 and 47 of the Charter of the city of Covington and the Georgia Election Code, Chapter 2, Title 21, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
B.  At the first regular meeting of the mayor and council of each year, they shall elect one of their number mayor pro tem, whose term of office shall be for one year, and if a vacancy occurs, the vacancy shall be filled by the mayor and council for the unexpired term. 
C.  At the meeting of the mayor and council at which this subsection is enacted and thereafter at the first regular meeting of the mayor and council of each year they shall also elect one of their number mayor pro tem elect, whose term of office shall be for the year during which he or she is elected and who shall serve as mayor pro tem during the calendar year next succeeding his or her election, if he or she remains a member of the council during that year. The mayor pro tem elect shall serve as mayor pro tem in the event of the absence of the mayor pro tem, and if a vacancy occurs in the office of mayor pro tem elect it shall be filled by the mayor and council for the unexpired term. 
D.  The salaries of the mayor and the members of the council shall be in accordance with Section 27 of the City Charter. 
E.  Regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be held on the first and third Monday nights of each month. At the meeting of the mayor and council at which this subsection is enacted and thereafter at the first regular meeting of the mayor and council of each year, the mayor and council shall establish by resolution the time for such regular meetings. Such time shall remain the regular meeting time until subsequently changed by the mayor and council. Other meeting dates and times as shall be specially set by the mayor and council. 
(Ord. dated 8/4/08 § 1; Ord. dated 3/17/08 §§ 1-3; Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2; prior code § 2-1) 
(Ord. dated 3/7/16(1), § 1; Ord. dated 2/20/17(1), § 1) 
Chapter 2.06 - CODE OF ETHICS 
Sections: 

2.06.010 - Intent. 
    It is essential to the property administration and operation of the city that the members of its governing authority be, and give the appearance of being, independent and impartial; that public office not be used for private gain; and that there be public confidence in the integrity of the governing authority. The governing authority finds that the public interest requires that the public be protected against such conflicts of interest by the establishment of appropriate ethical standards with respect to the conduct of the members of the governing authority in situations where a conflict may exist. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term: 
    "Complaint" means a written sworn statement filed with the city clerk containing specific allegations of misconduct by a member of the governing authority; provided, however, such allegations must be filed within six months of discovery of the alleged misconduct. 
    "Governing authority" or "member of the governing authority" means and includes the mayor or any council member of the city and any person appointed to any board or commission of the city. 
    "Interest" means any direct or indirect pecuniary or nonpecuniary benefit, held by or having value to a member of the governing authority as a result of a contract, transaction or other matter that is or may be the subject of an official act or action by or with the city. A member of the governing authority shall be deemed to have an interest in transactions involving: 
1.  Any person in the member's immediate family; 
2.  Any person with whom a contractual relationship exists whereby the member may receive any payment or other benefits unless the member is receiving a benefit for goods or services in the normal course of business for which the member has paid commercially reasonable compensation; 
3.  Any business in which the member is a director, officer, employee, agent, or shareholder, except as otherwise provided herein; or 
4.  Any person of whom the member is a creditor, whether secured or unsecured. 
    Pronouns used in this chapter shall be deemed to include masculine or feminine forms and singular or plural forms in order to reflect the gender or number of the affected member of the governing authority. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.030 - Prohibitions. 
    No member of the governing authority shall: 
A.  By conduct, give basis for the reasonable impression that any person can improperly influence him or unduly enjoy his favor in the performance of official acts; 
B.  Directly or indirectly request, exact, receive, or agree to receive a gift, loan, favor, promise, or thing of value for himself or another person if it could reasonably be considered to influence the member in the discharge of his official duties; 
C.  Disclose or otherwise use confidential information acquired by virtue of his official position for his or another person's private gain; 
D.  Use his official position to attempt to secure privileges that are not available to the general public; 
E.  Engage in, accept employment with, or render services for any private business or professional activity when such employment or rendering of services is adverse to and incompatible with the proper discharge of official duties; 
F.  Engage in any activity or transaction that is prohibited by any law now existing or hereafter enacted which is applicable to him by virtue of being a member of the governing authority; 
G.  Use his position as a member to request or require an employee to: 
1.  Do clerical work on behalf of the member, his family, business, social, church or fraternal interest when such work is not furthering a city interest, 
2.  Perform any work outside the employee's normal course of municipal employment, 
3.  Purchase goods or services to be used for the member's personal, business, or political purposes, and 
4.  Work for the member personally without paying the employee just and adequate compensation; 
H.  Use government property of any kind for other than officially approved activities, nor shall he direct employees to use such property for any purposes other than those approved by the governing authority; 
I.  Use his position in any way to coerce, or give the appearance of coercing, another person to provide any financial benefit to himself or any other person or entity. 
    Subsection B of this section shall not apply in the case of: 
1.  An occasional nonpecuniary gift of insignificant value; 
2.  An award publicly presented in recognition of public service; 
3.  A commercially reasonable loan or other financial transaction made in the ordinary course of business by an institution or individual authorized by the laws of Georgia to engage in the making of such a loan or financial transaction; 
4.  Campaign contributions made and reported in accordance with Georgia law. 
    Subsection E of this section shall not apply to a member of the governing authority who is a licensed professional and appears in such professional capacity on behalf of any applicant so long as the conflicts of interest disclosures required by this chapter are made to the applicable board or commission chairperson not later than thirty (30) days prior to the action being taken, and the member is associated with the matter before such board or commission at the time the matter is initiated. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.040 - Disclosure of conflicts of interest. 
    An appointed member of the governing authority who has an interest that he has reason to believe may be affected by his official acts or actions or by the official acts or actions of the governing authority shall disclose the precise nature of such interest by written or verbal statement thirty (30) days prior to the governing authority's taking official action on a matter affecting such interest and shall abstain from discussion of and voting on such matter. An elected member of the governing authority shall disclose the nature of any interest he has at the time such matter is presented to the governing authority for discussion. Such written or verbal statements shall be recorded into the minutes of the meeting of the governing authority and thus become part of the public record. Following any disclosure made pursuant to this section, the member shall refrain from all ex parte communications with other members of the governing authority regarding the matter in which he has an interest. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.050 - Disqualification. 
    A member of the governing authority shall disqualify himself from participating in any official act or action of the city which results in a pecuniary benefit to the member or a business or activity in which he has an interest, when such benefit is not available to the public at large. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.060 - Prohibited contracts. 
    The city shall not enter into any contract involving services or property with a member of the governing authority or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest. This section shall not apply in the case of: 
A.  Designation of a financial institution as a depository for city funds; 
B.  Borrowing of funds from any financial institution which offers the lowest available rate of interest in the community for such loan; 
C.  Contracts entered into in accordance with the exceptions set forth in Official Code of Georgia Annotated, Section 16-10-6(c); 
D.  Contracts entered into under circumstances that constitute an emergency situation, provided that the city manager submits a written statement explaining the emergency, to be recorded in the minutes of the governing authority; 
E.  Contracts entered into with a member of the governing authority, or with a business in which a member of the governing authority has an interest, provided that such contract is the result of a competitive bid, disclosure of the nature of such member's interest is made prior to the time any bid is submitted, and a written waiver of the prohibition contemplated by this section is issued by the city manager following such disclosure. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.070 - Restrictions on contracts with former members of the governing authority. 
    The city shall not enter into any contract with any person or business represented by such person, who has, within the preceding twelve (12) month period, been a member of the governing authority, unless the contract is awarded by a competitive bid. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.080 - Complaints. 
    Any person having a complaint against any member of the governing authority for an alleged violation of the provisions of this chapter shall file a written verified complaint setting forth the particular facts and circumstances which constitute the alleged violation. The complaint shall be filed with the city clerk. Upon receipt of a complaint, the mayor, or, in the event the complaint is against the mayor, the mayor pro tem shall appoint three members of the city council, who, along with the city attorney, shall constitute an investigating committee which shall determine whether the complaint sets forth sufficient facts to warrant referring the matter for a hearing before the board of ethics. In the event the complaint does not set forth sufficient facts to allege an ethics violation and is found unjustified, frivolous or otherwise unfounded, it shall be dismissed and the complainant notified of the dismissal immediately. In the event the complaint is found to state sufficient facts to warrant a hearing before the board of ethics, the board shall be appointed as provided herein. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.090 - Board of ethics. 
A.  Composition. 
1.  The board of ethics of the city shall be composed of five residents of the city to be appointed as provided in subsections (A)(2) and (A)(3) of this section. Each member of the board of ethics shall have been a resident of the city for at least one year immediately preceding the date of taking office and shall remain a resident of the city while serving as a member of the board of ethics. No person shall serve as a member of the board of ethics if that person has, or has had, within the immediately preceding one-year period, any interest in any contract, transaction, or official action of the city. 
2.  The mayor and council shall each designate two qualified citizens so as to provide a pool of fourteen (14) individuals who have consented to serve as a member of the board of ethics and who will be available for a period of two years to be called upon to serve in the event a board of ethics is appointed. 
3.  The city manager shall maintain a listing of the board of ethics pool. Should the investigating committee determine a complaint warrants a hearing before the board of ethics, the mayor, at the first public meeting after such determination, shall draw names randomly from the board of ethics pool until the specified five members of the board of ethics have been selected. The board of ethics thus selected shall elect one of its members to serve as chairman. 
4.  The members of the board of ethics shall serve without compensation. The governing authority of the city shall provide meeting space for the board of ethics. Subject to budgetary procedures and requirements of the city, the city shall provide the board of ethics with such supplies and equipment as may be reasonably necessary in the performance of its duties and responsibilities. 
B.  The board of ethics thus constituted shall have the following duties and powers: 
1.  To establish procedures, rules and regulations governing its internal organization and conduct of its affairs; 
2.  To hold a hearing within sixty (60) days after the complaint is filed. Failure to hold a hearing within the specified time shall result in dismissal of the complaint as to the transaction and shall prevent refiling for a period of six months from the date of filing if such complaint arises from the same incident; 
3.  To prescribe forms, approved by the city attorney, for the disclosures required by this chapter and to make such disclosures available to the public as required by Georgia law; 
4.  To make investigations, hold hearings and otherwise respond to complaints as necessary to determine whether any person has violated any provisions of this chapter; 
5.  To report its findings to the governing authority for such action as the governing authority may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.100 - Service of complaint; hearings and disposition of complaints. 
    The board of ethics shall cause a complaint to be served on the member of the governing authority charged with violation of this chapter as soon as practicable after the complaint is filed. Service may be made personally or by certified mail, return receipt requested. A hearing shall be held within sixty (60) days after the filing of the complaint. The board of ethics shall conduct the hearing in accordance with the procedures and regulations it establishes but, in all circumstances, the hearing shall be recorded and shall include the taking of testimony and the right of cross-examination of witnesses. The decision of the board of ethics shall be rendered to the mayor and council and written notice thereof provided to the affected parties within five days after completion of the hearing. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.110 - Penalty and member rights. 
A.  Any member of the governing authority who knowingly violates any provision of the code established by this chapter shall be subject to public reprimand or censure by the governing authority of the city. 
B.  At any hearing held by the board of ethics, the member of the governing authority who is the subject of inquiry shall have the right to written notice of the allegations at least ten (10) business days before a hearing, to be represented by counsel, to hear and examine the evidence, to cross-examine witnesses and to present evidence and witnesses in opposition or in extenuation. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
2.06.120 - Appeals. 
    Any party adversely affected by the findings of the board of ethics may obtain judicial review of such decision by filing an application for a writ of certiorari in the superior court of Newton County within thirty (30) days after the decision of the board of ethics. The filing and prosecution of such application shall proceed as provided by Georgia law codified in Title 5, Chapter 4, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. dated 4/3/06 (part)) 
Chapter 2.08 - MAYOR AND CITY COUNCIL 
Sections: 

2.08.010 - Emergency powers of mayor. 
A.  The mayor shall have the right to declare an emergency to exist when, in his opinion, any one or more of the following conditions exist: 
1.  That there is extreme likelihood of danger of destruction of life or property due to unusual conditions. 
2.  Unusual or extreme weather conditions, making use of city streets or areas difficult or impossible. 
3.  Civil unrest, commotion or uprising is imminent or exists. 
4.  There is a stoppage or loss of electrical power affecting a major portion of the city. 
B.  After declaration of such emergency, the mayor, as chief executive, shall have the right to exercise any or all of the following powers: 
1.  The power to use employees of the city other than employees of the police department to assist in the safety and preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city; 
2.  The power to close streets and sidewalks and to delineate areas within the city wherein an emergency exists; 
3.  The power to impose emergency curfew regulations; 
4.  The power to close business establishments within the affected area; 
5.  The power to close any and all municipally owned buildings and other facilities to the use of the general public; and 
6.  The power to do any and all acts necessary and incidental to the preservation of life, limb and property of the citizenry of the city. 
C.  No emergency power as set forth herein may be effective for more than seventy-two (72) hours after the declaration of an emergency by the mayor. However, upon declaration of a second or further emergencies to exist the emergency powers as set forth herein may be exercised during such further emergency period or periods, but never for more than seventy-two (72) hours in one declared emergency period. 
D.  No emergency period shall extend beyond the next regular or special meeting of the mayor and council. 
E.  The declaration of an emergency as to a portion of the city shall specify with exactness the area in which the emergency is declared to exist. 
(Prior code § 2-1.1) 
2.08.020 - Oath required of city officials. 
    Each officer of the city council shall take and subscribe to the oath for the faithful discharge of the duties of the office, in the form prescribed by the charter for the mayor and members of council. 
(Prior code § 2-20) 
Chapter 2.12 - CITY CLERK 
Sections: 

2.12.010 - City clerk-Appointment-Term-Removal-Oath. 
    There shall be a city clerk, who shall be appointed by the city manager before the first regular meeting of the mayor and council in January of each year. He shall be appointed for a term of one year, but may be removed from office at any time at the pleasure of the city manager whenever the city manager may deem it to be in the best interest of the city to so remove him. Before entering upon the duties of his office, he shall take and subscribe the following oath: 
"I do solemnly swear that I will, to the best of my ability, discharge the duties of city clerk of the City of Covington, Georgia, during my continuance in office so help me God." 
(Ord. dated 4/20/09, § 1) 
2.12.020 - City clerk-Duties. 
    The city clerk shall attend all meetings of the city council and make and keep an accurate and complete record of the acts and doings of the city council, which records shall be properly indexed. He shall make and keep such books and records and make such entries therein as may be required by law or the ordinances of the city. He shall attend all sessions of the Covington Municipal Court and keep the docket book thereof. 
(Prior code § 2-3) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/09, § 2) 
Chapter 2.16 - CITY ATTORNEY 
Sections: 

2.16.010 - City attorney-Election-Salary-Duties. 
    There shall be a city attorney appointed by the governing body at its first regular meeting in January of each year. He shall be paid such salary as shall be fixed by the governing body at the time of his election. He shall attend to all cases in which the city is a party and shall prepare all such ordinances, contracts and legal forms as may be requested of him by the governing body and do such other duties as may be incident to his office. 
(Prior code § 2-6) 
Chapter 2.20 - BOARDS, COMMISSIONS AND COMMITTEES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

2.20.010 - Committees. 
    Upon determination by the governing body that a committee or committees would facilitate the operation of the city government or would work for the general welfare of the city, the mayor shall appoint the members to any such committee or committees. The mayor shall be an ex officio member of all committees. 
(Prior code § 2-5) 
2.20.020 - Subpoena powers of council and board of tax assessors. 
    The city tax assessors and all council committees shall have power to issue subpoenas and compel the attendance of witnesses upon any committee meeting. 
(Prior code § 2-11) 
Chapter 2.22 - PUBLIC WORKS DIVISION 
Sections: 

2.22.010 - Public works division created. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 34 of the Charter of the city of Covington, there is established a public works division. 
(Ord. dated 3/20/06 (part)) 
2.22.020 - Powers and duties. 
    The public works division shall have general supervisory authority, in matters not otherwise expressly delegated or regulated by other provisions of the city code, over the following functions or operations of the city: 
A.  Maintenance of vehicles and other city equipment; 
B.  City cemeteries and parks; 
C.  Engineering; 
D.  Maintenance of facilities and grounds comprising real property owned by the city; 
E.  Maintenance and operation of the land application facility; 
F.  Collection and disposal of garbage; 
G.  Stormwater and sanitary sewerage operations; 
H.  Water system; and 
I.  City streets and roads. 
(Ord. dated 3/20/06 (part)) 
2.22.030 - Administration, powers and duties. 
    The chief operating officer of the public works division shall be the public works director of the city. The public works director shall promulgate and enforce such written rules, regulations, standards, criteria or procedures pursuant to the authority given under this chapter as may be necessary or appropriate to carry out his duties thereunder and shall also be responsible for enforcement of ordinances of the city code relating to the functions or operations enumerated in Section 2.22.020 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 3/20/06 (part)) 
Chapter 2.24 - BOARD OF TAX ASSESSORS 
Sections: 

2.24.010 - Board of tax assessors-Members-Appointments-Terms-Qualifications-Duties-Compensation. 
    There shall be a board of tax assessors which shall be composed of three members, all of whom shall be duly appointed by the mayor and council for terms of one year each, or until their successors are appointed and qualified. Each tax assessor must be a resident of this city and hold title to real estate subject to taxation by the city. It shall be the duty of the board of tax assessors to comply with the provisions of Title 3 of this code and to perform any other or further duties which may be assigned to them by the mayor and council. If at any time, and from time to time, there is no full board of tax assessors then serving, the city clerk shall be authorized and directed to fulfill the duties of the board of tax assessors as may be required by the city's code of ordinances. The tax assessors shall receive as compensation for their services such sums as may be prescribed by the mayor and council at the time of their appointment. The city clerk shall receive no extra compensation for carrying out the duties of the board of tax assessors. 
(Prior code § 2-10) 
Chapter 2.28 - RECREATION COMMISSION 
Sections: 

2.28.010 - Commission created-Appointment, term, vacancies. 
    Under the provisions of the general laws of the state of Georgia, there is established a recreation commission, which commission shall have the powers, duties, responsibilities and privileges specified herein as well as specified under the provisions of Chapter 64 of Title 36, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. The official name of this recreation commission shall be as established from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council of the city and the mayor and council by resolution, are expressly authorized to include in the name of said commission words or phrases that might reflect participation in the financial backing of the commission by the governing body of Newton County, Georgia. This commission shall be composed of no fewer than five persons nor more than nine persons with the precise number to be established by resolution of the mayor and council of the city from time to time; provided however, the unexpired term of any commission member may not be terminated by the mayor and council by adoption of a resolution reducing the number of members on the recreation commission. The members of the commission shall serve without pay and shall be appointed by the mayor of Covington. 
    The terms of office of each of the members of the recreation commission shall be for five years or until each member's successors are appointed and qualified except that the members of such commission first appointed shall be appointed for such terms that the term of no two members shall expire in the same year. Vacancies in such commission occurring otherwise than by expiration of term shall be filled by the mayor for the unexpired term. 
(Prior code § 16A-1) 
2.28.020 - Organization of commission-Regulatory powers. 
    Immediately after their appointment, the recreation commission shall meet and organize by selecting one of their members chairman and such other officers as may be necessary. The commission shall have the power to adopt by-laws, rules and regulations for the proper conduct of public recreation in the city. 
(Prior code § 16A-2) 
2.28.030 - General powers, duties of commission. 
    The recreation commission shall provide, conduct and supervise public playgrounds, athletic fields, recreation centers, and other recreation facilities and activities on any of the properties owned or controlled by the city or on other properties with the consent of the owners, and such authorities thereof. It shall have the power to conduct any form of recreation or cultural activity that will employ the leisure time of people in a constructive manner. 
(Prior code § 16A-3) 
2.28.040 - Appointment, compensation of director and other personnel. 
    The recreation commission shall have the power to appoint or designate someone to act as director who is trained and properly qualified for the work and such other personnel as the commission deems proper, and whose compensation shall be fixed by the commission. 
(Prior code § 16A-4) 
2.28.050 - Commission to submit budgets, accept gifts. 
    Annually, the recreation commission shall submit a budget to the city council for its approval. The commission may also solicit or receive any gifts or bequests of money or other personal property or donations to be applied, principal or income, for either temporary or permanent use for playgrounds or other recreation facilities. 
(Prior code § 16A-5) 
2.28.060 - Reports by commission. 
    The recreation commission shall make full and complete monthly and annual reports to the city council and any other reports from time to time as requested. 
(Prior code § 16A-5) 
Chapter 2.32 - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.32.010 - Police department-Appointment-Salaries-Bond. 
A.  Before the first regular meeting of the mayor and council in January of each year, the city manager shall appoint a chief of police, as many regular policemen as may be deemed necessary, and a street superintendent who shall be ex officio a police officer. In addition, the city manager may at any time appoint one or more extra policemen, when deemed necessary, by reason of an emergency or unusual circumstances. All of such appointments shall continue at the pleasure of the city manager, who shall have the right and power to suspend any one of such appointees if deemed in the best interests of the city to do so; provided, however, all suspensions and removals of police officers, including the chief of police, shall be subject to the provisions of the city's personnel ordinance and personnel policies. 
B.  The chief of police and all other policemen shall be under the control of the city manager; they shall be paid such salaries, however, as may be fixed by the mayor and council; and they shall be required to give bond, at the expense of the city, in such amounts as may be from time to time determined by the mayor and council, such bonds to be conditioned for the faithful performance of their duties. Extra policemen who are appointed temporarily for emergencies or unusual circumstances shall not be required to give bond. 
(Prior code § 2-7) 
2.32.020 - Police department-Rules and regulations governing. 
    All police officer shall be subject to the following rules and regulations: 
A.  They shall wear the regulation uniform as approved by governing body at all times while on duty. But this regulation shall not apply to emergency police. 
B.  They shall be moral and upright. 
C.  They shall not drink intoxicating liquors while on duty nor drink to excess at any time. 
D.  They shall pay their debts. 
E.  They shall promptly collect and turn over to the city treasurer all fines. 
F.  They shall promptly turn over to the treasurer all city monies collected by them. 
G.  They shall strictly enforce and strictly obey all of the laws and ordinances of the city. 
H.  They shall diligently remain on duty during such hours as they may be directed by the mayor or by the mayor and city council. 
I.  They shall discharge such other duties as may be in keeping with their office or may be prescribed by the governing body. 
J.  No policeman shall extend credit to any person for any fine imposed without first receiving the approval of the mayor. 
(Prior code § 2-8) 
Chapter 2.36 - FIRE DEPARTMENT 
Sections: 

2.36.010 - Fire department established-Purpose-Fire chief. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of Section 80 of the City Charter, there is established a department of the city to be known as the Covington fire department, the purpose of which shall be the prevention of fire and the protection of life and property within the corporate limits of the city. The fire department shall be headed by a person designated as the fire chief who shall be appointed by and report directly to the city manager and whose employment shall be governed by the personnel policies of the city. 
(Prior code § 10-1.1) 
2.36.020 - Establishment and duties of fire prevention bureau. 
A.  There is created under the supervision of the chief of the fire department of the city, the Covington fire prevention bureau. The purpose of creating the Covington fire prevention bureau is to better conserve property and safeguard human lives and to assist in the enforcement of various rules, regulations and ordinances of the city and the state pertaining to fire prevention and life safety. 
B.  The fire marshal in charge of the fire prevention bureau shall be appointed by the chief of the Covington fire department on the basis of examination to determine his qualifications. The appointment of the fire marshal shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service and his employment shall otherwise be governed by the city personnel policy. 
C.  Except as otherwise expressly provided by the other sections of the city code and regulations adopted or promulgated thereunder, the fire prevention bureau and the fire marshal shall be charged with responsibility for the direct administration and enforcement of all codes, regulations and ordinances dealing with fire prevention and life safety, including but not limited to all provisions of this chapter. Further, the term "authority having jurisdiction" as may be used in this chapter or in any standard code adopted under this chapter shall mean the fire prevention bureau and the fire marshal thereof. As may be consistent with the intent of the provisions of this chapter, the use of the term "fire marshal" shall mean the head of the fire prevention bureau. 
D.  The fire prevention bureau shall investigate the cause, origin and circumstances of every fire occurring in the city by which property has been destroyed or damaged, or loss of life has occurred and, so far as possible, shall determine whether the fire is the result of carelessness or design. Such investigation shall begin immediately upon the occurrence of a fire. The fire marshal shall take charge immediately of the physical evidence, shall notify the proper authorities designated by law to pursue the investigation of such matters, and shall further cooperate with the authorities in the collection of evidence and in the prosecution of any cases. Every fire shall be reported in writing to the fire prevention bureau. Such reports shall be in such form as shall be prescribed by the chief of the fire department. 
E.  The fire marshal shall compile and keep a record of all fires and of all facts concerning the same including injuries, deaths, rescues of persons and statistics as to the extent of such fires and damage caused thereby. The fire marshal shall make an annual report of the activities of the fire department and the fire prevention bureau and shall transmit this report to the chief of the fire department and to the city manager. 
(Prior code § 10-1.2) 
2.36.030 - Fire calls outside the city limits. 
    The fire department will answer all calls outside the city limits of the city in accordance with the "Emergency Operations Procedures Outside City Limits" and with the written "'Firefighting Mutual Aid Agreement", as approved by the mayor, city manager and chief of the fire department. 
(Prior code § 10-11) 
Chapter 2.40 - MUNICIPAL COURT 
Sections: 

2.40.010 - General provisions relative to court. 
A.  Court Established; Designation of Alternate Recorder. There shall be a recorder's court in the city for the trial of all offenders against the laws and ordinances of the city and violations of state law as permitted by state statute, to be held by the city recorder in the city hall as often as necessary. In the absence or disqualification of the recorder, the mayor and council shall designate an alternate recorder who shall preside as provided by the provisions of City Charter Section 44. 
B.  Powers to Compel Attendance and Sentence. The recorder's court shall have power to preserve order and to compel the attendance of witnesses and to punish for contempt as provided in City Charter Section 44. The recorder shall have full power and authority upon conviction to sentence any offender to labor upon the streets or other public works in said city for a period not exceeding six months or to impose a fine not exceeding the amount specified in city Charter Section 44, and imprisonment in the city prison or other place of confinement in said city for a period not exceeding six months, either one or more of said penalties may be imposed at the discretion of the recorder. 
C.  Right to Issue Warrants, Etc. The recorder shall have the right to issue criminal warrants, including inspection or search warrants; to hold preliminary trials and to fix bonds of all persons tried before him to answer for their appearance at Newton Superior Court for violations of criminal laws of this state; and to, in default of such bond, commit such offenders to jail for safekeeping 
(Prior code § 16-1) 
2.40.020 - Appearance bond-Authorized. 
A.  It is lawful to require of each and every person charged with violating any ordinance of said city to give a bond for his or her appearance before the recorder's court. 
B.  The said bond may be made with cash or by personal solvent securities or by one or more solvent sureties signing with the person charged with violating any ordinance of said city. 
(Prior code § 16-2) 
2.40.030 - Appearance bond-Forfeiture. 
    When such person giving bond fails to appear at the time and place given by summons before the recorder's court, and upon his case being called by the recorder or the presiding officer in said court and there being no appearance, the said bond shall be summarily forfeited, and the recorder shall make entry on his docket of the amount of cash deposit, or the value of the solvent securities, and the same shall be converted into the treasury of the city. And in case of sureties on bond the recorder shall issue execution against the principal and surety for the amount of such bond, besides lawful costs for same. 
(Prior code § 16-3) 
2.40.040 - Unlawful acts-Penalty. 
A.  It unlawful for anyone: 
1.  To fail or refuse to observe a lawful summons to attend the recorder's court. 
2.  To be boisterous while in attendance upon the recorder's court. 
3.  To express words of disparagement of and to the person presiding in said recorder's court, or of the said court. 
B.  Any person found guilty of violating this section shall, on conviction before the recorder's court, be punished according to Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Prior code § 16-4) 
2.40.050 - Recorder's power to issue subpoena. 
    The city recorder shall have the power to issue subpoenas and to compel the attendance of witnesses in the recorder's court and to punish, according to Chapter 1.12 of the code, for the failure to comply therewith. 
(Prior code § 16-5) 
Chapter 2.44 - ELECTIONS 
Sections: 

2.44.010 - Registration of voters. 
    The city shall use the voter registration list maintained by the Newton County voter registrar. Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector with the Newton County board of registrars shall be eligible to vote in a city election 
(Prior code § 9-1) 
2.44.020 - Conduct of elections. 
    Newton County shall be authorized to conduct all city elections held pursuant to Chapter 2, Title 21, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as the same may from time to time be amended, and shall perform all duties as superintendent of elections as specified under Chapter 3, Title 21, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as the same may from time to time be amended. The city shall pay Newton County all costs incurred in performing the aforesaid functions. 
(Prior code § 9-2) 
2.44.030 - Municipal election registration and qualifications to comply with state law. 
    Voter and candidate eligibility, election procedures, registration procedures and other matters pertaining to municipal elections for elections within the city shall be governed by the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code, Chapter 3 of Title 21, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Prior code § 9-3) 
2.44.040 - Oath of voters 
    All persons upon registering to vote shall take the following oath: 
    "You do solemnly swear (or affirm) that you are a citizen of the United States, a citizen of the State of Georgia, and a citizen of the City of Covington; that you are eighteen (18) years of age or will be by the date of the next municipal election; that you currently reside in the State of Georgia and within the corporate limits of the city of Covington, Georgia, and that you are otherwise qualified to register for municipal elections within the City of Covington, Georgia, SO HELP YOU GOD." 
(Prior code § 9-4) 
2.44.050 - Voting hours. 
    The polls for municipal elections shall be open from seven a.m. until seven p.m. on the day an election is held 
(Prior code § 9-5) 
2.44.060 - Absentee voting. 
    All absentee voting shall be conducted strictly in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Municipal Election Code. The Newton County registrar shall serve as absentee ballot clerk and shall perform all the duties set forth in Article 10, Chapter Title 21, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as the same may from time to time be amended. 
(Prior code § 9-6) 
2.44.070 - Notice of candidacy. 
    Each candidate, except a candidate nominated by nomination petition provided for in section 21-2-171(h), Official Code of Georgia Annotated, shall file his notice of candidacy in the office of the Newton County Election Superintendent at least twenty-two (22) but not more than thirty-six (36) days prior to the election in the case of a general election, and at least fifteen (15) but not more than thirty (30), days prior to the election in the case of a special election. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 17; prior code § 9-7) 
Chapter 2.48 - RETIREMENT 
Sections: 

2.48.010 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. dated 1/22/2019(1), § 1, reserved § 2.48.010, which pertained to mandatory retirement age for city employees and derived from the prior code § 2-23. 
2.48.020 - Extended to city employees. 
    It is declared to be the policy and purpose of the city to extend at the earliest date possible under the agreement entered into by the state and the federal security administration, to the employees and officials thereof, and its instrumentalities, not excluded by law or by this article, the benefits of the system of old age and survivors insurance as authorized by the Federal Social Security Act, the State Enabling Act, and amendments thereto. In pursuance of said policy, and for that purpose, the city shall take such action as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior code § 15-1) 
2.48.030 - Authority to execute agreements. 
    The mayor, or other chief executive officer, of the city is authorized and directed to execute all necessary agreements and amendments thereto with the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia and officials as provided for in Section 2.48.020 of this chapter to include any employees that are in positions covered by a public retirement system, in the manner by said law provided. 
(Prior code § 15-2) 
2.48.040 - Withholdings from salaries or wages. 
    Withholdings from salaries or wages of employees and officials for the purpose provided for in Section 2.48.020 of this chapter are authorized to be made in the amounts and at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. and shall be paid over to the state agency. 
(Prior code § 15-3) 
2.48.050 - Contributions by city. 
    There shall be appropriated from city general fund account, funds such amounts at such times as may be required by applicable state or federal law or regulations for employer's contributions, administrative expenses, and guaranty fund to assure that the state will not incur any debt or loss as a result of the agreement referred to in Section 2.40.030 of this chapter. Such funds shall be paid over to the Employees' Retirement System of Georgia in accordance with regulations established by said agency. 
(Prior code § 15-4) 
2.48.060 - Records. 
    The city shall keep such records and make such reports as may be required by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior code § 15-5) 
2.48.070 - Exclusion of employees not authorized to be covered. 
    There is excluded from this any authority to make any agreement with respect to any position, or any employee or official not authorized to be covered by applicable state or federal laws or regulations. 
(Prior code § 15-6) 
Chapter 2.52 - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT 
Sections: 

2.52.010 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term "emergency management" means the preparation for and the carrying out of all emergency and disaster functions, other than those functions for which military forces or state and federal agencies are primarily responsible, to prevent, minimize, and repair injury and damage resulting from emergencies or disaster, or the imminent threat thereof, of manmade or natural origin. These functions include, without limitation, firefighting services; police services; medical and health services; rescue, engineering, warning services; communications; protection against the effects of radiological, chemical and other special weapons; evacuation of persons from stricken areas; emergency welfare services; emergency transportation; plant protection; shelter; temporary restoration of public utility services; and other functions related to civilian population, together with all other activities necessary or incidental to total emergency and disaster preparedness for carrying out the foregoing functions. 
(Prior code § 8-1) 
2.52.020 - Office of the county emergency management director. 
    The chairman of the board of commissioners of Newton County, with concurrence of the mayors of cities within the county, shall nominate for appointment by the governor an emergency management director for the entire county. When appointed, the emergency management director is charged with the following duties: 
A.  To represent the governing officials of the city on matters pertaining to emergency management. 
B.  To assist city officials in organizing city departments for emergency operations. 
C.  To develop, in conjunction with city and county departments, the Covington-Newton County plan for emergency functions set forth in Section of this chapter. Such plan will be in consonance with the Georgia Natural Disaster Operations Plan and Nuclear Emergency Operations Plan, and shall be submitted to the governing officials of the county and the cities therein for approval, and thence to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency for approval. 
D.  To maintain the emergency management agency and carry out the day-to-day administration of the Covington-Newton County emergency management program, including the submission of required reports to the Georgia Emergency Management Agency. 
E.  To submit reports, such as daily activity and financial reports, as required by governing officials in keeping with good management practices. 
F.  To obtain, with the authority of governing officials, a facility to be used as the Covington-Newton County Emergency operating center. 
G.  To coordinate the activities of the Covington-Newton County emergency operating center staff during periods of an emergency, and under the supervision of city and county governing officials. 
(Prior code § 8-2) 
2.52.030 - Covington-Newton County management agency. 
A.  The Covington-Newton County emergency management agency shall be established around existing city and county departments and the emergency and disaster functions described in Section 2.52.010 of this chapter are assigned as follows: 
Department/Agency Functions 1. Mayor (Chairman, county commissioners) Direction and control 2. Communications center Communication and warning 3. Police department Police service evacuation 4. Emergency management agency Public information, State military support training, Preliminary damage assessment and reporting, Attack preparedness, Specific hazards 5. Fire department Search, rescue and recover, Fire services, Hazardous materials, Radiological protection 6. Public works Engineering, Petroleum and solid fuel services, Utilities 7. School superintendent Transportation services, Food services 8. Health department Health and medical services 9. Clerk of Newton Superior Court Administrative services, Resources management 10. Department of family and children services Social services, Shelter and temporary housing  
B.  Heads of city departments listed above are responsible for assisting county department heads in developing appropriate annexes to the local emergency operations plan (EOP) for their assigned emergency functions. Such annexes will be submitted to the emergency management director for inclusion in the local EOP for submission to appropriate local officials for approval. 
(Prior code § 8-3) 
2.52.040 - Powers during an emergency or disaster. 
    In the event of a manmade or natural disaster, actual enemy attack upon the United States, or any other emergency which may affect the lives and property of the citizens of Covington, the mayor of Covington, separately or jointly with the chairman of the board of commissions of Newton County, or in their absences their legally appointed alternates, city manager, county administrative assistant or mayor pro tem, may determine that an emergency or disaster exists and thereafter shall have and may exercise for such period as such emergency or disaster exists or continues the following powers: 
A.  To enforce all rules, laws and regulations relating to emergency management and to assume direct operational control over all emergency management resources; 
B.  To seize, take for temporary use or condemn any private property for the protection of public; 
C.  To sell, lend, give or distribute all or any such property or supplies among the inhabitants of Newton County and to maintain a strict accounting of property or supplies distributed and for funds received for such property or supplies; and 
D.  To perform and exercise such other functions and duties, and take such emergency actions as may be necessary to promote and secure the safety, protection and well-being of the inhabitants of the county. 
(Prior code § 8-4) 
2.52.050 - Volunteers. 
    All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, performing emergency functions pursuant to this chapter shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such emergency functions, duly assigned volunteers shall have the same immunities as city officers and employees. 
(Prior code § 8-5) 
2.52.060 - Penalties. 
    Any person violating any provision of this chapter, or any rule, order, or regulation made pursuant to this chapter, shall, upon conviction thereof, be punishable for committing a misdemeanor. 
(Prior code § 8-6) 
2.52.070 - Liberality of construction. 
    This chapter shall be construed liberally in order to effectuate its purpose. 
(Prior code § 8-7) 
Chapter 2.56 - AIRPORT 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article 1 - In General 

2.56.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless from the context a different meaning is apparent, the following terms hereinafter used in these regulations shall be defined as follows: 
    "Airport" means the Covington Municipal Airport. 
    "Airport manager" means the city manager or his or her designee having immediate charge of the airport. 
    "City council" means the council of the city of Covington, Georgia. 
    "Person" means an individual, partnership, firm, association, or corporation. 
(Prior code § 3-1) 
(Ord. dated 1/6/14, § 1) 
2.56.020 - Authority of the airport manager. 
    The airport manager shall at all times have authority to take such action as may be necessary for the proper handling, conduct and management of the airport and the enforcement of these regulations. In any contingencies not specifically covered by these rules and regulations, the airport manager shall be authorized to make such rules and render such decisions as he may deem proper. 
(Prior code § 3-2) 
Article 2 - General Regulations 

2.56.030 - Unauthorized operations prohibited. 
    No commercial operation of any kind, or any other type of operation or activity shall be conducted at the airport unless specifically authorized by the city council. 
(Prior code § 3-3) 
2.56.040 - Duty to obey regulations. 
    The use of the airport or any of its facilities in any manner shall create an obligation on the part of the user thereof to obey all regulations herein set forth. 
(Prior code § 3-4) 
2.56.050 - Release of city from liability. 
A.  The privileges of using the airport or its facilities shall be conditioned on the assumption of full responsibility and risk by the user thereof, who shall release, hold harmless and indemnify the city, its officers and employees from any liability or loss resulting from such use, including claims of third persons. 
B.  The privilege of using the airport shall be upon the further condition that any person desiring to use the same shall furnish a policy of indemnity against personal injury and property damage in such sum as the city council shall require. 
(Prior code § 3-6) 
2.56.060 - Violators deprived of use of facilities. 
    Any person violating any of the airport rules and regulations may be deprived of the use of the airport facilities for such period of time as may be determined by the city council. 
(Prior code § 3-6) 
2.56.070 - Soliciting, signs, advertising, without permit; prohibited. 
    No person shall solicit funds for any purpose, and no signs, advertisements, or circulars may be posted or distributed, at the airport without permission of the city council. 
(Prior code § 3-7) 
2.56.080 - Garbage-Destruction of buildings, etc. 
    Garbage, refuse and other waste material shall be placed in receptacles provided for such purpose; and no person shall remove, destroy or disturb in any way buildings, signs, equipment, markers or other property at the airport. 
(Prior code § 3-8) 
Article 3 - Motor Vehicle Regulations 

2.56.090 - Entering runways, etc. 
    No highway or automotive vehicles, or pedestrians, shall enter the apron, runways or taxiways without receiving prior approval of the airport manager. 
(Prior code § 3-9) 
2.56.100 - Aircraft loading or unloading. 
    When aircraft are parked on the apron for the purpose of loading or unloading, no vehicle shall be driven between the aircraft and the loading gate or fence. 
(Prior code § 3-10) 
2.56.110 - Parking vehicles on airport property. 
    No vehicle shall be parked on the airport property except in those areas designated for that purpose by the airport manager. 
(Prior code § 3-11) 
2.56.120 - Accidents to be reported to manager. 
    Every accident involving injury or property damage shall be reported immediately to the airport manager. 
(Prior code § 3-12) 
2.56.130 - Negligence of vehicle operators. 
    No person shall operate any vehicle in a careless or negligent manner or in disregard for the safety of others or in excess of posted speed traffic signs. 
(Prior code § 3-13) 
Article 4 - Aircraft Operations Regulations 

2.56.140 - Federal Aviation Rules adopted. 
    The air traffic rules and aircraft operations regulations of the Federal Aviation Agency as they now are, or may hereafter be, including all amendments and additions thereto, are made a part of these airport rules and regulations as fully and completely as if set forth herein verbatim. 
(Prior code § 3-14) 
2.56.150 - Starting, running up aircraft engines. 
    Aircraft engines shall be started and run up only in the places designated by the airport manager for such purposes. At no time shall engines be run up when hangars, shops, airplanes, or any person are in the path of the propeller stream. 
(Prior code § 3-15) 
2.56.160 - Parking, storing, repairing aircraft. 
    No aircraft shall be parked, stored or repaired at the airport, except in the areas designated by the airport manager for such purposes. 
(Prior code § 3-16) 
2.56.170 - Maximum time for gate position. 
    At no time, except for mechanical difficulty, will any plane be allowed more than thirty minutes for loading or unloading at a gate position. Planes wishing to park for a longer period shall proceed to the parking area designated by the airport manager. 
(Prior code § 3-17) 
2.56.180 - Visual inspection to avoid collision. 
    No person shall taxi an aircraft until he has ascertained by visual inspection of the area that there will be no danger of collision with any person or object in the immediate area. 
(Prior code § 3-18) 
2.56.190 - Taxiing at safe speed. 
    Aircraft shall be taxied at a safe and reasonable speed with due regard for other aircraft, persons, and property, and in accordance with taxi patterns which will be published by the airport manager. 
(Prior code § 3-19) 
2.56.200 - Brakes-Attendants required where inadequate. 
    Aircraft not having adequate brakes shall have an attendant at each wing tip when the aircraft is taxiing near buildings, persons, or other aircraft. 
(Prior code § 3-20) 
2.56.210 - Aircraft awaiting take-off. 
    Aircraft awaiting take-off shall stop one hundred twenty-five (125) feet from the runway in use, or at a greater distance if the holding post marker painted on the taxi-way so indicates, and in a position that affords a direct view of aircraft approaching for a landing. 
(Prior code § 3-21) 
2.56.220 - Landings-Movement-Confined to runways-Hard surface areas. 
    All take-offs and landings shall be confined to the runways, and all movement of aircraft shall be confined to the hard surface areas. 
(Prior code § 3-22) 
2.56.225 - Sport parachuting (skydiving). 
A.  Applicability. This section shall apply only to parachute operations conducted over the Covington Municipal Airport (hereinafter, "the airport"). 
B.  Governing Regulations. All applicable parachute operations shall be regulated by the provisions of Federal Aviation Regulation Part 105, as supplemented by Federal Aviation Administration Advisory Circular 105-2D, as the same may be revised or amended from time to time, copies of which are maintained for inspection during normal business hours at the offices of the Airport, 15200 Airport Road, Covington, Georgia, and which are by this reference incorporated into and made a part of this section. Where any provision of this section conflicts with the provisions of said federal regulations, the more restrictive shall apply. 
C.  Skydiving Certificate of Authorization. Any operator desiring to utilize the airport as the airport of departure for skydiving operations over or onto airport property shall first obtain a certificate of authorization from the airport manager, as follows: 
1.  An application in the form and manner prescribed by the airport manager shall be filed with the airport manager, together with payment of an administrative fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution. 
2.  The said application shall contain the following information: 
(a)  The date and time the parachute operation will begin. 
(b)  Each altitude above mean sea level at which the aircraft will be operated when parachutists or objects exit the aircraft. 
(c)  The duration of the intended skydiving operation. 
(d)  The name, address, and telephone number of the person who requests the authorization or gives notice of the skydiving operation. 
(e)  The registration number and the name and address of the pilot and the registration number of the aircraft to be used. 
3.  The certificate of authorization thus obtained shall not operate to permit skydiving operations at any location other than Covington Municipal Airport. Any person desiring to conduct skydiving operations in other locations must comply with the governing regulations cited in subsection B. of this section. 
4.  The applicant shall provide the airport manager or his designee with a current certificate of liability insurance issued by an insurer duly authorized to do business in the State of Georgia indicating coverage indemnifying the city, its elected officials, agents, officers and employees from any liability for property damage or personal injury arising from or in any way associated with such skydiving operation, with limits of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00) combined single limit. 
5.  Every person participating in such skydiving operation, whether pilot, operator or skydiver, shall execute and deliver to the airport manager or his designee a personal waiver, indemnification and release of liability in favor of the city from property damage or personal injury arising from or in any way associated with such skydiving operation. 
D.  No person may conduct a skydiving operation, and no pilot in command of an aircraft, may allow a skydiving operation to be conducted from such aircraft if that operation would create a hazard to air traffic or to persons or property on the ground. 
E.  No person may conduct or participate in a skydiving operation, and no pilot in command of an aircraft, may allow a person to conduct or participate in a parachute operation from such aircraft if that person is or appears to be under the influence of alcohol or any drug that affects that person's faculties in any way contrary to safety. 
F.  This section shall not apply to parachute operations conducted by members of United States military forces. 
(Ord. dated 6/3/13, § 1; Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 1) 
2.56.230 - Airport managers directions to be complied with. 
    At the direction of the airport manager, the operator of any aircraft on the airport (including any damaged or inoperable aircraft) shall move the aircraft from the place where it is parked or stored to any other place designated on the airport; and if such operator should refuse to comply with such directions, the airport manager may tow the aircraft to such place at the operator's expense and without liability for damage that may result from such moving. 
(Prior code § 3-23) 
2.56.240 - Report of accident to airport manager required. 
    The pilot of an aircraft involved in an accident in or near the airport and causing personal injury or property damage shall immediately report the same to the airport manager. In the event that he is unable to do so, the owner or his agent or witnesses shall make such report. 
(Prior code § 3-24) 
2.56.250 - Payment for damaged airport property. 
    Airport property damaged or destroyed by an accident or otherwise shall be paid for by the parties responsible. 
(Prior code § 3-25) 
2.56.260 - Detention of aircraft for nonpayment. 
    The airport manager shall have the authority to detain any aircraft for nonpayment of any charges due. 
(Prior code § 3-26) 
Artic1e 5 - Rules For Aircraft Fueling Operations 

2.56.270 - Refueling while engine running or aircraft enclosed-Prohibited. 
    No aircraft shall be fueled or drained while aircraft engine is running or while the aircraft is in an enclosed area. 
(Prior code § 3-27) 
2.56.280 - Approved grounding required during refueling. 
    During all fuel operations the aircraft shall be grounded by an approved method. 
(Prior code § 3-28) 
2.56.290 - Smoking-Open flame-Near hangar prohibited. 
    Smoking or lighting of an open flame shall be prohibited within fifty (50) feet of any hangar or building. 
(Prior code § 3-29) 
2.56.300 - Fueling near hangar prohibited. 
    Fueling operations shall be conducted and fuel trucks shall be parked at least fifty (50) feet from any hangar or building. 
(Prior code § 3-30) 
2.56.310 - Upkeep of fuel dispensing equipment. 
    All fuel dispensing equipment shall be of a modern design and shall be kept in a safe nonleaking condition. 
(Prior code § 3-31) 
Article 6 - Fire Regulations 

2.56.320 - Smoking-Open flame at posted area, fuel stations-Prohibited. 
    Smoking or lighting of any open flame is prohibited at places with posted signs, within fifty (50) feet of any aircraft and within fifty (50) feet of hangars, fuel trucks, or fuel loading stations. 
(Prior code § 3-32) 
2.56.330 - Unauthorized open fires prohibited. 
    No person shall start an open fire any place on the airport without permission of the airport manager. 
(Prior code § 3-33) 
2.56.340 - Fire extinguishers, equipment-Provided and maintained by tenants. 
    Tenants of all hangars and buildings shall provide suitable fire extinguishers and equipment and they shall be kept in good condition and inspected at least every twelve (12) months by trained personnel. 
(Prior code § 3-34) 
2.56.350 - Tenants to keep premises cleared. 
    All tenants are required to keep their premises clean and clear of all rubbish, junk, debris, old aircraft and vehicles, and any other unsightly objects. If any such premises should not be cleared within five days after notice from the airport manager to do so, the airport manager may have the same cleaned at the expense of the responsible tenant or tenants. 
(Prior code § 3-35) 
Article 7 - Minimum Requirements for Fixed Base Operators 

2.56.360 - Fixed base operator, operation-Defined. 
    The term "fixed base operator" as herein used is defined as any person, firm, or corporation entering into or performing any type of commercial, aeronautical enterprise or activity; and the term "fixed base operation" refers to any such commercial operation of a fixed base operator. 
(Prior code § 3-36) 
2.56.370 - Operations to be full-times-Rates to be approved by city. 
    All fixed base operations at the airport shall be full-time progressive business enterprises with manned office facilities at the airport during all business hours. The fixed base operator shall operate the airport for the use and benefit of the public without discriminatory or unreasonable charges or fees for any airport service. Rates or charges for such activities and services shall be fixed by the fixed base operator subject to the city's concurrence and approval of such rates and charges as to reasonableness. In the event of disputes as to such reasonableness, the final determination shall be the right and determination of the city. Nothing herein contained shall be construed to grant or authorize the granting of an exclusive right within the meaning of Section 308 (2) of the Federal Aviation Act of 1958 as amended. 
(Prior code § 3-37) 
2.56.380 - Performance bond may be required. 
    Fixed base operators may be required to furnish the city a performance bond commensurate with the construction required under the provisions of Sections 2.56.430 and 2.56.440 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 3-38) 
2.56.390 - Construction to comply with standards. 
    All construction herein required shall be in accordance with design and construction standards established by the city for the facility involved. 
(Prior code § 3-39) 
2.56.400 - Business ability, solvency of base operators. 
    Fixed base operators must show financial solvency and business ability to the satisfaction of the city. 
(Prior code § 3-40) 
2.56.410 - City determines compliance with standards-Lease for base operators. 
    The city shall determine substantial conformance with the standards for fixed base operators. No fixed base operator shall be allowed to operate on the airport without a fully executed lease agreement with the city. 
(Prior code § 3-41) 
2.56.420 - Liability insurance. 
    The minimum liability insurance which a fixed base operator shall carry is three hundred thousand dollars ($3000,000.00) for bodily injury and one hundred thousand dollars ($100,000.00) for property damage, such coverage to include all activities of the fixed base operator. 
(Prior code § 3-42) 
2.56.430 - Hangar construction. 
    Each fixed base operator shall construct (or lease from the city) and maintain a hangar of not less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet in size, with an adjoining storage lean-to of the same construction as the hangar to be not less than eight hundred (800) square feet in size, on airport property at a location designated by the city. If such hangar is to be constructed, plans and specifications for such construction must be submitted for the approval of the city, and must also meet the approval of all concerned departments of the Federal Aviation Agency, before a permit shall be granted for work to begin. 
(Prior code § 3-43) 
2.56.440 - Requirements for lean-to. 
    A lean-to having a minimum of one thousand two hundred (1,200) square feet of floor space and using the same type construction as the hangar shall be provided and maintained adjoining the hangar for shops, offices, lounge, and rest room facilities. 
(Prior code § 3-44) 
2.56.450 - Minimum equipment of base operation. 
    The fixed base operator shall have a minimum of two airworthy and operational aircraft, and maintain a sufficient stock of parts, gasoline and accessories. Shop equipment shall include the necessary equipment to perform all maintenance of modern, small aircraft. 
(Prior code § 3-45) 
2.56.460 - Maintenance men, mechanics required. 
    The fixed base operator shall provide the services of at least one full-time Federal Aviation Agency certified A & E mechanic, and as many Federal Aviation Agency certified personnel as may be required to perform the various aircraft maintenance and repairs in accordance with all rules, regulations, and directives of the Federal Aviation Agency and other governmental bodies having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Prior code § 3-46) 
2.56.470 - Permitted operations of base operator. 
    The fixed base operator may engage in flight instruction, charter service, and/or aircraft rental, such services to be performed only by properly certified instructors and pilots with ratings and qualifications as required by the Federal Aviation Agency in the performance of all operations as outlined in this paragraph. 
(Prior code § 3-47) 
2.56.480 - Minimum standards-Full-time ramp services. 
    Fixed base operators providing sale of aviation products and hangar rental must meet the minimum standards as shown herein and must provide ramp services full-time during daylight hours, and by call at night, seven days a week. 
(Prior code § 3-48) 
2.56.490 - Miscellaneous operations. 
    Miscellaneous operations such as radio and instrument repairs, aerial advertising, crop dusting, and other aeronautical activities not hereinbefore provided for may be conducted by any person upon application to and approval by the city. Reasonable terms and conditions for the privilege of engaging in these various services will be established by the city council commensurate with the nature and scope of the activities involved. 
(Prior code § 3-49) 
2.56.500 - First leases-City council may modify certain requirements. 
    In the first lease hereafter executed by the city with a fixed base operator, the city may, at the discretion of the city council waive or modify the requirements of Sections 2.56.430 and 2.56.440 of this chapter on such terms and conditions the city council may deem appropriate. 
(Prior code § 3-50) 
2.56.510 - Leases subject to chapter provisions. 
    Any lease hereafter executed by the city and a fixed base operator shall be expressly subject to the provisions of this chapter, including all amendments thereto, regardless of whether such amendments are enacted or adopted before or after the execution of such lease. 
(Prior code § 3-51) 
Article 8 - Penalties 

2.56.520 - City penal laws-Police authority-Effective on airport property. 
    The city's penal laws are made of force and effect on airport property. Any officer of the city, including police officers, shall have the same authority on airport property as in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 3-52) 
Chapter 2.60 - CEMETERIES 
Sections: 

2.60.010 - Injury to shrubbery plants, etc., prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to break or to injure in any way any trees, shrubbery, plants, vines or flowers, in the public cemeteries or parks in said city or to displace or remove anything in private lots in said cemetery without consent of the owner thereof. This section is not to be construed to affect the action of owners of lots in said cemeteries so far as their own lots are concerned. 
(Prior code § 7-1) 
2.60.020 - Sale of cemetery lots. 
    The purchase price of cemetery lots in Southview and Westview cemeteries shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per grave site, including perpetual care, maintenance and upkeep. 
(Ord. dated 4/2/12, § 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated April 2, 2012 repealed §§ 2.60.020-2.60.060 in their entirety and enacted a new § 2.60.020 to read as set out herein. Former §§ 2.60.020-2.60.060 pertained to rates for cemetery lots-perpetual care required; charge for grave digging; charge for perpetual upkeep; and maintenance of lots-annual charge, respectively, and derived from prior code §§ 7-1-7-6. 
2.60.030 - Record keeping. 
    The city clerk and/or his or her authorized and appointed representative shall keep and maintain records pertaining to the owner(s) of lots, persons buried, and location of graves on lots within both the Southview and the Westview cemeteries. It shall be the responsibility of the funeral director in charge of the burial of remains in either city cemetery to make inquiry as to the availability of the grave and to do the interment in such a way as not to disturb any other graves, and thereafter provide the city clerk or the city clerk's designee ("cemetery clerk") within thirty (30) days after the interment the required information to allow the city to maintain its records. The city clerk shall provide appropriate forms upon request for the funeral director's reporting of information concerning burials, lot ownership and other information necessary or appropriate and that may be reasonably available to the funeral director concerning burials within either city cemetery. The city clerk and/or the cemetery clerk shall endeavor to keep a current updated map of the city's cemeteries posted in a public place at City Hall and to review same annually for completeness. 
(Ord. dated 4/2/12, § 1; Prior code § 7-7) 
Editor's note- See § 2.60.020 editor's note. 
2.60.040 - Cemetery regulations. 
A.  Definition of Term. "Cemetery" means any land or structure in the city dedicated to and used, or intended to be used, for interment of human remains, including cremated remains. It may either be a burial park for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments, or a combination of one or more thereof. 
B.  Zoning Districts Where Permitted and Prohibited. Subject to the provisions of Title 44, chapter 3, Article 4, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, and the further provisions of this section, cemeteries may be established and maintained in every zoning use district enumerated in Section 24-26(a) of this code except ER-HR, MHP, S-P and CBD districts. 
C.  Approval Necessary. No cemetery shall be established without the prior written approval of the planning commission after application and hearing as provided in Section 16.124.010 of this code, and further approval of the mayor and council upon affirmative recommendation of the planning commission as provided in Section 16.128.040(F) of this code. 
D.  Height of Buildings Regulated. No building or other structure exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in height, as measured from existing ground level prior to any site preparation, shall be constructed or placed in a cemetery. 
E.  Green Belt Required. A green belt not less than ten (10) feet in width, containing opaque plantings of trees and shrubs with mature growth not less than ten (10) feet in height, shall be established and maintained around the perimeter of every cemetery. 
F.  Fencing Requirements. A fence not less than six feet in height, suitable to secure the cemetery from vandalism, shall be erected and maintained along the outer boundary of the aforesaid green belt. Construction of such fence shall be approved by the planning commission as a condition to establishment of the cemetery pursuant to subsection C of this section. 
G.  Roadway, Width. Interior roads intended for vehicular traffic within cemeteries shall be not less than thirty (30) feet in width. 
H.  Accessory Buildings. Accessory buildings for office, storage or maintenance facilities in conjunction with the operation of cemeteries shall be permitted; provided, however, that no such accessory building shall be erected closer than ten (10) feet from any cemetery lot line. 
I.  Identification Signs. One identification sign, not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet in area, shall be permitted at each entrance to a cemetery from a public road. 
J.  Register of Interments. The owner of each cemetery shall establish and maintain a current register of each grave, crypt, niche or vault that is opened in such cemetery, which shall contain for each such grave, crypt, niche or vault the date of any interment therein the name of the person whose remains were so interred and, where known, the name and address of the next of kin of such decedent as of the date of interment. A copy of such register shall be filed with the city on or before March 31 of each year. 
(Ord. dated 4/2/12, § 1; Prior code § 7-8) 
Editor's note- See § 2.60.020 editor's note. 
2.60.050 - Mausoleum regulations. 
A.  Definition of Term. "Mausoleum" means a structure or building which is substantially exposed above ground and which is used, or intended to be used, for the interment of human remains in crypts or niches. 
B.  Mausoleums to Meet Section 2.60.080 Requirements. No mausoleum shall be maintained in the city except in a cemetery meeting the requirements of Section 2.60.080 of this chapter. 
C.  Approval Necessary. No mausoleum shall be erected without the prior written approval of the planning commission after application and hearing as provided in Section 16.124.010 of this code, and further approval of the mayor and council, upon affirmative recommendation of the planning commission, as provided in Section 16.128.040(F) of this code. 
D.  Application; Required Submittals. Every application for a building permit for a mausoleum shall be accompanied by: 
1.  A plat of survey of the mausoleum site prepared by a Georgia-registered land surveyor, showing the location of the proposed mausoleum and the requisite parking spaces; 
2.  A complete set of plans and specifications for the mausoleum prepared and certified by a Georgia-registered professional engineer or Georgia-licensed architect; and 
3.  A landscaping design plan for the entire mausoleum site. 
E.  Lot and Parking Requirements. The minimum lot size for a mausoleum shall be one acre and each mausoleum lot shall contain paved spaces for off-street parking of not less than five full-size automobiles or one such space for each one hundred (100) square feet of chapel area in the mausoleum, whichever is greater. 
F.  Location on Lot. No mausoleum shall be erected closer than seventy-five (75) feet from any residential property line or sixty (60) feet from any nonresidential property line. 
G.  Certificate of Use. No interment shall be made in a mausoleum until a certificate of use shall have been issued by the city building and zoning department upon satisfactory completion of the mausoleum according to the plans and specifications submitted by the applicant. 
(Ord. dated 4/2/12, § 1; Prior code § 7-9) 
Editor's note- See § 2.60.020 editor's note. 
2.60.060 - Abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds. 
A.  Statement of Purpose. The mayor and council of the city find that it is appropriate for the city to exercise its police power to preserve and protect any abandoned cemetery or any burial ground which has been abandoned or is not being maintained by the person who is legally responsible for its upkeep, whether or not that person is financially capable of doing so, to expend public money in connection therewith, to provide for reimbursement of such funds by billing any legally responsible person or levying upon any of his property, and to exercise the power of eminent domain to acquire any interest in land necessary for that purpose, all in the manner provided in O.C.G.A. Sections 36-72-3 through 36-72-16, as the same shall be amended from time to time. 
B.  Definitions. As used in this Section 2.60.060, the term: 
    "Abandoned cemetery" means a cemetery which shows signs of neglect including, without limitation, the unchecked growth of vegetation, repeated and unchecked acts of vandalism, or the disintegration of grave markers or boundaries and for which no person can be found who is legally responsible and financially capable of the upkeep of such cemetery. 
    "Archeologist" means any person who is: 
1.  A member of or meets the criteria for membership in the Society of Professional Archaeologists and can demonstrate experience in the excavation and interpretation of human graves; or 
2.  Employed on July 1, 1991, by the state or by any county or municipal city as an archeologist. 
    "Burial ground" means an area dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. The term shall include privately owned burial plots, individually and collectively, once human remains have been buried therein. The fact that the area was used for burial purposes shall be evidence that it was set aside for burial purposes. 
    "Burial object" means any item reasonably believed to have been intentionally placed with the human remains at the time of burial or interment or any memorial, tombstone, grave marker, or shrine which may have been added subsequent to interment. Such term also means any inscribed or uninscribed marker, coping, curbing, enclosure, fencing, pavement, shelter, wall, stoneware, pottery, or other grave object erected or deposited incident to or subsequent to interment. 
    "Cemetery" or "cemeteries" means any land or structure in this state dedicated to and used for interment of human remains. It may be either a burial park for earth interments or a mausoleum for vault or crypt interments or a combination of one or more thereof. 
    "Descendant" means a person or group of persons related to a deceased human by blood or adoption in accordance with O.C.G.A. Title 19. 
    "Genealogist" means a person who traces or studies the descent of persons or families and prepares a probative record of such descent. 
    "Human remains" means the bodies of deceased human beings in any stage of decomposition, including cremated remains. 
    "Preserve and protect" means to keep safe from destruction, peril, or other adversity and may include the placement of signs, markers, fencing, or other such appropriate features so as to identify the site as a cemetery or burial ground and may also include the cleaning, maintenance, and upkeep of the site so as to aid in its preservation and protection. 
C.  Permit Required. No known cemetery, burial ground, human remains, or burial object shall be knowingly disturbed by the owner or occupier of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located for the purposes of developing or changing the use of any part of such land unless a permit is first obtained from the mayor and council, which shall have authority to permit such activity except as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 36-72-14. 
D.  Contents of Application. Application for a permit shall be made to the planning and zoning director and shall include the following information: 
1.  Evidence of ownership of the land on which the cemetery or burial ground is located in the form of a legal opinion based upon a title search; 
2.  A report prepared by an archeologist stating the number of graves believed to be present and their locations as can be determined from the use of minimally invasive investigation techniques, including remote sensing methods and the use of metal probes, which activities shall not require a permit; 
3.  A survey prepared by or under the direction of a registered surveyor showing the location and boundaries of the cemetery or burial ground based on an archeologist's report; 
4.  A plan prepared by a genealogist for identifying and notifying the descendants of those buried or believed to be buried in such cemetery. If those buried or believed to be buried are of aboriginal or American Indian descent, the genealogist, in preparing the notification plan, shall consult with the Council on American Indian Concerns created pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 44-12-280 and shall include in the notification plan not only any known descendants of those presumed buried but also any American Indian tribes as defined in paragraph (2) of O.C.G.A. Section 44-12-260 that are culturally affiliated; and 
5.  A proposal for mitigation or avoidance of the effects of the planned activity on the cemetery or burial ground. If the proposal includes relocation of any human remains or burial objects, the proposal shall specify the method of disinterment, the location and method of disposition of the remains, the approximate cost of the process, and the approximate number of graves affected. 
E.  Required Plan for Notifying Descendants. The applicant shall implement its plan for identifying and locating descendants no later than the date the application is submitted to the city. The city shall review the applicant's plan for identifying and notifying the descendants of the deceased persons and may require as a condition for issuing a permit that the applicant implement additional reasonable attempts to identify and locate descendants. Notice to possible descendants shall include information on how to contact the city and a summary of the rights of descendants under this chapter. The city shall promptly inform any descendant who indicates an interest in the disposition of the human remains and burial objects regarding any proposals for mitigation, the terms of any permit issued, the time and place of any scheduled public hearings, and appeal procedures and events. 
F.  Public Hearing. 
1.  Within 15 days after it is satisfied that all reasonable effort has been made to notify descendants, as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 36-72-6, the city shall schedule a public hearing at which any interested party or citizen may appear and be given an opportunity to be heard. In addition to the notice required in O.C.G.A. Section 36-72-6, notice of the public hearing shall be advertised in the legal organ once a week for the two consecutive weeks immediately preceding the week in which any such hearing is held. 
2.  Within 30 days after the conclusion of the public hearing, the city shall notify the applicant in writing of the city's decision. The city shall have the authority to deny the application with written reasons therefor, to issue a permit adopting the application in whole or in part, or to issue a permit which may include additional requirements to mitigate the proposed activity's adverse effects on the cemetery or burial ground, including but not limited to relocation of the proposed project, reservation of the cemetery or burial ground as an undeveloped area within the proposed development or use of land, and respectful disinterment and proper disposition of the human remains. The city may adopt the applicant's proposal for mitigation. 
G.  Criteria for Consideration in Decision on Application. The city shall consider the following in making its determination: 
1.  The presumption in favor of leaving the cemetery or burial ground undisturbed; 
2.  The concerns and comments of any descendants of those buried in the burial ground or cemetery and any other interested parties; 
3.  The economic and other costs of mitigation; 
4.  The adequacy of the applicant's plans for disinterment and proper disposition of any human remains or burial objects; 
5.  The balancing of the applicant's interest in disinterment with the public's and any descendant's interest in the value of the undisturbed cultural and natural environment; and 
6.  Any other compelling factors which the city deems relevant. 
H.  Application Fee. The fee to file an application for a permit under this Section 2.60.060 shall be two thousand dollars ($2,000.00) which reflects the cost to the city for processing and reviewing the application including, but not limited to, the cost of hiring an attorney, independent archeologist, and independent surveyor to assist in making recommendations regarding the applicant's plan. 
I.  Appeal of Decision on Application for Permit. Should any applicant or descendant be dissatisfied with a decision of the city, he or she, within thirty (30) days of such decision, may file an appeal in the Superior Court of Newton County. Until the expiration of the time for appeal as set forth herein, the applicant shall not begin or resume activities which comply with the permit issued by the city. If an appeal is filed, the applicant may begin or resume activities which comply with the permit only upon consent of the city and the party seeking judicial review or upon order of the reviewing court for good cause shown. 
J.  Supervision. Any disinterment and disposition of human remains or burial objects permitted under this section shall be supervised, monitored, or carried out by the applicant's archeologist and shall be done at the expense of the person or entity to whom the permit is issued. 
K.  Violation. Any violation of the provisions of this section by any person is hereby deemed to be a misdemeanor punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010. The zoning administrator, the city's code enforcement personnel, or any law enforcement officer of the city is hereby authorized and directed, upon discovery of any violation of any provision of this section, to issue a citation for the violator to appear before the appropriate court on a day and time certain to answer to the misdemeanor charges. In addition to any other remedy provided in this article, the city may seek injunctive relief to cease and remove any violations of this article in the appropriate court against the appropriate person or entity. Any violation of this section is hereby deemed to be a continuing nuisance and may be abated by an application for injunction or other proceedings allowed by law in the appropriate court. 
(Ord. dated 4/6/15(2), § 1) 
Title 3 - REVENUE AND FINANCE 
Chapters: 
Chapter 3.04 - FISCAL PROVISIONS GENERALLY 
Sections: 

3.04.010 - Issue of checks-When countersigning required. 
    All checks issued to meet the city payroll may be signed by the finance director alone or by the city manager alone; all other checks issued on the city treasury shall be signed by at least two of the following: 
A.  The finance director; 
B.  The accounting manager; 
C.  The city manager or the administrative assistant if one has been appointed by the city manager; 
D.  The mayor; 
E.  The city clerk; or 
F.  A member of the city council designated by the city council at its first regular meeting in January of each year to serve until the next year or until a successor is appointed. The name of the person so appointed and authorized to countersign checks issued on the city treasury shall be spread upon the minutes of the first regular meeting of the mayor and council in each calendar year. 
(Prior code § 2-17) 
(Ord. dated 4/15/13, §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 11/2/09, § 1) 
Chapter 3.08 - PURCHASING PROCEDURES 
Sections: 

3.08.010 - Purchasing policy-When approval required. 
    All payments for public works construction projects and for all other purchases of the city, including expenditures for maintenance and repairs, shall be made by a department head or the city manager. Such purchases which do not exceed five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) and payments for any public works construction projects which project is performed at a total cost of less than five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) may be made by a department head alone, without the approval of the city manager. Such purchases which do not exceed twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) and payments for any public works construction project which project is performed at a total cost of less than twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) may be made by the city manager alone, without the approval of the mayor and council. All other purchases and expenditures, except as hereinafter provided in Section 3.08.020, and all other public works construction projects shall require the approval of the mayor and council. No purchase or expenditure shall be made unless funds for the same are provided by the budget. Mayor and council approval of any public works construction project may be evidenced by approval of any budget including such public works construction project as an itemized expense. A public works construction project shall mean the building, altering, repairing, improving, or demolishing of any public structure or building or other public improvements affixed to any public real property but does not include the routine operation of existing structures, buildings, or real property. Public works construction projects shall not be subdivided in an effort to evade the provisions of this Chapter 3.08. 
(Ord. dated 10/6/08 § 1; Ord. dated 12/15/14(2), § 1) 
3.08.020 - Purchasing policy-Emergency purchase defined-Manner of making. 
A.  An emergency purchase or expenditure is one which necessity resulting from accident or unforeseen circumstances, requires the city to make in order to avoid an extreme hardship or an unusually large loss. It must involve uncommon or extraordinary circumstances. It must involve surprise, or be such that the exercise of reasonable prudence would not have previously suggested the wisdom of the purchase or expenditure. 
B.  In all cases where there is immediate need by any department for an emergency purchase or expenditure, as thus defined in subsection A of this section, the requisition for the same shall be marked "for emergency purposes"; and when a requisition so marked is received by the city manager or city clerk it shall be his duty to give the same his immediate attention. 
C.  In such emergency, if the city manager should be absent or disabled, such purchase or expenditure may be made by the city's finance director or other designee as may be appointed by the city manager, and the same shall be reported to the mayor and council for ratification at its next regularly scheduled meeting following the date of such expenditure. 
D.  The provisions of this section shall not alter the limitations set forth in Section 3.08.010 of this chapter except as follows: an emergency purchase of up to twenty thousand dollars ($20,000.00) may be made by the city manager or by the city's finance director or other designee in the city manager's absence or disability as above provided, without the approval of the city manager, but if such expenditure exceeds five thousand dollars ($5,000.00) the same shall be presented to the mayor and council for ratification at its next regularly scheduled meeting following the date of such expenditure. 
(Ord. dated 10/6/08 § 2; prior code § 2-19) 
Chapter 3.12 - PROPERTY TAX 
Sections: 

3.12.010 - Annual property tax returns. 
    All real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city, which is subject to taxation by the city, shall be returned for taxation each year by the owners thereof as of the first day of January in the year in which such returns are made. All such returns shall show the fair market value of the property returned and shall be made under oath and shall be filed between the first day of January and the last day of March of each year. The returns of such property (including automatic returns where there are no changes of status of property) to the tax commissioner of Newton County, Georgia, for Newton County and state of Georgia ad valorem tax purposes shall be deemed to be an adequate return of such property for the city ad valorem tax purposes. 
(Prior code § 19-1) 
3.12.020 - Compilation of tax digest. 
    The compilation of a tax digest of all real property and personal property within the corporate limits of the city which is subject to taxation by the city, giving the fair market value and forty (40) percent assessed value of all such property for taxation as determined for Newton County and state of Georgia ad valorem tax purposes, shall be prepared by the Newton County tax commissioner, as provided in the contract between the city and Newton County for assessment and collection of city taxes entered into pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-359.1. 
(Prior code § 19-2) 
3.12.030 - Property not included in Newton County ad valorem tax information. 
A.  If any property subject to taxation by the city should not be reflected on information furnished to the city by Newton County, the board of tax assessors shall bring such fact to the attention of the appropriate authorities of Newton County so that such property may be entered on the county tax digest at its fair market value. 
B.  Any property added to the county tax digest in accordance with the procedures aforesaid shall likewise be added to the city tax digest by the board of tax assessors so that the final tax digest shall include all property subject to taxation by the city. 
(Prior code § 19-3) 
3.12.040 - Levy of taxes. 
    When the board of tax assessors has completed the tax digest for the city as hereinbefore provided, the mayor and council shall proceed to levy sufficient taxes to satisfy all of the city's obligations on its bonded indebtedness and to produce such additional revenues as may be needed for municipal purposes, subject to the limitations provided by the laws and constitution of this state. All taxes levied by the mayor and council shall be levied on the assessed value of the taxable property of forty (40) percent of the fair market value thereof. 
(Prior code § 19-4) 
3.12.050 - Tax notices-Time of payment. 
A.  When the tax levy has thus been completed as aforesaid, the city shall notify the Newton County tax commissioner of same, as provided in the contract between the city and Newton County for assessment and collection of city taxes entered into pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-359.1. 
B.  All ad valorem taxes due the city shall be due and payable contemporaneously with Newton County ad valorem taxes 
(Prior code § 19-5) 
3.12.060 - Delinquent taxes-Execution-Interest-Penalties. 
A.  All taxes not paid on or before the due date provided for at Section 3.12.050(B) of this chapter are delinquent. 
B.  All delinquent taxes shall be collected by the Newton County tax commissioner, as provided in the contract for assessment and collection of city taxes entered into between the city and Newton County pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-359.1. 
C.  The rate of interest and penalty to be imposed on delinquent taxes shall be as provided by the laws of this state. 
(Prior code § 19-6) 
3.12.070 - Community redevelopment tax incentive program. 
A.  Purpose. The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including but not limited to social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
    In furtherance of its objective to eradicate conditions of slum and blight within the city, the mayor and council, in exercise of the powers granted to municipal corporations at Chapter 61, Urban Redevelopment, of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, has designated those areas of the city where conditions of slum and blight are found or are likely to spread. 
    In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Article IX, Section II, Paragraph VII (d) of the 1983 Constitution of the State of Georgia. 
B.  Definitions. 
    "Blighted property, blighted, or blight" means any urbanized or developed property which: 
1.  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structure; 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
c.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this division shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.  A site identified by the federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site pursuant to 42 U.S.C. Section 9601, et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
2.  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of aesthetic conditions. 
    "Building inspector" means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
    "Community redevelopment" means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough city ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
    "Millage" or "millage rate" means the levy, in mills, which is established by the city for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
    "Person" means such individual(s), partnership, corporations, business entities and associations which return real property for ad valorem taxation or who are chargeable by law for the taxes on the property. 
    "Public officer" means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this section. 
C.  Levy of increase ad valorem tax on blighted real property. There is hereby levied on all real property within the city which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven (7.0) to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
    Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
D.  Official identification of property maintained in blighted condition. 
1.  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
a.  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed: 
i.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city for inspection of a parcel of property, said inspection to be based on the criteria as delineated in ordinance; or 
ii.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this section for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
b.  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection a. above shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
c.  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this section, and is subject to increased taxation. 
d.  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person(s) shown on the most recent tax digest of Newton County as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence it becomes known to the public officer that real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person(s) known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this subsection, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
2.  The written notice given to the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that real property of which the person(s) is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have thirty (30) days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
3.  Within thirty (30) days of the receipt of a request for hearing, the municipal court clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten (10) business days' notice to the person(s) requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the designated legal organ in Newton County, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
4.  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this section. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or their witnesses and the person(s) requesting the hearing and/or their witnesses, the judge of municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the tax commissioner of Newton County, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
5.  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the Superior Court of Newton County for a writ of certiorari within thirty (30) days of issuance of the court's written determination. 
E.  Remediation or redevelopment to remove designation of blighted condition. 
1.  A property owner or person(s) who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this section as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
a.  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
b.  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to Chapter 8.24, Unfit Buildings, of Title 8 of the Code of Covington, Georgia. 
2.  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the tax commissioner of Newton County. 
3.  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person(s) chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and development department, and contain the following: 
a.  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
b.  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
c.  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
d.  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
e.  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
f.  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this section) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
F.  Decreased rate of taxation to be applied after successful remedial action or redevelopment of blighted property. 
1.  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in subsection D of this section, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. 
2.  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person(s) chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment, of the amount expended. 
G.  Duty of public officer to provide notice to county tax commissioner. It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the Tax Commissioner of Newton County in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the Newton County Tax Assessor's Office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to assure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this section. 
(Ord. dated 7/23/18(1), § 1) 
Chapter 3.16 - LODGING TAX* 
Sections: 

3.16.010 - Definitions. 
    The following words, terms and phrases shall, for the purposes of this article and except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning, be defined as follows: 
    "Due date" means the twentieth day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
    "Estimated tax liability" means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in the lodging provider's circumstances. 
    "Folio" means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the date(s) of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax and the method of payment. 
    "Guest room" means a room, lodging or other accommodation occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
    "Hotel" means any structure or any portion of a structure, including any lodging house, rooming house, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto court, truck stop, tourist cabin, lodge, inn, time-share or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise, but not including any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other building in which human beings are housed for treatment or detained under legal restraint. 
    "Lodging provider" means any person or entity operating a hotel in the city, and who is subject to the taxation imposed by this article for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
    "Monthly period" means the calendar month of any year. 
    "Occupancy" means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of such guest room. 
    "Occupant" means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement. 
    "Permanent resident" means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than ten (10) consecutive days next preceding such date. 
    "Rent" means the dollar value of the consideration received or credit extended by the lodging provider for occupancy, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
    "Tax" means the tax on occupants imposed by this article under the provisions of Title 48, Chapter 13, Article 3, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
3.16.020 - Tax rate. 
    There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of eight percent of the amount of rent for such occupancy unless an exemption is provided under Section 3.16.040 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 2/1/10, § 1; Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
3.16.030 - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
    Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in this city shall collect a tax of eight percent on the amount of rent from the occupant, unless an exemption is provided under Section 3.16.040 of this chapter. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of all applicable taxes. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the amount of any tax due under this article that he fails to collect and shall remit to the city the amount of any tax collected under this article in excess of that which is due the city. 
(Ord. dated 8/2/10, § 1; Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
3.16.040 - Exemptions. 
    No tax shall be collected from an occupant after he becomes a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States of America or the state of Georgia or any instrumentality of either; or from any official or employee of the state of Georgia, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state of Georgia when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state of Georgia or Georgia local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign diplomat exempted by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is exempt from this tax. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
3.16.050 - Registration of lodging provider-Form and contents-Execution-Certificate of authority. 
    Every person or entity engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in this city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by such official not later than thirty (30) days after the effective date of the ordinance codified in this chapter. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person or entity transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of such place(s) of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax imposed hereunder as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by a duly authorized representative of the owner. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from occupants. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the place of business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
3.16.060 - Determination generally-Returns-Payments. 
A.  Due Date of Taxes. All amounts of tax shall be due and payable to the city monthly on or before the twentieth day of the month next succeeding the applicable monthly period. Any tax remaining unpaid after that day shall become delinquent. 
B.  Penalty and Interest for Failure to Pay Tax by Due Date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent of the tax due or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, if the delinquency period is one month or less; and an additional five percent or five dollars ($5.00), whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such delinquency shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single delinquency shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the tax due or twenty-five dollars ($25.00), whichever is greater. Additionally, delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate prescribed by Georgia law; such law being currently codified at O.C.G.A. § 48-2-40. 
C.  Acceptance of Delinquent Return and Remittance Without Imposing Penalty and Interest. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the city clerk by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten (10) days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
D.  Penalty for Fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of fifty percent (50%) shall be assessed. 
E.  Authority to Waive Interest and Penalties. The city council may waive the collection of any interest, in whole or in part, due the city on any unpaid tax whenever or to the extent that it determines that the delay in payment of the tax was attributable to the action or inaction of the city. The city council may waive, in whole or in part, the collection of any amount due the city as a penalty under the provisions of this article whenever and to the extent that it determines that the default giving rise to the penalty was due to reasonable cause and not due to willful neglect or disregard of the law. 
F.  Return; Remittance; Time of filing; Estimated tax. 
    On or before the twentieth day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than fifty percent (50%) of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the twentieth day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the twentieth day of the twentieth day of the next succeeding month. 
G.  Extension of Time of Filing; Requirements; Remittance; Penalty and Interest. 
    The city council may, for good cause shown, extend the time for making returns required by this article for not longer than thirty (30) days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than twelve (12) consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than one hundred percent (100%) of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the next preceding year; such remittance shall be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest be charged during the first ten (10) days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
H.  Collection Fee Allowed Lodging Providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed three percent of the tax due and accounted for as a collection fee in the form of a deduction in paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part); Ord. dated 12/17/18(1), § 1) 
3.16.070 - Deficiency determinations. 
A.  Recomputation of Tax; Authority to Make; Basis of Recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return or returns of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid for any monthly period on the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. 
B.  Notice of Determination. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
C.  Time Within Which Notice of Deficiency Determination to be Mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the twentieth day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
D.  Appeal or Protest of Deficiency Determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-380. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
3.16.080 - Determination if no return made. 
A.  Estimate of Gross Receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the lodging provider's total rentals in this city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period or periods in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice of such estimate shall be given in the manner prescribed in Section 3.16.070(B) of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
3.16.090 - Collection of tax by city. 
A.  Execution for Collection of Tax. The city may enforce the collection of any amount due under this article by execution issued by the city clerk against the lodging provider who owes the tax. The execution may be levied on the real property of the lodging provider and sold at public auction as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 48-5-359. 
B.  Lodging Provider Selling or Quitting Business. If any lodging provider liable for payment of taxes under this article sells or closes his business he shall make a final return and remittance of the tax due under this article within fifteen days after the date of sale or closing. 
C.  Duty of Successors or Assignees of Lodging Provider to Withhold Tax From Purchase Money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the lodging provider produces either a receipt from the city clerk reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
D.  Liability for Failure to Withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price of the business. 
E.  Credit for Tax, Penalty or Interest Paid More Than Once or Erroneously or Illegally Collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been overpaid, said amount may be refunded by the city. If the lodging provider determines that he has overpaid such amount and such overpayment has not been determined by the city clerk, the lodging provider shall have three years from the date of payment within which to file a 
claim for refund in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the city council, at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The city council shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
3.16.100 - Administration of ordinance-Recordkeeping. 
A.  Authority of City Clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this ordinance for the collection of the tax. 
B.  Records Required from Lodging Providers. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Such records shall at all times be available for examination by representatives of the city. 
C.  Application for Sales Tax Audit Reports. Each year, in the month of January, the city clerk shall request in writing from the Georgia Commissioner of Revenue any reports of sales tax audits conducted of hotels in the city during the preceding calendar year. 
D.  Examination of Records; Audits. The city clerk or any person authorized in writing by him may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. 
E.  Authority to Require Reports; Contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. Such reports shall be filed with the city clerk and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the date(s) of occupancy, the basis for any exemption and any other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
3.16.110 - Proceeds of the tax. 
    The proceeds from collection of the tax shall be expended for the purposes set forth in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-13-51(b)(5) and (6). 
(Ord. dated 12/13/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/16/05) 
Title 5 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND REGULATIONS 
Chapter 5.04 - BUSINESS LICENSES AND OCCUPATION TAXES GENERALLY 

5.04.010 - Occupation tax required. 
    For the year 1995 and succeeding years thereafter, each person engaged in a business, trade, occupation or profession within the city limits of the city, shall pay an occupation tax for such business, trade, profession or occupation and shall furnish upon request of the city manager or his designee proof of current payment of said tax in the form of an annual receipt therefor issued by the city. 
(Prior code § 13-1) 
5.04.020 - Purpose and scope of occupation tax. 
    The occupation tax levied under this chapter is for revenue purposes only and is not for regulatory purposes, nor is the payment of the tax made a condition precedent to the practice of any profession or engaging in any occupation. The occupation tax only applies to those businesses and occupations which are covered by the provisions of O.C.G.A. Sections 48-13-5 through 48-13-26. Any other businesses or occupations shall be taxed by the city pursuant to this Title and/or any other pertinent general or local law or ordinance. 
(Prior code § 13-2) 
5.04.030 - Construction of terms-Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Administrative fees" means a component of an occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
    "Employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2, but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
    "Location" or "office" includes any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project or a vehicle used for sales or delivery of a business or practitioner of a profession or occupation which had a location or office. 
    "Occupation tax" means a tax levied on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business for revenue raising purposes. 
    "Person" includes sole proprietors, corporations, partnerships, nonprofit organizations or any other form of business organization or entity. 
    "Practitioner of profession" or "occupation" means a person who by Georgia law requires state licensure regulating such profession or occupation, but shall not include a practitioner who is an employee of a business which pays an occupation tax. 
(Prior code § 13-3) 
5.04.040 - Occupation tax levied. 
A.  An occupation tax shall be levied upon each business and practitioner of a profession or occupation (except those exempted by Georgia law) with one or more offices or locations in the city based upon the maximum number of employees of the business or practitioner during the thirty (30) days next preceding December first of each year. 
B.  The tax rate for such occupation tax shall be as follows and may be adjusted annually by amendment of this section; provided, however, that the city council shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution regarding occupation tax and provided further that the tax rate on any new profession, business or occupation begun in the city on or after July 1 of any year shall, for such calendar year of commencement, be one-half of the occupation tax otherwise due: 
Number of Employees Tax Liability 0-1 $25.00 2-4 $100.00 5-20 $100.00 plus $20.00 per employee for each employee in excess of 4 21-75 $420.00 plus $15.00 for each employee in excess of 20 76-175 $1,245.00 plus $13.00 for each employee in excess of 75 Over 175 $2,545.00 plus $9.00 for each employee over 175  
C.  1.  No business or practitioner shall be required to pay more than one occupation tax for each of its locations. 
2.  No occupation tax shall be required from those real estate brokers, real estate agents, or real estate companies whose offices are located outside the city and who sell property located inside the city. 
D.  The number of employees of the business or practitioner shall be computed on a fulltime position basis or fulltime position equivalent basis, provided that for the purposes of this computation an employee who works forty (40) hours or more weekly shall be considered a fulltime employee and that the average weekly hours of employees who work less than forty (40) hours weekly shall be added and such sum shall be divided by forty (40) to produce fulltime position equivalents. 
(prior code § 13-4; Ord. dated 5/2/11, § 1; Ord. dated 3/2/15, § 1; Ord. dated 4/15/19, § 1) 
5.04.050 - Number of businesses considered to be operating in the city. 
    Where a person conducts business in more than one fixed location, each such location shall be considered a separate business for the purposes of this chapter. 
    The occupation tax provided in Section 5.04.040 of this chapter shall be levied, assessed and collected on those businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with no location or office in the state of Georgia if the business or practitioner: 
1.  Has one or more employees or agents who exert substantial efforts within the corporate limits of the city for the purpose of soliciting business or serving customers or clients; or 
2.  Owns personal or real property which generates income and which is located within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 13-5) 
5.04.060 - Professionals as classified in O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-9(c), paragraphs 1-18. 
A.  Practitioners of professions as described in O.C.G.A. Section 48-13-9(c)(1) through (20) shall elect as their entire occupation tax one of the following: 
1.  The occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in section 5.04.040 of this chapter. 
2.  A tax of one hundred dollars ($100.00) per practitioner who is licensed as such by the state of Georgia. The tax under this option shall apply to each practitioner maintaining an office or location in the city. 
B.  This election shall be made annually by the practitioner and reported in writing to the city by December first of each year. Any practitioner failing to report such election shall be deemed to have elected the occupation tax based on number of employees as set forth in Section 5.04.040 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-6) 
5.04.070 - Exemption for practitioners practicing exclusively for a government. 
    Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state of Georgia, or any political subdivision or instrumentality of either of them shall not be required to pay the occupation tax levied under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-7) 
5.04.080 - Payment of occupation tax-Effect of delinquency. 
A.  The occupation tax shall be payable January first of each year and shall, if not paid by January thirty-first of each year, be subject to penalties for delinquency as hereinafter prescribed. The tax on any new profession, business or occupation begun in the city shall be based upon the good faith written estimate by the practitioner, owner, proprietor, manager or executive officer of such profession, business or occupation of the maximum number of employees from its commencement date to the end of the calendar year of commencement, and the amount of such tax shall be delinquent if not paid within the thirty (30) days next following the commencement of such profession, business or occupation. Except as provided hereinafter at subsection B., failure of any person liable therefor under this article to timely pay the occupation tax shall constitute an offense which, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, shall subject the offender to punishment by a fine not to exceed five hundred dollars ($500.00) which may be enforced by the contempt power of the municipal court judge. 
B.  Notwithstanding the foregoing, if a lawyer begins or continues business after January first of the occupation tax year, the tax on such business shall be due and payable on December thirty-first of the year in which the business begins or continues. Any lawyer failing to pay the occupation tax by January thirty-first of the following year shall be considered delinquent. The penalty set forth at subsection A. shall not apply to violations of this chapter by lawyers. Specifically, failing to comply with the article will not result in the city closing the business or penalizing the continued practice of law by fining, imprisoning or criminalizing noncompliance. A lawyer shall not be required to post the city occupation tax receipt. 
C.  In addition to the remedy set forth at subsection A. hereof, delinquent occupation taxes may be collected by the issuance and enforcement of executions in accordance with the provisions of Section 59 of the City Charter, as the same may be amended from time to time. Delinquent taxes shall carry interest and penalty as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 48-2-40 and 48-13-21, respectively, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(prior code § 13-8; Ord. dated 5/2/11, § 2; Ord. dated 3/2/15, § 2; Ord. dated 6/20/16(1), § 1) 
5.04.090 - Temporary business establishments. 
    No person shall be permitted to erect upon the public common of said city any tent, booth, or other place of business without the authority and written consent of the governing body. 
(Prior code § 14-35) 
Chapter 5.08 - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT ESTABLISHMENTS 

5.08.010 - Purpose of chapter. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to regulate adult entertainment establishments so that criminal behavior, depressed property values and increased expenditures for law enforcement, which in common human experience have accompanied the operation of such establishments, may be avoided or controlled. It is recognized that such regulation cannot amount to total suppression of a constitutionally protected form of expression. This chapter is intended as a balancing of competing interests; control of criminal behavior and protection of neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the rights of adult entertainment establishments and their patrons to freedom of expression. 
(Prior code § 14-63) 
5.08.020 - Definitions. 
    The following terms used in this chapter defining adult entertainment establishments shall have the meanings indicated below: 
    "Adult bookstore" means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade as books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such materials or five percent or more of its net sales consisting of printed materials which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    "Adult entertainment establishment" means an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult mini-motion picture theater, adult video store, adult hotel or motel, adult motion picture arcade, cabaret, encounter center, escort bureau, adult business, adult dancing establishment or erotic dancing establishment. 
    "Adult mini-motion picture theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of less than fifty (50) persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    "Adult motion picture arcade" means any place to which the public is permitted or invited wherein coin or slug operated or electronically, electrically or mechanically controlled still or motion picture machines, projectors or other image-producing devices are maintained to show images to five or fewer persons per machine at any one time and where the images so displayed are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on depicting or describing specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    "Adult motion picture theater" means an enclosed building with a capacity of fifty (50) or more persons used for commercially presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
    "Adult video store" means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade video tapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent or more of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    "Erotic dance establishment" means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
    "Escort bureau" or "introduction service" means any person, firm, corporation or other entity which, for a fee, commission, hire, reward or profit, furnishes or offers to furnish names of persons, or which introduces, furnishes, or arranges for persons who may accompany other persons to or about social affairs, entertainments or places of amusement, or who may consort with others about any place or public resort or within any private quarters. 
    "Good Moral Character." A person is of good moral character according to this chapter if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. "Conviction" as used herein includes pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
    "Minor" means for the purposes of this chapter, any person who has not attained the age of eighteen (18) years. 
    "Specified anatomical areas" include any of the following: 
1.  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region; buttock; or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
2.  Human male genitals in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
    "Specified sexual activities" means and includes any of the following: 
1.  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse, masturbation, oral copulation, anal intercourse, oral/anal copulation, bestiality, direct physical stimulation of clothed or unclothed genitals, flagellation, torture or other infliction of pain in the context of a sexual relationship, or the use of human excretory functions in the context of a sexual relationship; or 
2.  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
3.  Fondling or touching of clothed or unclothed human pubic region, buttocks or female breast; or 
4.  Erotic or lewd touching, fondling or other sexual contact with an animal by a human being. 
(Prior code § 14-64) 
5.08.030 - Adult entertainment establishment regulations. 
A.  No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall advertise or cause to be advertised an adult entertainment establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this chapter. 
B.  No later than March first of each year, an adult entertainment establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the Covington police department showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
C.  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
D.  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with, as a dancer, a minor or a person not licensed pursuant to this chapter. 
E.  No minor shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
F.  An erotic dance establishment may be open between the hours of eight a.m. and two a.m. Monday through Friday, and Saturday from eight a.m. through two fifty five a.m. on Sunday. 
G.  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any alcoholic beverage or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
H.  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this chapter. 
I.  All dancing in an erotic dancing establishment shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least eighteen (18) inches from the level of the floor. 
J.  No dancing in an erotic dancing establishment shall occur closer than four feet to any other person. 
K.  No dancer in an erotic dancing establishment shall fondle or caress any other person, and no other person shall fondle or caress such dancer. 
L.  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer in an erotic dancing establishment. 
M.  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron in an erotic dancing establishment. 
N.  All areas of an adult entertainment establishment licensed under this article shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. Full lighting shall mean illumination equal to three and five-tenths foot-candles per square foot. 
O.  If any portion or subparagraph of this section or its application to any person or circumstance is held invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the remainder of this section or application to other persons or circumstances shall not be affected. 
(Prior code § 14-65) 
5.08.040 - Certain activities prohibited. 
    No person, firm, corporation or other entity shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Prior code § 14-66) 
5.08.050 - License required. 
    It is unlawful for any person, firm, corporation or other entity to engage in, conduct or carry on in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment activities or enterprises defined in this chapter without a current valid license to do so. No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state of Georgia or the United States. 
(Prior code § 14-67) 
5.08.060 - Admission of minors unlawful. 
    It is unlawful for an adult entertainment establishment licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within the premises of such establishment. 
(Prior code § 14-68) 
5.08.070 - Location. 
A.  No adult entertainment establishment shall be located in any zoning district except M2, nor: 
1.  Within five hundred (500) feet of any parcel of land which is either zoned or used for residential purposes; 
2.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, government building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
3.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which another adult entertainment establishment is located; 
4.  Within one thousand (1,000) feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; 
5.  On any parcel of land containing less than one acre; 
6.  On any parcel of land with less than one hundred (100) feet of public road frontage. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by measurement in a straight line from property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Ord. dated 3/5/07 § 1; prior code § 14-69) 
5.08.080 - Adult entertainment establishment employees. 
A.  Qualifications. Employees of an adult entertainment establishment shall be not less than eighteen (18) years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character as defined in this chapter. No employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed in an adult entertainment establishment shall work on any premises of an adult entertainment establishment for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" shall include an adjudication of guilt on a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with such crime. The terms "employed in an adult entertainment establishment" and "work on any premises of an adult entertainment establishment" shall be deemed to include work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the licensed premises of an adult entertainment establishment. 
B.  Approval for Employment. Before any person may work in an adult entertainment establishment, he shall file a notice with the chief of police of his or her intended employment on forms supplied by the city including, but not limited to, a color photograph of the applicant taken not sooner than one year preceding the application date and shall receive written approval for such employment from the chief of police. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the chief of police may require, including a set of fingerprints on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may within ten (10) days of said denial apply to the city manager for a hearing. The decision of the city manager after hearing may be appealed to the city council which may issue such order as is proper in the premises. An investigation fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall accompany the notice of intended employment. 
C.  Suspension or Revocation of Employment Approval. Violation of the provisions of this chapter, the code of the city or the laws and regulations of the state of Georgia shall at the discretion of a court of competent jurisdiction subject an employee to mandatory suspension or revocation of the said approval for such employment. 
D.  Independent Contractors. For the purpose of this chapter, independent contractors performing services for an adult entertainment establishment shall be considered as employees and shall be as employees, pursuant to this section, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Prior code § 14-70) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 2) 
5.08.090 - Application for license. 
A.  Any person, firm, corporation or other entity desiring to obtain a license to operate, engage in, conduct or carry on an adult entertainment establishment within the city shall make application in person to the city manager or his designated representative. Prior to submitting such application, a nonrefundable fee, established by resolution of the city council, shall be paid to the city clerk to defray, in part, the cost of investigation and report required by this chapter. The city clerk shall issue a receipt showing that such application fee has been paid. The receipt or a copy thereof shall be supplied to the city manager at the time such application is submitted. 
B.  Such application shall contain the following information: 
1.  The full true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
2.  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
3.  The previous addresses of the applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of the residence at each. 
4.  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least eighteen (18) years of age. 
5.  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
6.  Two photographs of the applicant at least two inches by two inches taken within six months preceding the application filing date. 
7.  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant, including all members, partners, officers, directors or shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of stock of any corporate applicant. 
8.  The business license history of the applicant and a statement as to whether such applicant has ever had a license or permit for an adult entertainment establishment revoked or suspended, the reason therefor, and the applicant's business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
9.  All convictions of violations of law, including ordinance violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the date, place and current status of any such conviction. 
10.  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of, incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names, addresses and dates of birth of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership as filed in the appropriate jurisdiction. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this chapter, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
11.  The names and address of the owner of the real property upon which the business is to be conducted and a copy of any applicable lease or rental agreement. 
12.  Such other identification and information as the Covington police department may require in order to discover the truth of the matters hereinbefore specified to be set forth in the application. 
13.  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers, directors or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of any corporate applicant, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony involving moral turpitude, in the five years immediately preceding the filing date of the application, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
14.  An individual applicant or responsible managing officer shall furnish a set of his fingerprints on regular city or United States Department of Justice forms. 
15.  If the applicant does business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name registration. 
16.  If the applicant is a foreign corporation, a copy of its certificate of authority to do business in Georgia. If the applicant is a domestic corporation, a copy of its articles of incorporation and its most recent annual registration with the Georgia Secretary of State. 
17.  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual partners or shareholders, officers or directors of any corporate applicant and who will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or any violation not a felony involving moral turpitude in the five years immediately preceding the filing date of the application. The city shall furnish forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant, who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
18.  Address of the premises to be licensed. 
19.  A plat by a Georgia registered land surveyor showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site of other business required to be regulated under this chapter. 
20.  Each application for an adult entertainment establishment permit shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual; 
b.  If by a partnership, by the manager or general partner; 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation; 
d.  If any other entity, by its chief executive officer. 
21.  Such other information as may be deemed necessary or desirable by the city manager to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Prior code § 14-71) 
5.08.100 - Application investigation. 
    The city manager shall have thirty (30) days to investigate the application and the background of the applicant. Upon completion of the investigation, the city manager shall grant the permit if he finds that: 
A.  The required fee has been paid; 
B.  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this chapter; 
C.  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application; 
D.  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application; 
E.  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the officers, directors or stockholders of a corporation applicant, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted of a felony or other offense involving moral turpitude; 
F.  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license or permit denied or revoked for cause by the city or any other jurisdiction, wherever located, prior to the date of application; 
G.  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business as proposed by the applicant would comply with this article and all other applicable laws and ordinances, including but not limited to health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards; 
H.  The applicant is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; 
I.  Neither the applicant, nor any former or present employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager of the applicant has within five years of the date of the application, knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined herein to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located or has allowed such premises to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined herein openly occur; 
J.  On the date the business for which a license is required herein commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open; 
K.  The grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, the state of Georgia or the United States. 
(Prior code § 14-72) 
5.08.110 - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
    No license provided for by this chapter shall be issued to or held by: 
A.  An applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes, including ad valorem taxes, due for a business at that location; 
B.  Any person who is not of good moral character; 
C.  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding over five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character; 
D.  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character; 
E.  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character; 
F.  Any applicant who is otherwise not qualified to hold and conduct a business according to the, laws of the United States, the state of Georgia or the city of Covington. 
(Prior code § 14-73) 
5.08.120 - License refusal-Appeal. 
    If the city manager, following investigation of the applicant, deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this chapter, he shall notify the city clerk of such opinion and, within thirty (30) days of the date of application, provide copies of the investigation report to the city clerk. The city clerk shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant who is denied a license may appeal such denial to the city council. 
(Prior code § 14-74) 
5.08.130 - Procedure for appeal. 
A.  The licensee may, within ten (10) days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
B.  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the city council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended license application, the date of the adverse decision (or receipt of notice thereof), the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the city council and the name and address of the applicant. 
C.  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than thirty (30) days after receipt of the application for city council review. 
D.  At said meeting or appropriate adjournment thereof the city council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee, from interested parties and from the appropriate city officials. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of, and the action of the city council shall be final. Further appeal to the Superior Court of Newton County shall be as provided by Georgia law. 
E.  The city council shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14-75) 
5.08.140 - License renewal. 
    Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided the licensee continues to meet the requirements set out in this chapter. The renewal fees for the adult entertainment establishment licenses shall be established by resolution of the city council. 
(Prior code § 14-76) 
5.08.150 - License nontransferable. 
    No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person, firm, corporation or other entity. Any such sale, transfer or assignment or attempted sale, transfer or assignment shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a permit is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Prior code § 14-77) 
5.08.160 - Change of location or name. 
A.  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by resolution of the city council, has been deposited with the city clerk and approval has been obtained from the city manager and the city zoning official. Such approval shall not be given unless all requirements and regulations contained in this chapter and the zoning ordinance and regulations of the city have been met. 
B.  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than the name of the licensee as specified on the applicable license. 
C.  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require an inspection by the city zoning official or his designee and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14-78) 
5.08.170 - Violations-penalty. 
    Any person violating the provisions of this chapter shall be guilty of a misdemeanor, punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. In addition to such punishment, violation of this chapter shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of any license issued hereunder. 
(Prior code § 14-79) 
5.08.180 - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
    Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this chapter shall be and the same is further declared to be a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action hereunder, commence an action for abatement, removal or enjoinment of such public nuisance in the manner provided by law. It may also initiate such other action in a court of competent jurisdiction as may be necessary to restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 14-80) 
Chapter 5.12 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES 
Article 1 - General Provisions 

5.12.010 - License required. 
    Subject to the provisions of this chapter, the city will issue retail licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption, licenses for sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption, wholesale licenses for the distribution of alcoholic beverages, licenses for the manufacture of alcoholic beverages, licenses for alcoholic beverage caterers, and nonprofit civic organization temporary permits within the corporate limits of the city. It shall be unlawful for any person to manufacture, sell, offer to sell or possess for the purpose of distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages in the city without being currently licensed as required under this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 9/16/13(1), § 1; Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.020 - Compliance with state law. 
    The laws of this state, regulating the sale and distribution of alcoholic beverages, codified as the Georgia Alcoholic Beverages Code, are incorporated into this chapter and made a part hereof by reference. Convictions of any violation of said laws or any provision of this chapter by the holder of a license issued pursuant to this chapter shall constitute grounds for immediate revocation of such license. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.030 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and terms shall have the meanings herein given them: 
    "Alcoholic beverage" means and includes all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine, or fortified wine, as such terms are defined in the Georgia Alcoholic Beverage Code or otherwise regulated for the packaged sale thereof under this chapter. 
    "Alcoholic beverage caterer" means any licensee who provides alcohol at any authorized event or function, or special event approved in accordance with Section 16.12.190. 
    "Ancillary wine tastings" means the provision of samples of wine offered for sale to customers by the holder of a license to sell wine for off-premises consumption at such location under the conditions set forth in this definition. Wine sampling shall be limited to customer requests of a sample of a wine offered for sale upon the premises, or in conjunction with wine education classes and sampling designed to promote wine appreciation and education. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. Wine bottles shall be opened only by the licensee or an employee, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. No open bottles of wine shall be removed from the licensed premises. Wine sampling and tasting is only permitted upon the premises. 
    "Ancillary growler malt beverage tastings" means the provision of samples of growler malt beverages offered for sale to customers by the holder of a license to sell malt beverages for off-premises consumption at such location under the conditions set forth in this definition. In no event shall the holder of a license for off-premises sale of distilled spirits be eligible to provide growler malt beverage tastings. Growler malt beverage sampling shall be limited to customer requests of a sample of a growler malt beverage offered for sale upon the premises, or in conjunction with growler malt beverage education classes and sampling designed to promote growler malt beverage appreciation and education. Pouring of growler malt beverages for tasting by customers shall only be conducted at a counter area constituting no more than ten (10) percent of the entire floor area of the premises. Samples shall not exceed two ounces, and no customer shall consume more than eight ounces in any two-hour period. Only the licensee or an employee shall open, handle, and serve, and samples shall only be poured by the licensee and/or an employee. No open growler containers shall be removed from the licensed premises. Growler malt beverage sampling and tasting is only permitted upon the premises. 
    "Art shop" means a retail business devoted exclusively to providing art education that is limited to instruction in painting, sculpture, sewing, embroidery, pottery, and similar crafts; or to selling and displaying portraits, paintings, sculptures, and similar artwork and crafts. An art shop may sell art supplies in addition to providing art education or to offering artwork for sale. An art shop shall not allow any activities that would cause the business to be an "adult entertainment establishment" as defined in Chapter 5.08 of this code. 
    "Church" means an entire building or structure used primarily as a place of worship, irrespective of the denomination of the worshipers. 
    "Distilled spirits" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume. 
    "Food caterer" means any food service establishment, as defined and permitted in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 26-2-270, who prepares food for consumption off the premises. 
    "Growler" means a bottle not to exceed two liters and not less than twelve (12) ounces that is filled with a malt beverage from a keg by a licensee, or an employee of a licensee, holding a license issued by the city for retail sale of malt beverages for off-premises consumption. 
    "Hotel" means a building or structure kept, used, maintained, advertised and held out to the public to be a place where sleeping accommodations are offered for rent to guests, whether transient, temporary, or permanent, which has a minimum of seventy-five (75) rooms, each having a minimum gross area of two hundred (200) square feet (including a private bathroom for each guest room) used for the sleeping accommodations of such guests and which regularly offers at least sixty (60) percent of its rooms for travelers and guests on a short-term basis. A hotel may, but is not required to, offer public dining rooms, meeting rooms and other related facilities which are conducted on the same premises and as a part of the hotel operation. Motels meeting the qualifications set out herein for hotels shall be considered to be a hotel hereunder. 
    "License" means the authorization by the city to engage in the sale of alcoholic beverages. 
    "Licensee" means any person, firm or corporation duly licensed to sell alcoholic beverages. 
    "Lounge" means a separate room where alcoholic beverages are served by the drink, which is either connected with or part of and is adjacent to a restaurant and operated in conjunction therewith, or located in a hotel and operated in conjunction with the hotel, on the same premises as the hotel, and under the same management as the hotel operations. All indoor portions of lounges shall be air conditioned, have a seating capacity for at least forty (40) patrons, and shall have all booths, stools and tables unobstructed and open to view. 
    "Malt beverage" means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any other similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer, and strong beer. The term does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
    "Minor" for purposes of this chapter means any person under twenty-one (21) years of age. 
    "Person" means and includes any individual, partnership, corporation, limited liability company or other business entity. 
    "Premises" means the definite closed, enclosed or portioned-in locality, whether a room, shop or building, and any structures, including patios, verandas, porches, decks, pavilions and terraces which are physically attached to said locality and upon prior written consent of, and under such conditions as may be specified by, the mayor and council of the city, may include a portion of the public sidewalk right-of-way adjacent to said locality, wherein alcoholic beverages may be sold and consumed. Notwithstanding any provision of this article to the contrary, the term "premises," when applied to a golf course shall also mean and include all tee areas, cart paths, fairways, roughs, greens and other open areas within the boundaries of the tract of land upon which the golf course is situated. 
    "Private club" means a nonprofit corporation or limited liability company organized and existing under the laws of the state of Georgia, actively in operation within the city having at least fifty (50) dues paying members, and owning, hiring or leasing a building or space therein for the exclusive use of its members with suitable kitchen and dining room space and equipment and maintaining a sufficient number of employees for preparing and serving meals for its members and guests at least five days a week, provided, that no member or officer, agent or employee of the club is paid, or directly or indirectly receives, in the form of salary or other compensation, any profits from the sale of alcoholic beverages by the club to its members or guests beyond the amount of such salary as may be fixed by its members at or its governing board to be paid out of the general revenue of the club. 
    "Private residence" means a house or dwelling wherein not less than one nor more than two families customarily reside and shall not include a mobile home, an apartment house or condominium having facilities for housing more than two families, nor a boarding or rooming house where there are five or more boarders or roomers. 
    "Restaurant" means any public place maintained, and held out to the public as a place where meals are served and where meals are actually and regularly served, without sleeping accommodations, and provided with kitchen and dining room facilities with seating capacity for at least twenty-five (25) people, employing a sufficient number of employees to prepare and serve food for its guests. At least one meal per day must be served at least five days a week, with the exception of holidays, vacations and periods of redecorating, and the serving of such meals shall be the principal business conducted, with the serving of alcoholic beverages to be consumed on the premises only incidental thereto. The sale of alcoholic beverages in a dollar amount exceeding the dollar food sales for any period of ninety (90) consecutive days shall be prima facie evidence that the principal business of a licensee is not that of serving food. 
    "Wholesaler" or "wholesale distributor" means any person engaged in distribution or selling to licensees for the resale of alcoholic beverages. 
    "Wine" means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than twenty-one (21) percent alcohol by volume, made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by fermentation with brandy added. The term includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines and like products. The term does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. 
(Ord. dated 2/20/18(1), § 1; Ord. dated 9/16/13(1), § 2; Ord. dated 9/16/13, § 1; Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part); Ord. dated 5/6/19, §§ 1, 2) 
5.12.040 - Hours of operation. 
A.  Retail Sales for Off-Premises Consumption. The hours of operation for licensees for retail sales of alcoholic beverages for off-premises consumption shall be between the hours of seven a.m. and eleven forty-five p.m. Monday through Saturday and the hours of twelve thirty p.m. and eleven thirty p.m. on Sunday, except on Thanksgiving and Christmas. 
B.  Wholesale Sales. The hours of operation of licensees for the wholesale sales of alcoholic beverages shall be between the hours of seven a.m. and six p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
C.  Retail Sales for On-Premises Consumption. 
1.  The hours of operation for licenses for retail sales of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption shall be between the hours of eight a.m. and two a.m., Monday through Saturday, and between the hours of twelve-thirty p.m. and twelve midnight on Sunday. 
2.  No licensee shall in any manner dispense alcoholic beverages on the licensed premises between the hours of one-thirty a.m. and eight a.m., Monday through Saturday, nor on Sunday, except between the hours of twelve-thirty p.m. and twelve midnight. 
3.  The provisions of this subsection shall not be construed so as to prohibit a restaurant from being open for business during times when the sale or consumption of alcoholic beverages is prohibited, so long as the licensee posts a conspicuous notice to its customers that such sales are illegal at those times. 
(Ord. dated 2/17/14 § 1; Ord. dated 12/13/11, § 1; Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.050 - Location. 
A.  Except as may be applicable to a golf course, sales of alcoholic beverages under licenses issued under this chapter shall be made only at the location shown in the license application, and such location for the manufacture, wholesale or packaged spirituous liquor sales may only be a conforming use in a district zoned for industrial or business uses with adequate on-premises parking as required by the then applicable parking regulations of the city. 
B.  In addition to the foregoing location requirements in this section, a building proposed as a 
location for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages shall afford adequate toilet facilities and parking spaces and shall provide sufficient lighting so that the interior of the building and the premises on all sides of the building are illuminated and readily visible at all times from the street on which the building is located. 
C.  Where a building in which a licensee proposes to operate under the provisions of this article is at the time of application for such license not in existence, or not yet completed, the license may be approved by the mayor and council for subsequent issuance by the city clerk, provided the applicant files with the application plans and specifications for the proposed building showing clearly a compliance with all provisions of this article and applicable ordinances of the city and state law. Any other provisions of this article to the contrary notwithstanding, the city clerk shall not issue the license and no sales shall be allowed at such location until the premises have been completed in accordance with such plans and specifications and otherwise in conformity with the other provisions of this article and state law. Such license shall be secured by the applicant within fourteen (14) days after the issuance of the certificate of occupancy for the subject premises. 
D.  l.  It shall be unlawful for any licensee, other than manufacturer or wholesale licensees, under this chapter to deliver alcoholic beverages beyond the boundaries of the location for which such license is granted. Any alcoholic beverage served in an original container by a licensee for on-premises consumption shall be opened prior to delivery to a customer, nor shall any such licensee permit a customer to leave the licensed location with an alcoholic beverage served by the licensee. 
2.  The sale of growlers, as defined at Section 5.12.030, is authorized for and by those licensees holding a license issued by the city for retail sale of malt beverages for off-premises consumption but not authorized under any circumstances for licensees holdings a license issued by the city for retail sale of distilled spirits, or who sell, or offer for sale, vehicular fuel. The filing [filling] of growlers by means of a tapped keg shall not constitute the breaking of a package as contemplated by O.C.G.A. Section 3-3-26 or by subparagraph 1. of this subsection D. Growlers may only be filled from kegs procured by the licensee from a duly licensed wholesaler. Growlers may be filled and made available for retail sale only if securely sealed. In order to be securely sealed, the growler must be sealed with a tamper-proof cap or seal. 
E.  Licenses for consumption on premises will only be issued for locations for the operation of a golf course, duly licensed restaurant, lounge in conjunction with a duly licensed hotel, ancillary wine tastings in conjunction with operation of a duly licensed business selling wine for off-premises consumption, or ancillary growler malt beverage tastings in conjunction with operation of a duly licensed business selling malt beverages for off-premises consumption, as those terms are defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 9/16/13(1), § 3; Ord. dated 9/16/13, § 2; Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
Article 2 - Licensing Procedures and Regulations 

5.12.060 - Qualifications for licensees. 
    Applicants for licenses in the several alcoholic beverage sale categories shall meet the following requirements and provide the city with appropriate sworn statements related thereto. 
A.  Retail Sales for Off-premises Consumption. 
1.  The applicant shall be not less than twenty-one (21) years of age. 
2.  The applicant shall not have been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere, or had his or her probation or parole revoked in a prosecution for any felony or any other offense related to the sale or use of alcoholic beverages or any Georgia Controlled Substance, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. Section 16-13-21, sex crimes or crimes against children, within the five years next preceding the date of his or her license application. 
3.  The applicant shall be active in and solely responsible for the management of the business for which the license is granted. 
4.  If the applicant is a partnership all members thereof must meet the foregoing requirements. 
5.  If the applicant is a corporation or a limited liability company the manager must meet requirement numbers 1 and 2, of this subsection and all its directors and officers must meet requirement number 2 of this subsection. 
B.  Wholesale Sales. Wholesale licenses shall only be issued to applicants who are licensed by the State Revenue Department of Georgia. 
C.  Retail Sale or Manufacture of Distilled Spirits for Off-premises Consumption. In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section, an applicant for a license for the retail sale or manufacture of distilled spirits for off-premises consumption must meet the following requirements: 
1.  Each applicant or person having a direct or indirect beneficial interest in the license must not have had any license relating to alcoholic beverages issued by any licensing authority in the state of Georgia revoked. 
2.  No person or entity shall hold a beneficial interest in more than one license issued under this article. 
D.  Sale for On-premises Consumption. In addition to the requirements of subsection A of this section applicants for licenses for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Residency. Applicant (the owner, if a sole proprietorship; a partner, if a general partnership; or a designated officer or local general manager, if a corporation or limited liability company) shall designate a resident of Newton County who shall be responsible for any matter related to the license. Such residency shall not be a requirement if the applicant is a corporation authorized to do business in Georgia which designates an officer of the corporation or a general manager at the applicant's location in the city who shall be responsible for any matter related to the license. 
2.  Prior Convictions. The applicant shall not have been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere, or had his or her probation or parole revoked in a prosecution for any felony or any other offense related to the sale or use of alcoholic beverages or any Georgia Controlled Substance, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. Section 16-13-21, sex crimes or crimes against children, within the five years next preceding the date of his or her license application. 
3.  Business Interests. Neither the applicant nor any owner of a beneficial interest in the applicant may have a financial interest in any distillery, wholesale liquor business or more than one retail package liquor business, or may have had any license for the manufacture, distribution or sale of alcoholic beverages in Georgia revoked by the issuing authority. 
4.  The applicant must be duly licensed to operate a restaurant as a private club, to operate a lounge in conjunction with a duly licensed hotel, or, as to on-premises consumption limited to ancillary wine tastings only, to sell wine for off-premises consumption, or, as to on-premises consumption limited to ancillary malt beverage tastings only, to sell malt beverages for off-premises consumption. 
E.  Alcoholic Beverage Caterers. 
1.  License Requirements for Resident Caterers. Any food caterer who possesses a valid license from the city to sell or otherwise dispense malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits for on-premises consumption by the drink at a fixed location within the city may apply for an off- premises license that permits sales at an authorized catered event, function or special event permitted in accordance with Section 16.12.190 and which takes place on private property. Each off-premises catering license authorized herein shall be valid only for the event for which the license is issued and any required event permit must be obtained. The fee for each license shall be set by resolution of the city council, and this fee amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any food caterer, to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off premises and in connection with a catered event, function or special event without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
2.  Permit Requirements for Nonresident Caterers. A nonresident alcoholic beverage caterer shall submit an application for an off-premises event permit. The fee for each such permit shall be fifty dollars ($50.00) as authorized by O.C.G.A. Section 3-11-3 (or such fee as may be authorized by any future amendment or revision thereto). An application for an event permit shall include the name of the caterer, the date, address, time, and name of the event and the quantity and type of alcoholic beverages to be transported from the licensee's primary location to the location of the authorized catered event or function. The original event permit shall be kept in the vehicle transporting the alcoholic beverages to the catered event or function. It shall be unlawful for any person, including any food caterer, to engage in, carry on, or conduct the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages off premises and in connection with a catered event, function or special event without first having obtained a license as provided herein. 
3.  Limitation on License. A licensed alcoholic beverage caterer may sell or otherwise dispense only that which is authorized by his alcoholic beverage license. For example, if the alcoholic beverage caterer possesses a valid license to sell malt beverages, he may sell or otherwise dispense only malt beverages at the authorized catered event or function. 
4.  Tax on Sales by Resident Caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the sale of alcoholic beverages by a resident caterer as provided in Article 3 of this chapter. 
5.  Tax on Drinks Served by Nonresident Caterers. Excise taxes are imposed upon the total of individual alcoholic beverage drinks served by a nonresident caterer in the amounts set forth in Article 3 of this chapter and shall be paid within thirty (30) days after the conclusion of the catered event or function. 
6.  Any alcoholic beverage caterer who holds an alcoholic beverage license by virtue of its operation of a restaurant shall include the dollar amount of sales of alcoholic beverages at any off-premises catered event or function towards such licensee's total alcoholic beverage sales for purposes of calculating the ratio of dollar alcohol sales to dollar food sales in accordance with Section 5.12.030. 
F.  Nonprofit Civic Organization Temporary Permit. 
1.  To be eligible to apply for a temporary permit to sell alcoholic beverages at an authorized event, a bona fide nonprofit organization must be the applicant; a nonprofit authorization letter (Federal Form 501-C) must be produced; any required event permit must be obtained; and the authorized event for which the event permit is issued must be associated with and benefit the cause of a charitable or civic organization. 
2.  Pursuant to state law, a temporary permit shall authorize the organization to sell alcoholic beverages for consumption only on the premises for a period not to exceed one day, subject to all laws and ordinances regulating the time for selling such beverages; the temporary permit shall be valid only for the place specified in the permit; and no more than two such permits may be issued to the applicant organization in any one calendar year. 
3.  Each application for such a temporary permit shall be accompanied by a nonrefundable fee in an amount as set by resolution of the city council, which amount shall remain in effect until modified or amended by subsequent resolution adopted by the city council. 
G.  Beer and/or Wine Amenity License. 
1.  To be eligible to apply for a beer and/or wine amenity license, the applicant must meet all other license application requirements set forth in this chapter for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for on premises consumption, excepting only the requirement of subsection D.4. of this code section, and must not be a business among those named at subsection D.4. of this code section. 
2.  Provision of beer and/or wine must clearly be a secondary function of the business and provided as an act of hospitality and ancillary to the applicant's business. Restaurants and other eating establishments shall not be eligible for a beer and/or wine amenity license. 
3.  The beer and/or wine must be provided solely as an act of hospitality and no purchase of any good or service shall be required to receive the provided beer and/or wine. 
4.  The license shall permit the service of amenity beer and/or wine in accordance with the limitations of this code section no more often than two days per calendar month and the business shall maintain a record of the day(s) upon which beer and/or wine are provided in accordance herewith and shall make same available to the city for inspection upon request. 
5.  The license shall permit the service of no more than one six-ounce serving of wine or one twelve-ounce serving of beer to a person within a single business day. 
6.  The provision of beer and/or wine shall be subject to this code and to all applicable state laws which address the use and serving of alcoholic beverages, and no one who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or intoxicated may consume wine or beer. 
7.  All beer and/or wine provided by the license holder shall be accompanied by complimentary hors d'oeuvre. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a license holder from serving additional food, provided it meets all of the requirements provided in this code and is properly permitted by the city. 
8.  Applicant must be a business licensed by the city and pay the annual beer and/or wine amenity license fee in the amount then adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. 
9.  The license holder shall have an established closing time of no later than ten o'clock p.m. 
10.  The license holder shall not allow any activities that would cause the business to be an "adult entertainment establishment" as defined in Chapter 5.08 of this code. 
H.  Art Shop License. 
1.  To be eligible to apply for an art shop license, the applicant must meet all other license application requirements set forth in this chapter for a license for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink for on-premises consumption, excepting only the requirement of subsection D.4. of this code section, and must operate as an art shop. 
2.  An art shop licensed hereunder may allow each customers to bring in no more than 750 ml of wine or thirty-six (36) ounces of beer to be consumed on the premises. 
3.  An art shop shall not store, keep or handle any wine or beer belonging to the customer, and no owner, employee or agent of the art shop shall pour or have any contact with the wine or beer. 
4.  No customer of an art shop shall consume more than three six-ounce servings of wine or three twelve-ounce servings of beer during a three-hour period or four six-ounce servings of wine or four twelve-ounce servings of beer within a single business day. 
5.  The consumption of wine and/or beer in an art shop shall be subject to this code and to all applicable state laws which address the use and serving of alcoholic beverages, and no one who is under twenty-one (21) years of age or intoxicated may consume wine or beer in an art shop. 
6.  Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit an art shop from serving food, provided it meets all of the requirements provided in this code and is properly permitted by the city. 
7.  Applicant must be a business licensed by the city and pay the annual art shop license fee in the amount then adopted by resolution of the mayor and council. 
8.  An art shop shall have an established closing time of no later than ten o'clock p.m. 
(Ord. dated 2/20/18(1), § 2; Ord. dated 2/19/18(2), § 1; Ord. dated 9/16/13(1), § 4; Ord. dated 9/16/13, § 3; Ord. dated 10/17/11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 6/7/10, § 1; Ord. dated 12/8/08, § 1; Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.070 - Application requirements. 
A.  Applications for licenses for sale of alcoholic beverages in the city shall be made to the mayor and council on forms provided by the city and filed with the city clerk. Such application shall contain the name and address of the applicant; a description of the proposed location of the business; the type of business to be conducted; and, if a corporation or limited liability company, the names and addresses of all members, shareholders, officials of the applicant and the names and address of any other person or entity who will have a beneficial interest in the license, if issued; if a partnership, the names and addresses of all partners; and such further information as may be deemed appropriate by the mayor and council under the provisions of this chapter. The completeness and accuracy of such information shall be sworn to or affirmed in writing by the applicant at the time of filing the application. 
B.  Applicants for a consumption on premises license shall also attach to such application: 
1.  A sketch, drawing or floor plan of the building and outside premises or, if such building has not been completed on the date of filing the application, a copy of the plans and specifications for the proposed building and a copy of a current building permit issued by the city planning department for same; 
2.  Any and all other documents necessary or desirable to establish that the applicant meets the definition of the category of business for which a license may be granted pursuant to the provisions of Section 5.12.050 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 3/4/09, §§ 1, 2) 
5.12.080 - Application procedure. 
A.  Upon filing the application with the city clerk, the applicant shall deposit in cash a nonrefundable processing fee as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution to cover the expense of the city's evaluation, processing and publication fees in connection with the application. 
B.  The city shall require no more than forty-five (45) days for processing the application; provided, however, that applications for renewal of licenses shall be made on or before November 1st and processed on or before December 31st of the year in which such application is filed. A penalty of ten (10) percent of the applicable license fee shall be assessed for failure to timely renew such license. 
C.  At the time the application is filed, the city clerk shall provide notice to the applicant of the date on which the application will be considered by the mayor and council. The applicant shall appear, personally or by attorney, at the council meeting at which the application is scheduled to be considered. The city clerk shall also publish in the newspaper in Newton County in which legal advertisements are published notice of the filing of the application at least once during the two weeks next preceding the week in which such consideration of the application is scheduled. Such notice shall contain a description of the location of the proposed business and the name of the applicant as well as the date, time and location of consideration of the application by the mayor and council. 
D.  Written notice of the city council's decision on the application, stating the reasons therefor, shall be mailed or delivered to the applicant within ten (10) days next following such decision. 
E.  An applicant aggrieved by the city council's decision upon consideration of the application shall, upon written request delivered to the city clerk within thirty (30) days following the applicant's receipt of notice of such decision, be afforded a rehearing before the city council within thirty (30) days of delivery of such request, with an opportunity to present further evidence and cross-examine any opposing witnesses. 
F.  Upon approval of the application and payment of the applicable license fee as hereinafter set forth in Section 5.12.100 of this chapter, the city clerk shall issue the appropriate license. 
G.  Licenses issued pursuant to this chapter shall be on a calendar year basis. Licenses issued for new businesses during the year shall be effective for the remainder of the calendar year of issuance. The applicable license fee for applications received after January 31st for such year shall be reduced pro rata for each month remaining in such year. 
H.  All licenses issued under this chapter shall have printed thereon: 
 THIS LICENSE IS SUBJECT TO REVOCATION, SUSPENSION OR ANNULMENT BY THE MAYOR AND COUNCIL OF THE CITY OF COVINGTON AND FURTHER SUBJECT TO ALL APPLICABLE STATUTES, ORDINANCES, RULES AND REGULATIONS OF THE CITY OF COVINGTON AND THE STATE OF GEORGIA. 
I.  Misrepresentation by Applicant. Any material omission or untrue or materially misleading information which is contained in any original, renewal or transfer application for a license under this chapter shall constitute grounds for denial of such application, and if any license has been previously granted under such circumstances, the same shall constitute grounds for revocation of such license. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08, § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 5/2/11, § 1; Ord. dated 11/4/13, § 1; Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 3; Ord. dated 2/15/16(2), § 1) 
5.12.090 - Transfer restrictions. 
A.  Licenses hereunder shall not be transferable except as otherwise provided in this article. 
B.  In case of death of any person owning a license, or any interest therein, the same may, with the approval of the mayor and council, and subject to the terms of this article, be transferred to the administrator, executor or personal representative of the deceased person, or to the heirs at law of the deceased person, if such heirs meet all of the other qualifications for licensees required hereunder. The license of such deceased person shall be held by the administrator, executor, or personal representative of such deceased person only for the time necessary to complete administration of the decedent's estate and to dispose of the license or his interest therein, but in no event for longer than twelve (12) months. 
C.  A licensee may make application to the mayor and council to approve the transfer of the location of its business premises. Any new location shall meet all requirements of a new license to be issued hereunder except for the payment of a license fee. Upon approval of the requested transfer of location by the mayor and council, the existing license shall be surrendered to the city and a new license issued showing the new location upon payment of a twenty-five dollar ($25.00) processing fee to the city. 
D.  Applications for transfer of an unexpired license issued under this article shall be handled in the following manner: 
1.  An application for transfer shall be made by the proposed transferee as an initial application for a license under this article. The proposed transferee's application shall specify that if approved, an existing current license of the same class issued under this article will be transferred to the applicant and the license to be transferred shall be fully identified in the transferee's application. The transferee's application shall otherwise be in complete conformity with the requirements of this article for new applicants. The transferee's application shall include written consent for such transfer of each person constituting a holder of the existing license. 
2.  The application of the proposed transferee shall be accompanied by the processing fee specified under Section 5.12.080 of this article and shall otherwise be processed in accordance with the provisions of this article for a new application. If the mayor and council approve the application of the transferee, the transferee shall be issued a license for the unexpired term of the then existing license upon surrender of the said existing license. 
E.  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit one or more members of a partnership or limited liability company holding a license to withdraw from the partnership and to assign his interest in such entity to one or more of the other members who were members at the time of the issuance of the then current license. Such withdrawal shall not serve to bring in any new members into such entity; however, a licensee may take in new members or additional shareholders provided any additional member or shareholder meets all requirements of this article. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.100 - License fees. 
    Annual license fees to be paid by licensees under the provisions of this chapter are as follows: 
A. Off-premises consumption of malt beverages and wine only $500.00 B. Off-premises consumption of malt beverages and wine only with ancillary on-premises tastings of same 750.00 C. On-premises consumption of malt beverages and wine only 500.00 D. Off-premises (package) consumption of distilled spirits only 5,000.00 E. On-premises consumption of all alcoholic beverages 3,000.00 F. On-premises consumption of distilled spirits only 3,000.00 G. Manufacturer of any alcoholic beverage 5,000.00 H. Wholesaler, malt beverages and wine only 100.00 I. Wholesaler, distilled spirits only 1,500.00  
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part); Ord. dated 4/21/14) 
Article 3 - Excise Taxes 

5.12.110 - Malt beverages and wine-Wholesale. 
    There shall be imposed and levied on each wholesale dealer selling malt beverages or wine within the city an excise tax at the rates set forth in Section 5.12.140 of this article and in the following manner: 
A.  Each wholesale dealer who has sold malt beverages or wine within the city shall file a report on the tenth day of each calendar month, itemizing for the preceding calendar month the exact quantities of all such alcoholic beverages, listed by size and type of container, for the month sold within the city. Each wholesale dealer shall then remit to the city on the tenth day of the month next following the calendar month in which such sales were made the amount of excise tax due in accordance with this article. 
B.  No decal, stamp, or other identifying marking shall be required on such alcoholic beverages sold within the city. 
C.  The excise tax provided for in this section shall be in addition to any license tax, license fee, or other charges which may now or in the future be imposed upon the business of selling such alcoholic beverages at retail or wholesale, within the corporate limits of the city. 
D.  Failure to make a timely report and remittance shall render a wholesale dealer liable for penalty equal to a fifteen (15) percent of the total amount due during the first thirty (30) day period following the date such report and remittance were due, and the further penalty of fifteen (15) percent of the amount of such remittance for each successive thirty (30) day period or any portion thereof during which such report and remittance are not filed. The filing of a false or fraudulent report shall render the wholesale dealer making such report liable in an amount equal to fifty (50) percent of the amount of the remittance which would be required under an accurate and truthful report. Such failure to make a timely report shall also constitute grounds for revocation of the business license issued by the city to the wholesaler. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.120 - Distilled spirits-Retail. 
    There shall be imposed and levied on each retail dealer selling distilled spirits within the city for off-premise consumption an excise tax at the rate set forth in Section 5.12.140 of this article and in the following manner: 
A.  The tax imposed by this section shall be computed and payable monthly. Each wholesale dealer or distributor selling, shipping, or delivering distilled spirits to any retail dealer in the city shall, as a condition to the privilege of conducting said business in the city: 
1.  Keep and maintain true and correct records of all sales shipments, or deliveries of distilled spirits to each retail dealer in the city, such records to be preserved for a period of not less than one year and to be made available on request for the inspection of any duly authorized representative of the city. 
2.  Collect from such retail dealer in the city at time of delivery of distilled spirits, the amount of tax due under the terms of this section and hold the same in trust for the city until such tax is remitted to the city as herein provided. 
3.  On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, each wholesaler shall make a verified and comprehensive report to the city which shall correctly show all sales and deliveries of distilled spirits to retail dealers in the city for the calendar month immediately preceding the date of said report. Said report shall show the name and addresses of each retail dealer, the quantities delivered to each retail dealer, the amount of excise tax collected under the terms of this section, and such other reasonable information as may be requested by the city. Said report shall be accompanied by remittance payable to the city, for all taxes collected or due, as shown on said report. 
4.  The excise tax levied in this section is levied upon the retailer licensed to do business in the city, and it is the intent of this section to so levy said tax but require the payment of the tax at the time of delivery to the retailer by the wholesaler, who shall have the responsibility of remitting the tax to the city on behalf of the retailer. In the event the tax due hereunder is not timely paid, a ten (10) percent penalty on the gross tax will be levied by the city against each defaulting retailing licensee for whom the tax is not timely paid. 
B.  If any wholesale dealer or distributor fails or refuses to make the reports required herein, the city shall notify such dealer or distributor of such default by certified mail, and if the reports are not made and the taxes remitted within five days from the date of receipt of such notice, such wholesale dealer or distributor shall be prohibited from making any further deliveries in the city, and the retail dealer licensees served by such wholesale dealer or distributor to whom the taxes should have been paid shall be subject to having their licenses suspended or revoked as herein provided. 
C.  It shall be a violation of this article for any person, firm or corporation to sell at retail within the city any distilled spirits on which the taxes herein provided for have not been paid. 
D.  It is unlawful and a violation of this article for any wholesale dealer or distributor, person, firm or corporation to deliver any distilled spirits to any retail dealer in the city without, at the time of such delivery, collecting the excise taxes as herein provided. 
E.  Any person, firm or corporation violating any of the provisions of this section or who shall assist any retail dealer in distilled spirits in the city to evade or avoid the payment of the taxes herein provided for shall be guilty of a violation of this section and on conviction thereof in the recorder's court shall be fined or sentenced as provided by Section 1.12.020 of this code, and any licensee under this section so convicted shall also be subject to having his license suspended or revoked. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.130 - On-premises consumption. 
    There shall be imposed and levied upon licensees for the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on premises an excise tax on the sale of distilled spirits by the drink at the rate provided in Section 5.12.140 of this article and in the following manner: 
A.  The tax imposed by this section shall be payable monthly. Each licensee for the sale of distilled spirits by the drink in the city shall, as a condition to the privilege of conducting said business. 
1.  Keep and maintain accurate records of all sales of distilled spirits by the drink such records to be preserved for a period of not less than one year and to be made available upon request for inspection by duly authorized representatives of the city; 
2.  Collect from the consumer at the time such drinks are served the amount of tax due under the provisions of this section and hold the same in trust for the benefit of the city until such time as the said tax is remitted to the city; and 
3.  On or before the tenth day of each calendar month, make and deliver a verified report to the city accurately showing the total dollar amount of all charges to the public for sales of distilled spirits by the drink by the licensee during the calendar month next preceding the date of the report, along with such other pertinent information as may be reasonably required by the city, said report to be accompanied by remittance to the city of all taxes due under this section, as reflected by said report. 
B.  In the event payment of the tax levied pursuant to the provisions of this section is not timely received by the city as hereinabove provided a penalty in the amount of ten (10) percent of the tax due will be levied by the city against the defaulting licensee. 
C.  In addition to the penalty imposed in subsection B of this section, any person or entity violating any provision of this section or who shall assist any licensee to evade or avoid payment of the tax levied pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be guilty of a violation of this code and upon conviction in the municipal court of the city shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code, and any licensee so convicted shall, in addition to all other penalties provided in this section, be subject to having his license revoked or suspended. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.140 - Excise tax rates. 
    The rate of excise taxes levied and imposed on the sale of alcoholic beverages within the city pursuant to this article shall be as follows: 
A.  Malt beverages - wholesale in containers of less than fifteen and one-half (15 1/2) gallons - .4166 cents per ounce. 
B.  Malt beverages - wholesale in bulk containers of fifteen and one-half (15 1/2) gallons - six dollars per container, and a like rate for fractional parts or multiples thereof. 
C.  Wine - wholesale - sixty cents ($0.60) per gallon. 
D.  Distilled spirits - retail - eighty cents ($0.80) per gallon. 
E.  Distilled spirits - consumption on premises - three percent of the charge to the public for such beverages. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
Article 4 - Miscellaneous Regulations 

5.12.150 - Wholesale deliveries. 
    Malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits shall only be delivered to or received at the premises of a retail licensee in the city by a vehicle owned and operated by a wholesale dealer licensed by the city. Upon each delivery of distilled spirits by such wholesaler an invoice shall be prepared in triplicate showing the quantity, brands and prices of distilled spirits so delivered, together with the amount of the excise tax due and collected thereon. The original of each such invoice shall be delivered to the retailer at the time of delivery, and a copy shall be maintained by the retailer for a period of twelve (12) months next following such delivery for examination by authorized representatives of the city. Upon request, copies of such invoices shall be submitted with any reports required by the city. Retail licensees shall maintain the original invoices for a period of twelve (12) months next following such delivery and shall likewise maintain records of sales of distilled spirits and any other records required by the city. Authorized representatives of the city shall have the right to inspect licensees' records and to make complete audits of same at any time. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.160 - Retail storage. 
    Licensed retailers of packaged distilled spirits shall store same only on the premises for which the license was granted. All such stock shall be kept available at all times for inspection by authorized representatives of the city and shall be stored in or immediately adjacent to the room in which the licensee is authorized to conduct business. Any such inventory found to have been sold or distributed by a wholesaler not licensed to make sales or deliveries in the city shall be subject to immediate confiscation. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.170 - Exclusion of minors from licensed premises. 
    No licensee for retail sale of distilled spirits shall allow any minor to be or remain in the licensed premises unless such minor is accompanied by his parent or legal guardian. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.180 - Delivery of packaged distilled spirits. 
    Retail sales of packaged alcoholic beverages may only be delivered in unopened containers and conducted within the building licensed for that purpose; provided, however, that such sales and deliveries through service windows accessible to pedestrian and vehicular traffic shall be allowed. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part); Ord. dated 8/18/14(1), § 1) 
5.12.190 - Reporting requirements for restaurants. 
A.  Each licensee for sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption operating as a restaurant shall, as a condition of maintaining such license, file with the city clerk within thirty (30) days after the end of each calendar quarter: 
1.  A sworn statement on forms approved by the city of the licensee's retail sales during the preceding calendar quarter. Such statements shall reflect the licensee's total dollar sales amounts for the applicable calendar quarter, the total sales amounts for sales of malt beverages and wine, the total sales amounts for distilled spirits sold by the drink, and total dollar sales for food items. 
2.  Certified copies of the licensee's state of Georgia Department of Revenue Sales and Use/Tax Monthly Reports as filed with Georgia Department of Revenue for each month during the applicable calendar quarter. 
B.  Any sale of a food or beverage containing any alcoholic beverage shall be deemed to be a sale solely of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits as the case may be, and no such sale shall be included as food sales in the quarterly reports. The fact that the sale of food during any calendar quarter exceeds sales of alcoholic beverages shall not be conclusive on the issue of whether the licensee is meeting the requirements of operating a restaurant as herein defined; however, the failure of the food sales to exceed the sale of alcoholic beverages shall be prima facie evidence that the principal business of the licensee is not that of serving food as required to meet the definition of a restaurant. 
C.  Such quarterly statements shall be confidential in nature and shall not be open for public inspection except as may be required by Georgia law. Such forms shall be used solely by the city manager for determination of whether or not the licensee remains qualified to hold its retail license for sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. Failure to timely file such statements shall be a violation of a city ordinance punishable in the manner provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code and a basis for the revocation of the license granted under this chapter. If, after appropriate notice and hearing, the judge of the city's municipal court finds that a licensee's violation of this section is not willful and the licensee otherwise meets the requirements of a restaurant as provided in this chapter, the judge shall have the option of imposing a probationary period on the licensee, not to exceed six months, and any further violations of this article shall be a basis for revocation of such license. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.200 - Containers for on-premises consumption. 
A.  Purchases of distilled spirits by licensees for on-premises consumption must be in containers of seven hundred (700) milliliters or greater unless a particular brand is only packaged in a smaller container. Sale of distilled spirits by a licensee for on-premises consumption in unbroken packages or in any quantity other than appropriate for on-premises consumption is prohibited. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for a licensee for on-premises consumption of distilled spirits to add to the contents of a bottle or to refill empty bottles, or in any other manner to misrepresent the quantity, quality, or brand name of any alcoholic beverage. Bottles of distilled spirits must be broken immediately upon being emptied of their original contents. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.210 - Requirements for permanent employees of licensees for on-premises consumption. 
A.  A licensee under this chapter shall be responsible for the conduct of his employees while such employees are acting within the scope of their employment. 
B.  Managerial employees and bartenders of licensees for on-premises sale of alcoholic beverages must obtain an annual permit for such employment from the Covington police department. 
C.  An application for such permit on a form and with fingerprints and other such exhibits as may be prescribed by the Covington police department shall be filed with the Covington police department within fourteen (14) calendar days next following commencement of such employment, together with payment of a nonrefundable processing fee in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00) to cover the costs of investigation and issuance of the permit. 
D.  Upon approval of the permit application, the Covington police department shall issue to the applicant a permit containing the permit number, photograph of the applicant and other identification information deemed appropriate by the Covington police department. 
E.  To qualify for issuance of such permit, applicant shall not have been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere to any felony or to any other offense related to the sale, manufacture or use of alcoholic beverages or any Georgia Controlled Substance, as that term is defined in O.C.G.A. Section 16-13-21, sex crimes or crimes against children; provided, however, that if the applicant has had any such conviction and has successfully completed five years of any probation or parole imposed upon said conviction then this disqualification shall be removed. 
F.  Employees must renew such employment permits annually and display them at all times when engaged in transactions involving alcoholic beverages. No licensee shall permit an employee to work at his licensed premises unless such employ shall have been issued a current valid permit pursuant to this section. 
(Ord. dated 7/19/10, § 1; Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.220 - Requirements for temporary employment of outside persons. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for a licensee to knowingly employ in any premises licensed for the sale of alcoholic beverages by the drink hereunder, any temporary outside person in any capacity whatsoever, including performers, entertainers, or musicians, who have been convicted in any jurisdiction of soliciting for prostitution, pandering, letting premises for prostitution, keeping a disorderly place, illegally dealing in narcotics, sex offenses, or any charge relating to the manufacture, sale or use of alcoholic beverages. A conviction occurring more than five years prior to the period of employment shall not be considered a disqualification. The term "conviction," as used in this section and Section 5.12.210 of this chapter, shall include an adjudication of guilt, a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or a forfeiture of a bond. 
B.  No licensee hereunder shall employ any person under eighteen (18) years of age in his establishment; however with permission of the chief of police, underage persons who are a part of a professional entertainment troupe may entertain in such premises when accompanied by their parents, legal guardian or professional agent, but shall not remain in the premises except for the time necessary for scheduled entertainment. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.230 - Permitted attire for employees and customers. 
    No licensee for on-premises consumption of alcoholic beverages shall permit any person to appear on the licensed premises attired in such manner as to expose any portion of the body to view between the top of the areola of the breast and that point which is fourteen (14) inches above the center of the kneecap; provided, however, nothing contained herein shall prohibit the licensee from permitting bona fide customers to their establishment to appear in what are commonly referred to as "Bermuda shorts," or other short pants or tennis outfits. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.240 - Prohibited activities for on-premises consumption licensees. 
    The following activities, conduct conditions or practices shall be prohibited on the premises licensee: 
A.  Cover charges in any form, except when collected to offset costs of entertainment provided for the period of time of the payor's presence on the premises; 
B.  Dance floors shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the licensed premises gross square footage. 
C.  Beverage containers for individual serving larger than twenty-four (24) ounces; 
D.  Less than twenty-five (25) food items maintained and available from the licensee's menu; 
E.  Special events unrelated to food service, such as lingerie shows, wet tee shirt or heterosexual bikini contests, or mud wrestling; 
F.  Contests of skill or chance in which the prize is alcohol or money; 
G.  Events providing drink price discounts for special groups; 
H.  Pole dancing; or 
I.  Male or female reviews. 
J.  Dispensing alcoholic beverages shall be limited to one point of sale per story of the licensed premises elevation. 
(Ord. dated 8/18/08 § 1; Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 3/16/15(3), §§ 1, 2) 
5.12.250 - Public consumption of alcoholic beverages. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to drink or furnish any drink of an alcoholic beverage within any public street, building or other public property within the city, except as otherwise provided in this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.255 - Furnishing of alcohol by patron. 
A.  It is prohibited for any person to bring in his or her own alcoholic beverage in any establishment either licensed or unlicensed to serve alcoholic beverages; provided, however, that restaurants as defined in this chapter and that are licensed pursuant to this chapter as a retail dealer of distilled spirits to be consumed on the premises, and/or a retail dealer of beer to be consumed on the premises, and/or a retail dealer of wine to be consumed on the premises may allow customers to bring in a bottle or bottles of wine and to charge a corkage fee as a convenience charge for opening and serving the wine brought in by the customer. 
B.  Facilities licensed as an art shop under Section 5.12.060 of this chapter also may allow customers to bring in a bottle or bottles of wine and/or beer subject to the specific provisions of this code governing the operation of an art shop. 
C.  Any wine not consumed at a business establishment as described in subsection A. of this section shall be disposed of at the premises and not carried out in an unsealed container. 
(Ord. dated 2/20/18(1), § 3) 
Article 5 - Enforcement 

5.12.260 - Enforcement. 
    By acceptance of any license issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the licensee will be deemed to have agreed that law enforcement officers of the city shall have the right to enter the premises of the licensee at any time and without a warrant for purposes of determining compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.270 - Production of records. 
    In conjunction with any application for a license, or in conjunction with any license which has been issued under the provisions of this chapter, or in conjunction with the revocation, suspension or cancellation of any such license, or in conjunction with any hearing contemplated by this article, or in conjunction with the collection of any fee or excise tax levied hereunder, the mayor and council shall have the right to subpoena all or any part of the records, books, documents, reports or invoices of any licensee for the purpose of auditing the records of such licensee, securing compliance by such licensee with the provisions of this chapter or proving or disproving a violation of any provision of this chapter by a licensee. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.280 - Suspension or revocation of licenses. 
A.  No license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee hereunder shall be suspended or revoked, except for due cause as hereinafter defined, and after a hearing and upon a prior five-day written notice to the holder of such license of the time, place and purpose of such hearing and a statement of the charge upon which such hearing shall be held. 
B.  Due cause for the suspension or revocation of such license shall consist of the violation of any laws or ordinances regulating alcoholic beverages, or violation of regulations made pursuant to authority granted for the purpose of regulating alcoholic beverages, or for the violation of any state or federal law or city ordinance other than traffic ordinances. 
C.  Violation of any of the provisions of this chapter by a licensee hereunder shall subject such licensee to revocation of the license, as provided herein. 
D.  When any license for the manufacture or sale of alcoholic beverages is revoked, all signs indicating that such beverage may be manufactured, sold or consumed shall be removed from the licensed premises, both outside and inside. Upon receipt by the Covington police department of notice of such revocation, it shall take the necessary steps to see that this section is enforced. 
E.  In the event the city council revokes or suspends any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages granted under this chapter, no new license shall be granted by the city for the sale of alcoholic beverages at the same location for the period of six months next following the date of such revocation or suspension. 
F.  The mayor of the city is authorized to suspend any license issued under this chapter in emergency situations, such as civil disorders or natural disasters, or in any situation that the mayor deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health, safety or welfare of the citizens of the city. Said suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council, or a meeting called prior to the next regular meeting, at which time the council shall determine if such emergency still exists. 
G.  When a license is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee or excise tax to the holder of such license. 
H.  Written notice of the city council's decision to suspend or revoke any license issued hereunder, with the reasons therefor stated, shall be mailed or delivered to the holder of such license within ten (10) days following such decision. 
I.  Any holder of a license issued hereunder aggrieved by such suspension or revocation shall, upon written request delivered to the city clerk within thirty (30) days of such license holder's receipt of the aforesaid notice, be afforded a hearing before the city council within the thirty (30) days of delivery of such request, with an opportunity to present evidence and cross-examine opposing witnesses. 
J.  Whenever the state of Georgia shall revoke any license to manufacture or sell alcoholic beverages, the city license to manufacture or sell such product shall thereupon be automatically revoked without any further action on the part of the city. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.290 - Seizure of contraband. 
    Alcoholic beverages owned, possessed or stored contrary to the provisions of this chapter are declared to be contraband and shall be seized and destroyed by the Covington police department. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
5.12.300 - Penalty. 
    The violation of any provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court of the city, be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.020 of this code, and the license of any licensee so convicted shall, in addition to all other penalties provided in this section, be subject to suspension or revocation. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08 § 1 (part)) 
Chapter 5.16 - CABLE TELEVISION SYSTEM 

5.16.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, abbreviations and their derivations shall have the meaning herein given. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense, words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number. 
    "Basic CATV service" means the distribution of broadcast television and radio signals. 
    "Cable television service" means either or both "basic CATV service" or "expanded CATV service" as herein defined. 
    "Cable television system" means a system composed of, without limitation, antennae, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides or any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial cable audio and/or radio, television, electronic or electrical signals to and from persons, subscribers and locations in Newton County, Georgia. 
    "CATV" means a cable television system as herein defined. 
    "CATV department" means the division of the city carrying out the operation of the city's cable television system under the name Covington Cable Television. 
    "City" means the city of Covington, a municipal corporation of the state of Georgia. 
    "County" means the geographic area of Newton County. 
    "Covington Cable Television" means the cable television system operated by the city pursuant to this chapter, all franchise agreements, the applicable provisions of the city's Charter, and all applicable rules and regulations. 
    "Expanded CATV service" means any communications service in addition to basic CATV service provided by the city either directly or as a carrier for the subsidiaries, affiliates or any other person engaged in communications service, including, but not by way of limitation, pay and nonbroadcast TV, burglar alarm service, data or other electronic transmission services, facsimile reproduction services, meter reading services, home shopping services or other services beneficial to the subscriber. 
    "Franchise agreement" means each and every agreement, contract, franchise or ordinance by and between the city of Covington and any other municipality within Newton County, Georgia, or the governing authority of Newton County, Georgia, regulating the conditions of the city's operation of a cable television system in areas of the county other than within the then-existing corporate limits of the city. 
    "Governing authority" means the duly elected and serving mayor and council of the city of Covington, Georgia. 
    "Installation" means the physical process of connecting a subscriber's premises to the city's cable television system so that the subscriber shall be able to receive the applicable cable television service provided by the city. The amount of wires, cable, connectors and converters allowed for the installation and connection of a service to a subscriber and the charges for such installation and connections shall be except as otherwise provided in this chapter as prescribed by rules and regulations of the CATV department. 
    "Multiple-use subscriber" means a subscriber who has more than one outlet for and uses cable television service for the benefit and enjoyment of persons other than the subscriber and the subscriber's family and guests and includes, but is not limited to, hotels, motels, boarding houses, apartments, nursing homes, hospitals and schools. 
    "Person" means any person, firm, partnership, association, corporation, company or organization of any kind. 
    "Reconnection" means the physical process of making available the applicable cable television service to a subscriber in premises previously receiving cable television service and includes, but is not limited to, the removal of any apparatus that prohibits the subscriber's premises from receiving cable television service through the city's cable television system and the installation of all required converters and other attachments necessary to allow the subscriber to make permissible connections for the reception of cable television service. 
    "Standard connection" means the providing of cable television service to a subscriber by means of an overhead service line of no more than two hundred (200) feet in length from the city's nearest distribution cable and as otherwise defined and described by the CATV department's rules and regulations. 
    "Subscriber" means any person or entity that has contracted to receive basic CATV service. 
(Prior code § 22-101) 
5.16.020 - Scope. 
A.  This chapter shall apply to the city operation of what is commonly known as a cable television system composed of, without limitation, antennae, cables, wires, lines, towers, wave guides or any other conductors, converters, equipment or facilities designed, constructed or wired for the purpose of producing, receiving, amplifying and distributing by coaxial cable, audio and/or radio, television, electronic or electrical signals to and from persons, subscribers and locations in Newton County, Georgia. As used in this chapter, the term "cable television system" shall include the system composed of the within and foregoing items and all cable television services provided by the city through such system. The city shall operate its cable television system in accordance with the provisions of Sections 58(g) and 16A of the Charter of the City of Covington, Georgia (Georgia Laws 1962, page 2003, as amended) and in accordance with: 
1.  All applicable rules, regulations, procedures and policies of all governmental agencies; 
2.  All franchise agreements and ordinances between the city and any other local government within Newton county, Georgia; and 
3.  The provisions of this chapter. 
B.  The city contemplates operating its cable television system both within the corporate limits of the city as may now or hereafter exist as well as in areas of Newton County outside the corporate limits of the city; provided, however, anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, the city shall not extend its cable television system for the purpose of supplying cable television services in any area of Newton County outside of the then-existing corporate limits of the city without first entering into a franchise agreement with the governing body of Newton County, Georgia, when such services are to be provided in the unincorporated areas of Newton County, Georgia, or with the governing body of any other municipality within Newton County when such services are to be provided in any such municipality. The city, upon approval by the mayor and council, shall be authorized to enter into franchise agreements with the governing bodies of Newton County and the various municipalities located within Newton County upon such terms and conditions as the mayor and council shall agree and as provided in such franchise agreements; provided, however, except as otherwise expressly provided in any such franchise agreements, the provisions of this chapter and all rules and regulations promulgated and adopted pursuant to the provisions hereof shall apply to the operation of Covington Cable Television within the city and throughout Newton County, Georgia. 
(Prior code § 22-102) 
5.16.030 - Title and operation of system as separate financial entity. 
    The city's cable television system shall be known as Covington Cable Television and shall be operated as a separate distinct financial entity under the control of the governing authority. The city manager shall have primary responsibility for the operation of the CATV department; however, the city manager may delegate the day-to-day operations of the system to an operating supervisor and/or such other city employees as the city manager may designate. 
(Prior code § 22-103) 
5.16.040 - Installation and reconnection charges, subscriber rates and miscellaneous service charges. 
A.  For the purpose of determining installation and reconnection charges, subscriber rates and miscellaneous service charges, subscribers shall be divided into two separate subscriber classifications, to-wit: 
1.  Multiple-use subscribers as that term is defined in Section 5.16.010; and 
2.  Home subscribers which shall mean all subscribers other than multiple-use subscribers. 
B.  The governing authority is authorized to establish from time to time by resolution, various classifications of cable television service. Initially, the service classifications shall be basic CATV service and expanded CATV service, and it is contemplated that expanded CATV service will be further divided into other sub classifications so that subscriber rates can be based on types of services received by the subscriber. 
C.  The governing authority shall from time to time, by resolution, establish the installation and reconnection charges for standard connections and subscriber rates for all subscribers and service classifications, which rates and charges shall remain in effect until modified by subsequent resolution of the governing authority. Miscellaneous service charges, including but not limited to service charges for installation of CATV service other than for a standard connection, as that term is herein defined, shall be established from time to time by resolution of the governing authority or pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by the CATV department in accordance with the provisions of this article. Such miscellaneous service charges shall be set so as to reimburse the city for the actual direct materials and labor costs involved in providing the miscellaneous services plus an overhead factor as set by resolution from time to time by the governing authority. 
D.  Different subscriber rates can be established for the different classifications of services and subscribers; provided, however, subscriber rates within the different classifications shall be uniform and shall not differentiate due to geographic location of the subscriber. Nothing contained herein shall preclude or prohibit the governing authority from amending this article to allow for subscriber rate differentials between residents and nonresidents of the city except to the extent such rate differentials are prohibited by applicable franchise agreements. 
E.  The governing authority is authorized to establish by resolution classifications of the installation and reconnection charges for different geographic areas within Newton County; provided, however, all installation and reconnection charges for subscribers located within the corporate limits of the city shall be the same within each classification of subscribers and services. 
(Prior code § 22-104) 
5.16.050 - Connection policy. 
    Cable television service shall be extended to a subscriber upon written application on forms prescribed by the CATV department, the payment of the applicable installation charge (including the estimated amount of miscellaneous service charges imposed by the CATV department for a service connection other than a standard connection), and the subscriber's providing the city with any and all necessary easements and permits. Nothing contained herein shall require the city to provide cable television service to any person requesting service in an area outside the then-existing corporate limits of the city which is not then covered by a franchise agreement, or where the extension costs for such service are prohibitive as provided by Section 5.16.110 of this chapter. 
    Installations and reconnections shall be done during normal business hours of the CATV department, unless the CATV department promulgates rules and regulations providing otherwise. Installations and reconnections shall be made in accordance with the rules and regulations of the CATV department. 
(Prior code § 22-105) 
5.16.060 - Ownership of component parts. 
    All components of the Covington Cable Television System including, but not limited to, all connecting wires, cables, converters, related equipment and apparatus used by the CATV department in installing cable television service to a subscriber shall be and always remain the property of the city. The application for service signed by each subscriber shall contain an acknowledgement of ownership of such property by the city and the agreement to return all of such property to the city upon the termination of the subscriber's cable television service whether voluntarily or involuntarily due to nonpayment of the subscriber's obligations hereunder or failure to comply with this chapter and the rules and regulations of the CATV department. 
(Prior code § 22-106) 
5.16.070 - Deposit policy, billing cycle, cut-off and reconnection policy. 
A.  Cable television service shall be afforded to each qualified subscriber upon compliance with the provisions of Section 5.16.050 of this chapter; provided, however, such service shall not be extended to any person who has a delinquent utility or cable television service account with the city unless and until such account(s) is paid in full and the applicant pays a deposit of twice the amount of the city's monthly rates for cable television service applied for by that person. 
B.  Cable television services shall be billed on a calendar month basis. Such services for the initial month of service shall be prorated on the basis of the number of days service is received and a thirty day month. Liability for the monthly subscriber rates shall accrue as of the first day of each month and there shall be no prorating for the termination of service prior to the end of each calendar month. 
C.  The city shall bill its subscribers for cable television service at the applicable subscriber rates in arrears for each preceding calendar month on or about the first day of each month. Bills for cable television service shall be due by the tenth day after billing; except when the final date of payment falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, the due date shall be extended to the next business day of the city. United States Post Office postmarks will be accepted as payment date on receipts by mail provided the city actually receives same within twelve (12) days from the billing date. 
D.  Any subscriber not paying his bill for cable television service when due as provided in the preceding subsection shall have his service immediately disconnected by the CATV department. Any service disconnected due to nonpayment of a cable television service billing shall not be reconnected until all arrearage billings and the applicable reconnection fees have been paid to the city and the deposit provided for in subsection A of this section placed with the city. 
(Prior code § 22-107) 
5.16.080 - Use of existing city properties and rights-of-way and joint pole agreements. 
    In the construction and operation of its cable television system, the city shall be authorized and empowered to use all city property, including but not limited to streets, alleys, roadways, rights-of-way and easements inuring to the benefit of the city (unless such use by the city is prohibited by the right-of-way deed or easement in favor of the city) and all poles, cables and other apparatus used by the city in its utility system, including but not limited to the city's electrical system. The governing authority is authorized to enter into agreements with Georgia Power Company, Southern Bell Telephone and Telegraph Company, American Telephone and Telegraph Company, Snapping Shoals Electric Membership Corporation, and other such public utilities owning and operating utility systems within Newton County, Georgia, for the joint use of poles and facilities in the city's operation of its cable television system. 
(Prior code § 22-108) 
5.16.090 - Easements. 
    The city's regular easement form shall be executed by the applicant to cover the premises to which an applicant desires the extension of cable television service. The city shall not be required to build any portion of a service line across the private property of one person to serve another unless the lawful owners of the properties over which such lines shall cross consent to such an extension of service. 
(Prior code § 22-109) 
5.16.100 - Prohibited activities. 
    From and after February 15, 1982, no person shall: 
A.  Make any unauthorized connection, whether physically, electrically, acoustically, inductively or otherwise, with any part of the city's cable television system for the purpose of enabling himself or others to receive any cable television service without payment of the applicable installation or reconnection charge and subscriber rate to the city; 
B.  Without the consent of the city, willfully tamper with, remove or injure any cables, wires or equipment used by the city in its cable television system; 
C.  Connect or attempt to connect any apparatus to the city's cable television system for any purpose except for the connection of the exact number of televisions and/or other electronic equipment expressly permitted to be connected to said system under the subscriber's application agreement; 
D.  Resell, redistribute or otherwise charge anything of value for the use or redistribution of any cable television service received by a subscriber except as expressly permitted for a multiple-use subscriber. 
(Prior code § 22-110) 
5.16.110 - Regulation of extension based on anticipated cost and revenue. 
    The city expressly reserves the right to refuse to extend cable television service when: 
A.  The cost of such extension is determined by the governing authority to be excessive in comparison to the revenue to be derived therefrom; or 
B.  When the city does not have funds available for such extensions; and in either such event, the applicant for such extension and the city may negotiate the financing of such extension on such terms and conditions as the governing authority may approve. 
(Prior code § 22-111) 
5.16.120 - Rules and regulations of the CATV department. 
A.  The CATV department shall adopt, from time to time, clearly reasonable rules and regulations concerning the operation of the CATV department. In addition to such other areas as the CATV department shall determine and not otherwise contrary to this chapter, such rules shall cover such areas as: 
1.  Allowances and guidelines for installations and reconnections including standard connections for both home subscribers and multiple-use subscribers; 
2.  Miscellaneous service charges or the rates for the calculation of service charges for normally required services provided in the installation of cable television service which will not otherwise be covered by the basic installation charge; all charges must be calculated so as to reimburse the city for the actual direct materials and labor costs involved in providing such services plus an overhead factor as may be set from time to time by resolution of the governing authority; 
3.  Charges for providing underground service to a subscriber; 
4.  Prohibiting employees of the CATV department from "fishing" of wire in walls and moving of furniture during installation or reconnection of cable television service; and 
5.  Miscellaneous policies and procedures, including defining normal working hours, for responding to service calls, making initial installations and reconnection. 
B.  Each applicant for cable television service shall, prior to actual installation, be apprised of the miscellaneous service charges and rates and an estimate of the miscellaneous service charges anticipated to be incurred in providing the applicable cable television service to the applicant. Prior to the commencement of installation of cable television service to a customer that will require services for other than a standard connection, the applicant shall pay a deposit to the city of the estimated miscellaneous service charges over and above the installation fee for standard connection. 
C.  Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, the governing authority shall have the right and privilege by resolution to rescind, revoke or amend from time to time, any and all rules and regulations adopted by the CATV department. 
(Prior code § 22-112) 
5.16.130 - Compliance with applicable laws, rules and regulations. 
    Covington Cable Television shall be operated in complete compliance with all applicable state, federal and local rules and regulations, including but not limited to the Federal Communications Act and FCC Rules and Regulations. The Covington Cable Television System shall at all times maintain an active registration statement with the Federal Communications Commission and the compulsory license under the 1976 Copyright Act. 
(Prior code § 22-113) 
5.16.140 - Complaint procedure. 
    The CATV department shall provide forms for recording, processing and resolving subscriber complaints. All subscriber complaints shall be submitted in writing to the CATV department on forms provided for that purpose and it shall be the responsibility of the CATV department to respond promptly to valid complaints. 
    All written complaints shall be maintained in permanent files by the city and reflect the disposition thereof. Complaints and records shall be maintained under a dual indices system of chronological order by date of filing and by subscriber names. 
(Prior code § 22-114) 
5.16.150 - Violations-Discontinuance of service-Penalties. 
A.  Upon the discovery of any violation of a provision of this or any other ordinance or franchise agreement regulating the operation of the city's cable television system, or any rule or regulation adopted by the CATV department relative to the operation of the cable television system, it shall be the duty of the CATV department to discontinue cable television service to the subscriber guilty of the violation until such violation is corrected and any charges connected therewith paid. 
B.  Any person violating any provisions of this chapter within the then-existing corporate limits of the city other than the nonpayment of bills for cable television service, which nonpayment shall be handled in the authorized and usual commercial practice, shall, upon conviction thereof by the recorder or mayor in the recorder's court of the city, be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 22-115) 
Chapter 5.20 - DEPOSITORY FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS 
Sections: 

5.20.010 - Business license tax imposed. 
    Pursuant to Section 48-6-93, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, there is levied an annual business license tax upon each financial depository institution located within the corporate limits of the city at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of said institutions as defined in Section 48-6-95(b), Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Notwithstanding any other provision of this chapter, the minimum amount of business license tax due from any depository financial institution pursuant to this chapter shall be one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per year. 
(Prior code § 13-37) 
(Ord. dated 6/7/10, § 1) 
5.20.020 - Due date and filing of return-Due date of taxes. 
    Each depository financial institution within the city shall file a return of its gross receipts within the city on March first of the year following the year in which such gross receipts were measured. Said returns shall be in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking of the state of Georgia and shall be based upon the allocation methods set forth in subsection (d) of Section 48-6-93, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. The tax levied pursuant to this chapter shall be assessed and collected based on the information provided in said return. The due date of the license tax as levied by this chapter shall be April 1, 1984, and April first of each subsequent year thereafter. 
(Prior code § 13-38) 
5.20.030 - Effective date. 
    This chapter shall be effective on January 1, 1984, with the license tax imposed hereunder being based on gross receipts of depository financial institutions for the calendar year 1983 and each subsequent year thereafter. 
(Prior code § 13-39) 
Chapter 5.24 - INSURANCE COMPANIES 

5.24.010 - Insurer license fee. 
    There is levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon each insurer doing business within the city in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). For each separate business location in excess of one not covered by Section 5.24.020 of this chapter, which is operating on behalf of such insurers within the city, there is levied a license fee in the amount of seventy-five dollars ($75.00). As used in this chapter, the term "insurer" means a company which is authorized to transact business in any of the classes of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-3-5. 
(Ord. dated 1/7/02 § 1: prior code § 13-21) 
5.24.020 - License fee for insurers insuring certain risks at additional business locations. 
    For each separate business location, not otherwise subject to a license fee hereunder, operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and in connection with such loans or sales offers, solicits or takes application for insurance through a licensed agent of an insurer, said insurer shall pay an additional license fee of twenty-six dollars and twenty-five cents ($26.25) per location for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter. 
(Ord. dated 1/7/02 § 2: prior code § 13-22) 
5.24.030 - Insurance agency license fees-Independent insurance agencies, brokers, etc., not otherwise licensed. 
    There is levied for the calendar year 1996 and for each year thereafter an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which an insurance business is conducted and which is not subject to the company license fees imposed by Section 5.24.010 of this chapter, in the same amount as provided for insurance company business locations in Section 5.24.010 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 13-23) 
5.24.040 - Gross premiums tax imposed on life insurance companies. 
    There is levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums which are received from policies insuring persons residing within the corporate limits of the city upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the state of Georgia in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-8.1. Gross direct premiums as used in this section shall mean gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by Section 5.24.010 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 1/7/02 § 3: prior code § 13-24) 
5.24.050 - Gross premiums tax, all other insurers. 
    There is levied for the year 2002 and for each year thereafter an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in subsection 1 of O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-3-5, doing business within the state of Georgia in an amount equal to two and one-half percent of the gross direct premiums received during the preceding calendar year in accordance with O.C.G.A. Sec. 33-8-8.2. 
(Ord. dated 1/7/02 § 3: prior code § 13-25) 
5.24.060 - Due date and payment of license fees. 
    The license fees imposed by Sections 5.24.010 through 5.24.030 of this chapter shall be due and payable on the first day of January in each calendar year, hereafter beginning January 1, 1984. Payments shall be deemed delinquent if not received by March thirty-first of each such year. Payment of the license fees hereinbefore mentioned shall be made to the city clerk of the city, and shall be accompanied by a report showing the name and address of the person responsible for each business location subject to the license fee imposed, the address of each business location, the class or classes of insurance written at each business location, the names of the companies represented and such other reasonable information as may be required. 
(Prior code § 13-26) 
Chapter 5.28 - TAXICABS[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. of October 1, 2012, repealed former Ch. 5.28, which pertained to Vehicles For Hire. Said ordinance enacted provisions designated as a new Ch. 5.28 to read as herein set out. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 

5.28.010 - Definitions. 
    When used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, unless the context indicates a different meaning: 
    "Operator" means the driver of a taxicab or the owner of a physical place of taxicab business within the corporate limits of the city. 
    "Piggy-back services" means transporting a taxicab passenger's vehicle from one location to another, for which a taxicab driver or taxicab company accepts or solicits any consideration, charge or fee that is determined by agreement, by mileage or by the length of time the taxicab passenger's vehicle is operated. 
    "Street" means and includes any street, alley, lane, avenue, court, or public road in the city. 
    "Taxicab" means any motor vehicle used in the business of transporting or offering to transport passengers for a fee or fare as a public conveyance and which is fitted with a taximeter or other device used to compute such fee or fare, based upon any combination of mileage, time or agreement with a passenger. 
    "Taxicab company" means a person or entity that operates one or more taxicabs under the provisions of this chapter. A taxicab company may also provide piggy-back services for taxicab passengers. 
    "Taxicab driver" means any person who is permitted to operate a taxicab on the streets of the city or to provide piggy-back services. 
    "Taxicab driver's permit" means the written authority granted by the city for an individual to operate a taxicab or to provide piggy-back service within the corporate limits of the city. 
    "Taxicab company permit" means the right and privilege granted to a taxicab company by the city for the operation of one or more taxicabs within the corporate limits of the city, issued upon meeting the requirements of this chapter and upon the receipt of a regulatory fee established by the city. 
    "Taxicab stand" means a public place alongside the curb of a street or elsewhere that has been designated by the city as reserved exclusively for the use of taxicabs. 
    "Taximeter" means a meter, instrument or device installed in a taxicab that measures the distance traveled by such taxicab, records the times the taxicab travels or is in waiting, and indicates the fare to be charged for such service. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.020 - Operators in the city. 
    Any person, business or entity shall be deemed to be operating in the city and subject to the provisions of this chapter if such person is regularly picking up passengers or providing piggy-back services in the city or maintains a location for maintaining a taxicab company for any consideration, charge or fee which is determined by agreement, by mileage, or by the length of time the taxicab is used. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.030 - Notice. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, notice shall be deemed delivered: when personally served; when delivery to the last known address of the affected party is acknowledged by signed receipt of certified mail; or three days after the date of deposit in the United States mail. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.040 - Taxicab company permit required. 
    It shall be unlawful to operate a taxicab business within the corporate limits of the city without a valid taxicab permit issued by the Covington Police Department for such operation. A taxicab permit shall be issued by the Covington Police Department only after all operating company taxicabs have been inspected and found to comply with all requirements of this chapter, including the payment of the taxicab company permit fee established by the city. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.050 - Taxicab company permit application. 
(A)  Any person or entity desiring to operate one or more taxicabs in the city must make prior application for a taxicab owners permit in the form and manner prescribed by the Covington Police Department. 
(B)  An application for a taxicab company permit must be filed with the Covington Police Department and verified before a notary public as true, correct and complete. Applicants must submit to a criminal background check. If the applicant is other than a sole proprietor, then all partners, officers, managers and stockholders holding a ten (10) percent or more interest in the taxicab company shall be subject to the provisions of this section. The applicant must further: 
(1)  Be at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(2)  Be a citizen of the United States or an alien who has either been admitted to the United States for permanent residence or otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service; 
(3)  Not have been convicted, pled guilty or nolo contendere, forfeited bond or been imprisoned, within a period of five years next preceding the date of application, for violation of any of the following federal or state criminal offenses: criminal homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; illegal gambling, criminal trespass, public indecency, theft or violence against person or property; peeping Tom, leaving the scene of an accident; manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vehicle; racing on highways or streets; using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting to elude an officer; criminal solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; felony in which a motor vehicle was used; perjury or false swearing; crime of violence; possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drug, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants; provided, however, that applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., relating to first offender status. If, at the time of an application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses proscribed in this subsection, then consideration of the application shall be suspended until entry of a plea, verdict or dismissal of such charge. 
(4)  Never have been convicted of crimes against children, or sex crimes; 
(C)  Applicants other than sole proprietors must also: 
(1)  File a list of all who employees who will be applying for a taxicab driver's permit; 
(2)  List the number of taxicabs the applicant will be operating, each taxicab's vehicle identification number (VIN), Georgia license number, and the year, make and model of each taxicab; 
(3)  Submit proof of motor vehicle insurance covering public liability and property damage issued by an insurance company authorized to do business in Georgia, or proof of a self-insurance certificate issued under Georgia guidelines and regulated by the Georgia Insurance Commissioner. Such proof of insurance shall meet all requirements set forth in Section 5.28.070. Such proof of insurance shall be required for each taxicab operated by the applicant; 
(4)  Submit payment of the proper permit fees, as established by the Covington Police Department; 
(5)  Provide the following information at applicant's expense: 
(a)  Trade name and legal name of business (if different from trade name); 
(b)  Business location, mailing address and telephone number; 
(c)  Federal employer ID number or Social Security number; 
(d)  Form of business (e.g., sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, limited liability company); 
(e)  The full legal name of the applicant; 
(f)  The current business and residence addresses of the applicant; 
(g)  The applicant's height, weight and color of eyes and hair; 
(h)  A complete set of fingerprints pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 35-3-35; 
(i)  A copy of the applicant's proposed rate schedule. 
(D)  An applicant who has consented for a criminal history based on fingerprinting record may request and receive a copy of the applicable criminal history record report from the Covington Police Department at no additional charge. Should the applicant desire to amend or correct the record, he or she shall be responsible for contacting the GCIC as to Georgia records or the FBI concerning records from other jurisdictions maintained in its file; 
(E)  File a copy of the applicant's proposed rate schedule. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.060 - Indemnity for benefit of city. 
    Permittees operating under this chapter shall indemnify and hold the city harmless against any and all liability, loss, claims, costs, damages, or expense which may accrue to the city as a result of the negligence, default, or misconduct of the permittee in connection with the rights granted hereunder. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.070 - Insurance coverage required. 
(A)  No taxicab company permit shall be issued or continued in effect unless there is in full force and effect liability insurance for each taxicab authorized in the amounts of twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) bodily injury to any one person; fifty thousand dollars ($50,000.00) for injuries to more than one (1) person which are sustained in the same accident; and twenty-five thousand dollars ($25,000.00) for property damage resulting from any one (1) accident. 
(B)  Before any policy of insurance required by this chapter is amended or voided for any cause, nonpayment of premium or otherwise, written notice thereof shall be immediately given by the taxicab company to the Covington Police Department. Alteration or voidance of any insurance policy required by this chapter without at least three calendar days' notice to the Covington Police Department shall be grounds for immediate suspension of the taxicab company permit. 
(C)  The provisions of subsection (a) of this section shall be waived in the event that the taxicab company has obtained and presented proof of a current and valid certificate of self-insurance from the commissioner of the Georgia Department of Insurance in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 33-34-5.1. 
(Ord. dated 2/4/13(1), § 1; Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.080 - Issuance or denial of application for taxicab company permit. 
(A)  The Covington Police Department shall examine the application and either grant or deny the application for a taxicab company permit, in writing, based upon the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
(B)  If the Covington Police Department finds that the applicant is not qualified to operate as a taxicab company, the application shall be denied. The applicant shall have the right to file an appeal from the decision of the Covington Police Department as set forth in Section 5.28.100 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.090 - Suspension, denial or revocation of taxicab company permit. 
(A)  A taxicab company permit may be denied, suspended or revoked by the Covington Police Department for the following reasons: 
(1)  Furnishing fraudulent or untruthful information or omitting information requested in an application or report; 
(2)  Failure to pay fees, taxes or other charges imposed by the provisions of this chapter; 
(3)  Failure to maintain all of the general qualifications applicable to the initial issuance of a taxicab company permit; 
(4)  Allowing the required insurance coverage to lapse; 
(5)  Violation of any provision of this chapter or of any other Georgia or federal law or ordinance affecting the operation of the permittee's business; 
(6)  Conviction of any act, or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere to any act, which would disqualify a person from obtaining a taxicab company permit; 
(7)  Discontinuing operations for a period of more than thirty (30) days or failing to begin operations within sixty (60) days of the date of issuance of a taxicab permit. 
(B)  Prior to any suspension or revocation by the Covington Police Department, a licensee shall be given written notification of the action, which shall include the grounds for such action and notice of the taxicab company permit holder's right to appeal. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.100 - Appeal procedure. 
    The denial, revocation or suspension of a taxicab company permit under the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the mayor and council of the city by filing a notice of appeal with the city clerk within thirty (30) days from the date that the adverse decision is issued by the Covington Police Department specifying the action of the Covington Police Department which the appellant contends was improper. The city clerk shall schedule such appeal for hearing before the mayor and council at its regularly scheduled meeting to be held not more than thirty (30) days next following the filing date of the notice of appeal. Notice of the date of the said hearing shall be provided to the appellant not later than ten (10) days next preceding the hearing date. The decision of the mayor and council upon hearing such appeal shall be in writing and served on the appellant personally or by certified mail to the address set forth in the applicable permit application. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.110 - Duration of taxicab company permit. 
    Taxicab company permits shall be in effect for twelve (12) months from the date of issuance. Taxicab company permits may be renewed upon application and payment of the required fee, for twelve-month periods thereafter, unless the taxicab company permit for the preceding period has been revoked or is under suspension. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.120 - Taxicab company permit holders responsible for violations by taxicab drivers. 
    Taxicab company permit holders under this chapter shall be responsible for violations of this chapter by its taxicab drivers, whether such taxicab drivers are direct employees or independent contractors of the taxicab company. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.130 - Alteration of taxicab company permit prohibited. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully alter, deface, obliterate or destroy a taxicab company permit issued pursuant to this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.140 - Taxicab driver's permit required. 
    No person shall operate or permit the operation of a taxicab in the city for the purpose of doing business in the city, unless the driver of said taxicab shall have first obtained and shall have then in force: 
(a)  A taxicab driver's permit issued under the provisions of this chapter; and 
(b)  The certificate of insurance coverage for the taxicab on file as provided in this chapter with proof of such insurance being physically located in the taxicab. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.150 - Taxicab driver's permit application. 
(A)  Any person desiring to operate a taxicab in the city shall submit a written application to the Covington Police Department, on a form to be furnished by the Covington Police Department. Such application shall provide sufficient information to the Covington Police Department to demonstrate that the applicant: 
(1)  Is at least eighteen (18) years of age; 
(2)  Has not been convicted, pled guilty, pled nolo contendere, forfeited bond or been imprisoned, within a period of five years next preceding the date of the application for violation of any of the following criminal offenses: homicide; rape; aggravated battery; burglary; aggravated assault; kidnapping; robbery; driving a motor vehicle while under the influence of intoxicating beverages or drugs; illegal gambling, criminal trespass, public indecency, theft, violence against person or property; peeping Tom, leaving the scene of an accident; manslaughter resulting from the operation of a vehicle; racing on highways or streets; using a motor vehicle in fleeing or attempting to elude an officer; solicitation to commit any of these listed offenses; felony in the commission of which a motor vehicle was used; perjury or false swearing; crime of violence, possession, sale or distribution of narcotic drugs, barbituric acid derivatives or central nervous system stimulants; crimes against children or other sex crimes; provided, however, that applicants shall be entitled to the full benefits of O.C.G.A. § 42-8-60 et seq., relating to first offender status. If, at the time of application the applicant is charged with any of the offenses proscribed in this subsection, then consideration of the application shall be suspended until such charges are properly terminated; 
(3)  Does not have more than five moving traffic violations in the past five years or traffic offenses totaling more than twenty (20) points in the past five years as designated by the Georgia Department of Driver Services; 
(4)  Is a citizen of the United States or an alien either admitted for permanent residence or who has otherwise been granted employment authorization by the United States Immigration and Naturalization Service. 
(B)  Each application shall be accompanied by: 
(1)  A copy of a valid class C Georgia driver's license issued to the applicant. The license must not be limited as defined in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-5-58 and 40-5-64. 
(2)  The applicant must sign a consent form authorizing the Covington Police Department to obtain his or her criminal history record. 
(Ord. dated 2/4/13(1), § 2; Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.160 - Identification and markings, generally. 
(A)  Every taxicab shall have markings on the front door of each side of the taxicab, in letters not less than four inches high and in colors contrasting with the color of the taxicab, denoting the telephone number and the full name of the taxicab company operating the taxicab, including words such as taxicab, taxi, or cab. Such sign shall be professionally applied and shall be either painted or permanently affixed to each side of the taxicab. Markings displaying the name of the business shall be a minimum of four-inch letters and a maximum of ten-inch letters. Other lettering shall be a minimum of two-inch letters and a maximum of six-inch letters. 
(B)  Taxicabs may also bear an identifying design, monogram or insignia. Such design, monogram or insignia shall be constructed so as not to conflict with or imitate any identifying design, monogram or insignia used by the holder of another taxicab license issued by the city, nor shall it be designed in such a way as to be misleading or deceptive to the public. Such identifying design, monogram or insignia shall be professionally applied and shall be permanently affixed. 
(C)  An identification decal issued to successful applicants by the Covington Police Department shall be affixed and maintained on the front and rear windshield of each taxicab. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.170 - Identification lights. 
    Every taxicab permitted by the Covington Police Department shall display, as a part of its equipment, an identification insignia on the top, which shall be electrically illuminated at night, and which top light shall carry either the name of the taxicab company, the word taxi, taxicab, or cab; provided, however, that during the period in which a taxicab is occupied and under hire, the identification insignia on the top of the taxicab shall not be illuminated. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.180 - Number, generally. 
    There shall be shown on the front and rear bumper of each taxicab a number at least four inches high, such number to be separate and distinct from that on any other taxicab permitted by the Covington Police Department. Such number shall be assigned to each taxicab and the owner thereof by the Covington Police Department and shall be professionally applied, either painted or permanently affixed, and shall be in reflective white, silver, gray, or black numerals which are in clear contrast with the color of the taxicab's bumper. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.190 - Distinctive color scheme. 
    All taxicabs operated under the authority of a taxicab company permit shall be painted the same color scheme. Color schemes shall be recorded with and approved by the Covington Police Department. No taxicab company's color scheme shall be confusingly similar to the color scheme of city or county public safety vehicles or to the color scheme of any other taxicab company permitted by the city. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.200 - Safe mechanical condition of taxicabs required. 
(A)  Each taxicab permitted by the Covington Police Department shall be maintained in mechanically sound and in good working order so as to ensure the safety of taxicab drivers, passengers, pedestrians and the other drivers on the roadways. Headlights, tail lights, brake lights, top lights, turn signals, license plate lights, windshield wipers and washers, glass, mirrors, window cranks or electric windows, door locks, trunk lid, door handles, horn, exhaust system, bumpers, fenders, body, tires, seat belts and other taxicab equipment must be in good condition and functioning properly. 
(B)  The Covington Police Department must be notified within ten (10) calendar days of any taxicab being taken out of service for any reason other than temporary maintenance. "Temporary maintenance" a used in this section means maintenance that will be completed within a thirty-calendar-day period. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.210 - Manifest. 
    Each taxicab driver and taxicab company shall maintain a legible daily manifest record of each trip made by the taxicab driver, showing time and place of origin, destination and amount of fare paid for each trip. Such completed manifests shall be returned to the taxicab company by the taxicab driver at least weekly and shall be maintained by the taxicab company at its office for a period of at least one calendar year. Said manifests shall be made available for inspection by the Covington Police Department or to any other sworn law enforcement officer. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.220 - Taximeter required. 
    Taxicabs operated under the authority of this chapter whose charges are determined by mileage or by the length of time the taxicab is used shall be equipped with a taximeter which shall be used while transporting passengers during the operation of the taxicab. The taximeter shall be affixed to the taxicab so as to be in clear view of the taxicab's passengers and shall be visible to them at all times of the day and night, and, after sundown, the face of the taximeter shall be illuminated. Taximeters shall be installed, properly connected and maintained in good repair as prescribed by the manufacturer of the meter. Taximeters shall be equipped with a device that designates when the taximeter is engaged. Taximeters shall be subject to inspection at any time by the Covington Police Department. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.230 - Maximum rates of fare; posting required. 
(A)  No person shall operate a taxicab within the city without first filing with the Covington Police Department a copy of such taxicab permit holder's rate schedule. Any changes to said rate schedule must be filed with the Covington Police Department prior to such changes being implemented. 
(B)  No taxicab operator shall charge a rate in excess of the rates filed with the Covington Police Department. 
(C)  Copies of all fares, charges and rates shall be posted in each taxicab and shall be of such size and positioned in such a manner as to be plainly visible to passengers being transported in the taxicab. 
(D)  Such rate schedule shall include rates for mileage, waiting time, extra passengers, excess baggage, flat rates, and piggy-back service rates if applicable when applicable. 
(E)  No charge shall be made for time or mileage for traveling to the location of a prospective passenger. 
(F)  The driver of any taxicab shall, upon request by the passenger, render to such passenger a receipt for the amount charged, on which shall be shown the name of the taxicab company, the taxicab number, taxicab driver's name and permit number, trip origin and destination, amount of charges, and date of transaction. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.240 - Registration with Covington Police Department if providing piggy-back services. 
    No taxicab driver or taxicab company shall provide piggy-back services without having first filed with the Covington Police Department notification of its intent to provide piggy-back services. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.250 - Refusal of passenger to pay legal fare. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to refuse to pay the legal fare of a taxicab having a valid taxicab driver's permit under this chapter after having hired the same, or to hire any taxicab with intent to defraud the driver of the value of such service. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.260 - Taxicab stands. 
    It shall be unlawful to erect a taxicab stand within the city limits when such taxicab stand causes taxicabs to form a line on a city street. Whenever a taxicab stand is established, it may be used by taxicabs upon a rotation basis of first-come, first-served. Taxicab drivers shall pull into taxicab stands from the rear and shall advance forward as taxicabs ahead depart. Taxicab drivers shall stay within five feet of their taxicabs and shall not solicit passengers while at a taxicab stand. Nothing in this section shall be construed as preventing a passenger from boarding any taxicab of the passenger's choice when the taxicab is parked at a taxicab stand. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.270 - Soliciting passengers prohibited. 
(A)  No taxicab driver shall solicit passengers, except when sitting in the taxicab driver's compartment of such taxicab or while standing immediately adjacent to the curbside thereof. The taxicab driver shall remain in the taxicab driver's compartment at all times when such taxicab is upon the street, except when exiting the taxicab to the side of the street or sidewalk for the purpose of assisting passengers and luggage into or out of the taxicab. 
(B)  Taxicab drivers shall not receive nor discharge passengers in the street, but shall pull up to the right-hand sidewalk or to the extreme right-hand side of the street and there receive or discharge passengers, except on one-way streets where taxicab drivers may receive and discharge passengers on either side of the street. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.280 - Carrying more than one fare-paying passenger. 
    It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver to pick up a second fare-paying passenger when the taxicab is occupied by a fare-paying passenger, without first securing the permission of the original fare-paying passenger. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.290 - Restriction on number of passengers. 
    No taxicab driver shall permit more persons to be carried as passengers in a taxicab than the rated seating capacity of the taxicab. In calculating the number of passengers a taxicab may carry, the taxicab driver shall be included in the count of the number of persons for the rated seating capacity of the taxicab. In no case shall a taxicab driver who is providing piggy-back services transport any passengers in the taxicab passenger's vehicle. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.300 - Refusal to carry orderly passengers prohibited. 
(A)  No taxicab driver shall refuse or neglect to convey any orderly adult upon request unless previously engaged or prevented by the provisions of this chapter from doing so. 
(B)  A taxicab driver may refuse to convey a passenger if the driver has reasonable cause to believe that the person intends to violate any federal or state law or city ordinance. 
(C)  The provisions of this chapter shall not be construed to require a taxicab driver to convey a passenger if the driver has reasonable cause to believe that doing so places the taxicab driver or others in danger. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.310 - Smoking prohibited when taxicab is occupied by passenger. 
(A)  It shall be unlawful for a taxicab driver to smoke in the taxicab when a passenger occupies the taxicab. 
(B)  "No Smoking" signs with letters not less than one inch in height or signs with the international no smoking symbol (consisting of a pictorial representation of a burning cigarette enclosed in a red circle with a red bar across it) not less than three inches in diameter shall be clearly and conspicuously posted inside the passenger compartment of the taxicab. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.320 - Property left in taxicab by passenger. 
    When a taxicab driver discovers that a passenger has left behind personal property in a taxicab under the taxicab driver's control he shall report such loss and deliver all such property to the office of the taxicab company within twelve (12) hours after the discovery of such property. The taxicab driver's report shall include brief particulars to enable the taxicab company to identify the owner of the property. The taxicab company shall maintain custody of the property on behalf of the owner for at least sixty (60) calendar days after notice of the found property is communicated to the owner thereof, if known. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.330 - Report of charges. 
    Taxicab drivers shall report to the Covington Police Department any charges filed against them by any law enforcement officer, including but not limited to, minor traffic charges, within three business days of the charge being made. Upon request by the Covington Police Department, said taxicab driver shall provide such details and/or copies of documents as are available concerning such charges. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.340 - Additional taxicab inspection. 
    Taxicabs shall be subject to inspection by the Covington Police Department at any time. Upon discovery of any violation of this or other applicable laws, the Covington Police Department shall take appropriate remedial action as authorized under this chapter. The Covington Police Department shall establish a systematic procedure to perform random, unannounced inspections of taxicabs in order to enforce compliance with this chapter and all other applicable laws. By accepting a taxicab company permit and/or a taxicab driver's permit to operate a taxicab in the city, each taxicab company and driver consents to unannounced, randomly selected inspections to ensure compliance with this chapter and other applicable ordinances. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.350 - Taximeter inspection. 
    Pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, every taximeter shall be subject to inspection by the Covington Police Department at any time, and upon discovery of any violation or any inaccuracy the Covington Police Department shall notify the operator of said taxicab in writing to cease operation immediately. The taxicab shall be kept out of service until the taximeter is repaired, the required working condition is restored and the taximeter is resealed by the Covington Police Department. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.360 - Citation for violation of taxicab ordinance. 
    The Covington Police Department shall have the authority to cite or subpoena taxicab drivers or taxicab company owners to appear in Covington Municipal Court for violations of this chapter. The punishment for conviction of violations of this chapter shall be as provided by Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
5.28.370 - Authority for removal of taxicabs from streets. 
    The Covington Police Department shall have the authority to remove from operation on the streets of the city any vehicle used as a taxicab that is in violation of this chapter and to prohibit operation of such taxicab until all deficiencies thereof have been corrected. An order of the Covington Police Department to remove a taxicab from the city streets may be appealed as set forth in Section 5.28.100 of this chapter. Until the appeal has been heard, the taxicab that has been ordered removed from service shall not be used. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(1), § 1) 
Chapter 5.32 - OTHER BUSINESSES 

5.32.010 - Peddlers on private property without permission of owner. 
A.  Declared Nuisance. The practice of being in and upon private property in this city by solicitors, peddlers, hawkers, itinerant merchants or transient vendors of merchandise, without the permission or invitation of the owner or occupant of such property, for the purpose of soliciting orders for the sale of goods, wares, or merchandise or for the purpose of disposing of or peddling or hawking the same, is declared to be a nuisance and shall be summarily abated. 
B.  Abatement. Any person causing such a nuisance shall be ordered by the police department to abate the same immediately. 
C.  Penalty. It is unlawful for any person causing such a nuisance to fail or refuse to abate the same immediately upon being ordered to do so by the police department. Upon conviction of such offense, the offender may be punished as provided by Section 1.12.010 of this code; and for this purpose, each time that such person shall go upon private property in violation of this section, after having been ordered not to do so by the police department, shall constitute a separate offense and may be punished accordingly. 
D.  Provisions Cumulative. The provisions of this section regarding such nuisances shall be cumulative of other provisions in this code regarding nuisances, and shall not be construed to alter, amend or repeal any other such provisions. 
(Prior code § 14-21.1) 
5.32.020 - Fortune telling. 
    It is unlawful for any person to carry on within the corporate limits of the city, the business of telling fortunes or carrying on the trade, business or profession of phrenology, clairvoyance, palmistry or other business of like kind or nature in which the future of any person is foretold or attempted to be foretold. 
(Prior code § 14-16) 
5.32.030 - Poolrooms, restrictions on minors. 
    No person under eighteen (18) years of age shall be allowed in a billiard or poolroom without the written consent, for such time and place, of a parent or legal guardian or when accompanied by a parent of legal guardian. 
(Prior code § 14-27) 
Chapter 5.36 - PAWNBROKERS 

5.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide requirements for the operation of pawnshops within the city, which serve to benefit the public by impeding the sale of stolen property. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
5.36.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term: 
    "Employee" means: 
1.  Any owner of a pawnshop or pawnbroker who, in the performance of duties or management of a pawnshop, comes into contact with members of the public; or 
2.  A person employed on a full-time or part-time basis by a pawnbroker in the operation of a pawnshop. 
    "Pawn transaction" means a loan on the security of or a purchase of pledged tangible personal property, including motor vehicles or motor vehicle certificates of title, on the condition that the pledged property may be redeemed or repurchased by the pledgor or seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time. "Pawnbroker" means a person or entity engaged in whole or in part in the business of lending money on the security of pledged tangible personal property, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property on the condition that it may be redeemed or repurchased by the seller for a fixed price within a fixed period of time, or in the business of purchasing tangible personal property from persons or sources other than manufacturers or licensed dealers as a part of or in conjunction with the foregoing business activities. 
    "Pawnshop" means a business location wherein a substantial part of the business conducted consists of the activities described under the definition of "pawnbroker" in this section. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
5.36.030 - Applicability of state law. 
    In addition to and not in substitution for the requirements of this chapter, the operation of any pawnshop within the city shall be subject to the terms and provisions of Title 44, Chapter 12, Article 3, Part 5, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
5.36.040 - Annual permit required. 
A.  Any person or entity desiring to operate or be an employee of a pawnshop within the city shall first make application in person to the city police department for a permit to carry on such activity. 
B.  No such permit shall be issued to a person who, within the five years next preceding the date of the application, has been convicted or pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to a crime constituting a felony, or involving moral turpitude, theft or fraudulent practices, or who has falsified, concealed or misrepresented any material portion of the application. 
C.  No pawnbroker shall allow any employee to work in a pawnshop unless the employee shall have been issued a current valid permit. 
D.  The application required under this section shall be in such form as prescribed by the city police department, and shall include the name and street address of the pawnshop, the full name, residence address, telephone number, date of birth, social security number and fingerprints of the applicant. 
E.  Current permits for operators and employees issued pursuant to the provisions of this chapter shall be maintained at the pawnshop and available for inspection during regular pawnshop hours of operation. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
5.36.050 - Permit application procedure. 
A.  After ascertaining that all requisite forms have been completed and filed, that all additional information, including fingerprints, has been submitted, that no applicant is disqualified by virtue of a criminal record, the chief of police, or his designee, shall approve the application, subject to payment of an annual permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
B.  In any case in which it appears to the chief of police that an applicant is not entitled to the issuance of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police shall so notify the applicant in writing by mailing such notice to the applicant at the address furnished by the applicant. In the event that the chief of police refuses to issue a permit, or in the event that a permit is surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal such action to the city manager according to the procedures set forth in this section. The appeal shall be perfected by filing with the chief of police a notice of appeal to the city manager. The notice of appeal to the city manager must be filed with the chief of police within fourteen (14) days following the mailing of the notification of denial or surrender of the permit, and it shall be the duty of the chief of police, upon receipt thereof, to transmit the notice of appeal to the city manager, together with copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Thereafter, the city manager shall set a date for hearing on the matter within thirty (30) days after receipt by the chief of police of the notice of appeal, and shall notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and place when the matter shall be heard. 
C.  The applicant shall be given the opportunity to be heard and to present testimony of witnesses in support of his appeal at the hearing before the city manager. Within fourteen (14) days of the hearing, the city manager shall issue a written decision thereon and shall provide a copy of such decision to the appellant by mailing the same to the appellant at the address furnished by the applicant. 
D.  Appeals from decisions of the city manager pursuant to this section may be taken to the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia, in the manner provided by law for appeals from convictions for municipal ordinance violations. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
5.36.060 - Pawnbroker records, reports-Fingerprinting. 
A.  Pawnbrokers shall keep permanent records containing an accurate description of all property pledged, traded or sold to them, including the name of the maker of the article, any identifying mark or number and a statement of the kind of material of which it is made, as well as the full name and address of the person by whom it was deposited or sold, and the time when such property was received. Such records shall be made as soon after the transaction as practicable, but in no event more than one hour thereafter. 
B.  Pawnbrokers shall also obtain the right index fingerprint of each person pledging or selling property in a pawn transaction unless the right index finger is missing, in which event, the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained, with a notation as to the exact finger printed. 
C.  Pawnbrokers shall file a daily written report, in such form and delivered in such manner as prescribed by the city police department, of all property pledged, traded or bought by such pawnbroker during the twenty-four (24) hour period ending at nine p.m. on the date of the report. In addition to any other information that may be required by the city police department, the reports shall show: 
1.  The name and address of the pawnbroker; 
2.  The date and time of the transaction; 
3.  The name of the pawnbroker or its employee dealing with its customer; 
4.  The name, age and address of the pawnbroker's customer and the distinctive number from such customer's driver's license or other similar identification card containing a photo of the customer, as well as a photocopy of the customer's driver's license; 
5.  The right index fingerprint of the customer unless the right index finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained, with a notation as to the exact finger printed; 
6.  The serial number of each pawn ticket issued by the pawnbroker; 
7.  A clear and accurate identification and description of the goods pawned, bought or sold, including the serial number, model or other identifying number, all identifying marks inscribed thereon, and a well-focused properly exposed color photograph of such goods; 
8.  The amount paid, received or advanced for each transaction; 
9.  The number of the check issued for the purchase price of any item purchased by the pawnbroker; and 
10.  A photocopy of any document tending to show the customer's ownership of the items pawned or sold to the pawnbroker. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 2/16/09, § 1) 
5.36.070 - Suspension or revocation of permit. 
A.  Subject to the right of appeal as set forth in Section 5.36.050(D) of this chapter, a pawnbroker's permit issued under this chapter may be suspended or revoked by the chief of police where the permit holder furnishes fraudulent or false information on his permit application or whenever a pawnbroker or employee violates the provisions of this chapter. The chief of police shall revoke the pawnbroker's permit whenever property is received by the pawnbroker during a period of suspension of that pawnbroker's permit. No suspension shall be for a period longer than the time remaining on the permit. 
B.  The following factors shall be considered on any revocation or suspension pursuant to this section: 
1.  Impact of the violation on the community; 
2.  Likelihood of deterring future violations; 
3.  Any mitigating circumstances or remedial steps taken by the permit holder; and 
4.  Any aggravating circumstances or failure of the permit holder to take remedial steps. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
5.36.080 - Dealing with minors. 
    No pawnbroker or employee shall receive any property for pawn from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
5.36.090 - Hours of operation. 
    Pawnshops may open for business only between the hours of seven a.m. and nine p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
5.36.100 - Enforcement. 
    The city police department shall have responsibility for enforcement of this chapter, including the authority to inspect pawnshops during business hours for the purpose of verifying compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 8/7/06 (part)) 
Chapter 5.40 - DEALERS IN PRECIOUS METALS AND GEMS 

5.40.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide requirements for the business of purchase and sale of precious metals and gems within the city, which requirements will serve to benefit the public by impeding the sale of stolen property. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the term: 
A.  "Dealer in precious metals or gems" means: 
1.  Any person engaged in the business of purchasing precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems; or 
2.  A person engaged in any other business if, in conjunction with such business, precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems are purchased from persons or sources other than manufacturers, manufacturers' representatives, or other dealers in precious metals or gems where such purchase is for resale in its original form or as changed by remounting, melting, re-forming, remolding, or recasting or for resale as scrap or in bulk. 
B.  "Gems" means any precious or semiprecious stone which is cut and polished. 
C.  "Numismatic coins" means coins whose value as collectors' items exceeds the value of the content of the precious metals in the coins. 
D.  "Person" means an individual, partnership, corporation, joint venture, trust, association, or any other legal entity however organized. 
E.  "Precious metals" means gold, silver, or platinum or any alloy containing gold, silver, or platinum. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.030 - Applicability of state law. 
    In addition to and not in substitution for the requirements of this chapter, any dealer in precious metals and gems within the city shall be subject to all the terms and provisions of Title 43, Chapter 37, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, "Dealers in Precious Metals and Gems", as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.040 - Exemptions. 
A.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to dealers exclusively engaged in the sale or exchange of numismatic coins or to transactions exclusively involving numismatic coins or other coinage. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to pawnbrokers or employees of pawnbrokers who are in compliance with the requirements of Chapter 5.36 of this Title 5. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.050 - Permit for operation as a dealer in precious metals or gems. 
A.  No person shall engage in business as a dealer in precious metals or gems until he has registered and obtained a permit from the city police department. 
B.  The registration and application for such permit shall contain the name, address, fingerprints and age of the dealer and all other persons employed by the dealer or having an ownership interest in the dealer's business and the address of each place where the dealer's business is conducted within the city. The dealer shall notify the city police department within seven days of any change in the information provided in the registration. 
C.  The city police department shall provide the Newton County Sheriff with a copy of each permit issued to a dealer in precious metals or gems within seven days of issuance of the permit or receipt of notice of a change in the registration information, as the case may be. 
D.  No permit for operation as a dealer in precious metals or gems shall be issued to any person who has been convicted of a felony or who employs any person who has been convicted of a felony or an entity of which any shareholder owning ten (10) percent or more of the outstanding shares of such entity has been convicted of a felony. This subsection shall not apply to any person who has been convicted of a felony after ten (10) years have expired from the date of completion of the felony sentence. 
E.  After ascertaining that all requisite forms have been completed and filed, that all additional information, including fingerprints, has been submitted, that no applicant is disqualified by virtue of a criminal record, the chief of police of the city, or his designee, shall approve the application, subject to payment of an annual permit fee in an amount established by resolution of the city council. 
F.  In any case in which it appears to the chief of police that an applicant is not entitled to the issuance or renewal of a permit under the provisions of this chapter, the chief of police shall so notify the applicant in writing by mailing said notice to the applicant at the address furnished by the applicant. In the event that the chief of police refuses to issue or renew a permit, or in the event that a permit is surrendered pursuant to the provisions of this chapter, the applicant or permit holder shall have the right to appeal such action to the city manager according to the procedures set forth herein. The appeal shall be perfected by filing with the chief of police a notice of appeal to the city manager. The notice of appeal to the city manager must be filed with the chief of police within fourteen (14) days following the mailing of the notification of denial or surrender of the permit, and it shall be the duty of the chief of police, upon receipt thereof, to transmit said notice of appeal to the city manager, together with copies of all papers constituting the record upon which the action appealed from was taken. Thereafter, the city manager shall set a date for hearing on the matter within thirty (30) days after receipt by the chief of police of the notice of appeal, and shall notify the appellant in writing of the date, time and place when the matter shall be heard. 
G.  The applicant shall be given the opportunity to be heard and to present testimony of witnesses in support of his appeal at the hearing before the city manager. Within fourteen (14) days of said hearing the city manager shall issue a written decision thereon and shall provide a copy of such decision to the appellant by mailing the same to the appellant at the address furnished by the applicant. 
H.  Appeals from decisions of the city manager pursuant to this section may be taken to the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia, in the manner provided by law for appeals from convictions for municipal ordinance violations. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.060 - Expiration and renewal of permits. 
    Each permit issued as provided in this chapter shall indicate thereon an expiration date which is not sooner than one year from the date of issuance and shall be posted in a conspicuous place in the business location of the permit holder. Permit holders may apply for renewal of the permit at any time after the sixtieth day next preceding the expiration date of the current permit by completing and filing a renewal application form provided by the city police department and payment of the annual renewal fee established by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.070 - Revocation and surrender of permits. 
A.  Any permit issued under the provisions of this chapter shall be revoked by operation of law upon conviction of the permit holder of falsifying an application for a permit or permit renewal or violation of any other provision of this chapter or violation of any unlawful act specified in O.C.G.A. § 43-37-6(a). 
B.  Upon revocation the permit holder shall surrender the permit to the city police department within one business day of final adjudication of the conviction resulting in revocation, and failure to do so shall constitute a separate violation for each day the permit is withheld. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.080 - Dealer transaction records. 
A.  Every dealer in precious metals or gems shall maintain a book, in permanent form, in which shall be entered at the time of each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems the following: 
1.  The date and time of the purchase; 
2.  The name of the person making the purchase from the seller; 
3.  The name, age, and address of the seller of the items purchased and the distinctive number from such seller's driver's license or other similar identification card containing a photo of the seller, as well as a photocopy of the seller's driver's license; 
4.  The right index fingerprint of the seller unless the right index finger is missing, in which event the print of the next finger in existence on the right hand shall be obtained, with a notation as to the exact finger printed; 
5.  A clear and accurate identification and description of the purchased goods, including the serial, model, or other number, all identifying marks inscribed thereon, and a well-focused, properly exposed color photograph of such goods; 
6.  The price paid for the goods purchased; 
7.  The number of the check issued for the purchase price, if payment is made by check; and a photocopy of any document tending to show the seller's ownership of the items purchased by the dealer. 
B.  The permanent record book required by this section shall be legible English. Entries shall appear in chronological order. No blank lines may be left between entries. No obliterations, alterations, or erasures may be made. Corrections shall be made by drawing a line of ink through the entry without destroying its legibility. The book shall be maintained for each purchase of precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems for at least two years. The book shall be open to the inspection at the business premises of the permit holder by any duly authorized law enforcement officer during the ordinary hours of the permit holder's business. 
C.  Dealers exclusively engaged in buying or exchanging for merchandise scrap dental gold and silver from licensed dentists by registered or certified mail or statutory overnight delivery may record the post office record of the mailed parcel in lieu of the seller's age and driver's license number as required in this section. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.090 - Daily written reports required. 
A.  Every permitted dealer in precious metals or gems in the city shall file a written report with the city police department, on forms prescribed by the city, of all precious metals or gems purchased by the dealer on the day previous to the date of the report. Such report shall contain all the information specified for the dealer's record book in Section 5.40.080 (A) of this Chapter 5.40 and shall be typewritten or handwritten in legible English and mailed or delivered electronically or physically to the city police department within twenty-four (24) hours after the date on which the transactions occurred. 
B.  Reports received by the city police department pursuant to this section shall be maintained in a locked container under the direct supervision of the chief of police or his designee and shall be available for inspection only for law enforcement purposes. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.100 - Dealing with minors. 
    No dealer in precious metals and gems, nor any employee of such dealer shall purchase any precious metal or gem from a person under the age of eighteen (18) years. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.110 - Hours of operation. 
    Dealers in precious metals or gems shall open for business only between the hours of seven a.m. and nine p.m., Monday through Saturday. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
5.40.120 - Disposition waiting period. 
    Any dealer who in the ordinary course of business acquires precious metals or gems or goods made from precious metals or gems shall hold such items for not less than seven calendar days before disposing of them by sale, transfer, grinding, melting, crushing or otherwise altering the appearance of such items. If the city police department has probable cause to believe that any of the items reported by the dealer as provided in Section 5.40.09 of this Chapter 5.40 written notice shall be given to the dealer to retain such items for an additional fifteen (15) days, and it shall be unlawful for the dealer to dispose of such items unless and until the notice is revoked by the city police department within such fifteen-day period. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10) 
Title 6 - ANIMAL CONTROL 
Chapters: 
Chapter 6.02 - GENERAL PROVISIONS AND DEFINITIONS 
Sections: 

6.02.010 - Administration and definitions. 
A.  The responsibility for the control of animals within the city shall rest with the Newton County senior animal control officer. 
B.  The responsibility for the control of rabies and other zoonos within the city shall rest with the Newton County board of health. 
C.  For the purpose of this title, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings herein ascribed to them, unless clearly indicated to the contrary by the context. 
    "Adequate food" means the provision at suitable intervals, not to exceed twenty-four (24) hours, of a quantity of wholesome foodstuff suitable for the species and age, sufficient to maintain a reasonable level of nutrition in each animal. Such foodstuff shall be served in a receptacle, dish, or container that is physically clean and in which agents injurious to health have been removed or destroyed to a practical minimum. 
    "Adequate shelter" means any animal restrained outdoors shall be provided with access to adequate shelter to remain dry during rain or snow and protect it from wind, and excessive heat or cold. Shelter size shall be large enough to allow the animal to stand up fully without touching the walls or ceiling and of sufficient width and depth to allow the animal to freely turn around. Sufficient and clean bedding material or other reasonable means of protection from the weather elements shall be provided. If an animal is tethered, the tether length shall be three times the length of the animal from the tip of its nose to the end of its tail. If the animal has no tail or a cropped tail, two feet must be added to the tether length. When sunlight is likely to cause overheating or suffering, sufficient shade must be provided to allow protection from the direct effects of the sun. The animal's containment area shall be free of accumulated waste and debris so that the animal shall be free to walk or lie down without coming in contact with any waste or debris, and a suitable method of draining shall be provided to eliminate excess water or moisture. 
    "Adequate water" means a constant access to supply of clean, fresh water provided in a sanitary manner. 
    Animal. The term "animal" is defined as any live vertebrate creature, domestic or wild. 
    Animal Control. The term "animal control" shall not be understood to be limited in practice, or interpretation, to the extermination of unwanted or deserted animals in the city. In practice it imposes an obligation upon the administrators to also develop and implement an aggressive program promoting responsible pet ownership within the city. The program as developed by the Newton County animal control department includes but is not limited to: 
1.  The development of an educational program on the need for responsible treatment, ownership, and the need for spaying and neutering of dogs and cats to prevent undesirable and unwanted litters; 
2.  An active, concerted, and responsible adoption program in conjunction with the Newton Humane Society, which might also include an adoption contract between the parties. Pet owners in the city are advised that the animal control center is not intended to be a dumping ground and extermination center to serve irresponsible pet owners at the expense of taxpayers. 
    "Animal control attendant" means an individual employed either full or part-time by the Newton County department of animal control whose duty is to provide humane care for the animals housed in the animal control center. 
    "Animal control center" means a structure or physical plant, which is constructed or renovated specifically to be the center of Newton County's animal control activities. The center contains facilities for housing animals in a humane manner, administrative areas for animal control personnel, a clinic and euthanasia room, a cold storage area for animal cadavers, an adoption area, facilities for humane education programs, and other facilities as determined by the director. 
    "Animal control officer (ACO)" means an individual employed either full or part-time by the Newton County department of animal control whose duty is to enforce the Newton County's animal control ordinance throughout Newton County, including the area within the corporate limits of the city. The ACO shall have the authority to issue citations, be familiar with local and state animal laws, and be sensitive to the needs of animals. 
1.  "Senior animal control officer" means a full-time employee of the Newton County department of animal control whose duty is to supervise and evaluate animal control officers assigned to field duty in addition to normal animal control officer duties. 
    "Animal welfare agency" means independent humane agency such as SPCA, Animal Welfare League and Humane Societies. The Humane Society of Newton County is a state approved, incorporated animal welfare agency whose goals include assisting the Newton County department of animal control on a voluntary basis. 
    "Cat" means a domestic feline of either sex, vaccinated or not vaccinated against rabies, registered or not registered in Newton County, Georgia. 
    "Director" means a full-time animal control officer of the Newton County department of animal control whose duty is to administer and manage the Newton County's animal control program. 
    "Dog" means a domestic canine of either sex, vaccinated or not vaccinated against rabies, registered or not registered in Newton County, Georgia. 
    "Neuter" means the surgical sterilization of an animal. 
    "Owner" means any person having a right of property in an animal, or any person who permits an animal to remain on such person's premises. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, partnership, municipality, county, society, or association. 
    "Rabies certificate" means a certificate of vaccination against rabies on a form furnished or approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
    "Running at large" means the going upon public or private property by an animal without the owner or person in charge thereof having control over such animal, including an animal which may be staked, tied or hobbled in any manner so as to allow such animal to go upon the public streets or sidewalks. 
    "Tether" means to attach an animal to a stationary object by a chain, cable or similar device. An animal is not considered tethered when the animal is attached to a stationary object, as long as the owner or custodian is physically within reach of the animal. Any tethering device used to tether an animal must be at least ten (10) feet in length. Note that, unless the owner or custodian is physically within the reach of the animal, tethering of an animal is prohibited. 
    "Under control" means any animal controlled by leash when off the property of the owner, or within the property limits of its owner (or of another with the permission of the person in control of the property) or confined by fence or other enclosure or restraint (electronic or physical), or accompanied by its owner. 
    "Vaccinate or inoculate" means the injection of a specified dose of antirabic vaccine by a veterinarian or properly supervised animal health technician into the proper site of an animal. 
    "Vaccination tag" means a tag furnished or approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources and the Newton County department of animal control. Such tag shall certify the year, county, and vaccination number and shall be worn at all times by the vaccinated animal. 
    "Vaccine" means an injectable material containing killed or attenuated rabies virus, licensed by the United States Department of Agriculture, Veterinary Biologies Division and approved by the Georgia Department of Human Resources. 
    "Veterinarian" means a person duly licensed to practice veterinary medicine in the state of Georgia. 
    "Veterinary hospital or clinic" means a place where medical and surgical treatment is administered to animals by or under the supervision of a veterinarian. 
    "Vicious animal" means an animal which constitutes a physical threat to human beings or other animals by virtue of one or more attacks of such severity as to cause personal injury or property damage, or if such animal makes unprovoked attacks on other animals. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 3-5-18(2), § 1) 
6.02.020 - Enforcement and violations. 
A.  The director, the animal control supervisor and officers, and other authorized employees of Newton County shall have all of the powers and authority of police officers to the extent only and no further of enforcing this chapter and other ordinances of the city relating to animals and fowl. 
B.  All duly appointed and qualified law enforcement officers and animal control officers are authorized to issue written notices to persons violating the provisions of this title or any other laws governing the regulation and/or disposition of animals, which notices shall, among other things, describe the violation complained of. Any person violating this code, obstructing qualified animal control personnel and/or their equipment or violating any other laws governing the regulation of animals within the city shall be subject to a fine not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) nor more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) and/or sixty (60) days imprisonment. Imprisonment and/or fine may be substituted with mandatory neutering of the animal by a veterinarian at the expense of the owner, except in circumstances where Georgia law provides for harsher penalties. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.02.030 - Humane treatment of animals. 
    No person having an animal in his possession and/or control shall fail to provide said animal adequate food, water, or shelter and adequate protection from the elements. Veterinary care, when needed, to prevent suffering to said animal, shall be provided and, further, said animal shall be treated with humane care at all times. 
A.  No person shall beat, ill treat, torment, overload, overwork, or otherwise abuse an animal, or cause, instigate, or permit combat between animals or fowl. 
B.  No person shall expose any known poisonous substance, whether mixed with food or not, so that the same is likely to be eaten by an animal. It shall not be unlawful for a person to expose common rat or insect poisons on such person's property. 
C.  No person shall use steel-jawed leghold traps for the trapping of animals without a required written permit obtained from the appropriate state or federal government agency. 
D.  All persons within the corporate limits of the city shall be deemed to have consented to reasonable means or force necessary to cause removal of animals left unattended in a closed vehicle. A vehicle is considered closed regardless of whether or not such vehicle's windows are open. No action at law or equity or claim for damages shall lie against the city or its officers in connection with lawful enforcement of this section. 
E.  A leash must restrain any animal that is kept in the back of an open truck or a convertible car. Such a leash must be of the size and length to restrict the animal within the confines of the car or bed of the truck and to prohibit the animal from jumping out over the side or back of such vehicles. 
F.  Any animal mistreated in violation of the provisions of this chapter may be impounded immediately and examined and/or treated by a veterinarian as may be appropriate in such veterinarian's professional judgment. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.02.040 - Tethering of animals. 
A.  Tethering of an animal is prohibited. 
B.  As a secondary means of restraint to a proper enclosure, an animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system providing that: 
1.  A running cable line or trolley system is set inside a proper enclosure; 
2.  Only one animal may be attached to each running cable line or trolley system; 
3.  No animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system for more than twelve (12) hours in a 24-hour period; 
4.  No animal may be attached to a running cable line or trolley system between the hours of ten p.m. and six a.m. or when the temperature is below thirty-two (32) degrees or above ninety (90) degrees Fahrenheit; 
5.  Cables, chains and other leads attaching the animal to the running cable line or trolley system must be made of a substance which cannot be chewed by the animal and shall not weigh more than five percent of the body weight of the animal tethered; 
6.  A running cable line or trolley system must have a swivel installed at each end and be attached to a stationary object that cannot be moved by the animal; 
7.  The running cable line or trolley system must be appropriate for the size and breed of animal; 
8.  The length of the tether from the running cable line or trolley system to the animal's collar should allow access to the maximum available exercise area and allow the animal free access to water and shelter; 
9.  It is attached to a properly fitted harness or collar not used for the display of a current rabies tag and other identification; and with enough room between the collar and the dog's throat through which two fingers may fit. Choke collars and pinch collars are prohibited for the purpose of tethering an animal to a running cable line or trolley system; and 
10.  It is tethered at sufficient distance from any other objects to prohibit the tangling of the cable, from extending over an object or an edge that could result in injury of strangulation of the animal and be of sufficient distance from any fence so as to prohibit the animal access to the fence. 
C.  It shall be a violation of this code for any person to 
1.  Obstruct any street or sidewalk by tethering an animal; 
2.  Permit an animal to be so tethered that it can go upon or across any street or sidewalk; or 
3.  Tether an animal to a tree, or box around any tree, planted or growing in a street or public place. 
(Ord. dated 3-5-18(2), § 2) 
Chapter 6.04 - RABIES CONTROL 
Sections: 

6.04.010 - Rabies vaccination. 
    All dogs or cats in the city over three months of age shall be inoculated annually for rabies with an approved vaccine. All dogs and cats which are brought into the city and which are more than three months of age and which have not been inoculated shall be inoculated within thirty (30) days after their arrival in the city. Any person owning, keeping, harboring, or maintaining a dog or cat in the city who fails or refuses to comply with the vaccination requirements of this section shall be deemed guilty of an offense. A certificate of a veterinarian certifying that the vaccine was administered as required by this section, bearing the date and type of vaccine and the identification of the dog or cat by breed, color, and sex, the vaccination or tag number and the name and address of the owner, shall be evidence of such vaccination. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.04.020 - Rabid animals. 
    Except as provided in subsection A below, every animal that has rabies or symptoms thereof, every animal that has been exposed to rabies, and every animal that bites or otherwise attacks any person within the city shall be impounded at once and held under observation by the Newton County department of animal control for ten (10) consecutive calendar days. If its owner desires, such animal may be confined at the owner's expense for observation in a veterinary hospital or clinic approved by the director for the same period of time. 
A.  Any dog or cat that bites or otherwise attacks a person within the city while the animal is confined on the owner's premises may be quarantined on the owner's premises for a period often (10) consecutive calendar days immediately following the date of such attack if the animal has a current rabies vaccination at the time the attack occurred, provided that the animal is observed by an ACO at the beginning of the quarantine period, and again ten (10) days later. Said animal shall also be examined by a veterinarian at the end of the quarantine period. The veterinarian shall provide the owner with a written report setting out the results of such examination. The report shall be submitted by the owner to the director within three days after the examination has been made. Any owner or keeper of an animal that fails to keep the animal confined, fails to have the animal examined by a veterinarian, or fails to provide the animal control department a veterinarian's report of the results of an examination when required to do so under the provisions of this section shall be in violation of this code and subject to fines and penalties as provided in Section 6.02.020. 
B.  No animal that has rabies shall be allowed at any time on the streets or public ways of the city. No animal that has been suspected of having rabies shall be allowed at any time on the streets or public ways of the city until such animal has been released from observation by the director or the director's designee. The owner, keeper or person in charge of any animal that has rabies or symptoms thereof, or that has been exposed to rabies, or that has bitten or otherwise attacked any person within the city shall, on demand, turn such animal over to the director or the director's designee. The body of any animal that has died of rabies shall not be disposed of except as directed by the director. Any person having knowledge of an animal bite is hereby required to report it immediately to the Newton County department of animal control. Failure to make such report shall be violation of this section and subject to fines and penalties as provided in Section 6.02.020. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
Chapter 6.06 - DOGS AND CATS 
Sections: 

6.06.010 - Dogs and cats running at large. 
A.  It shall be the duty of every owner of any dog or cat or anyone having a dog or cat in his possession or custody, to ensure that it is under control, so that it cannot wander off of the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian, it being the intent of this chapter that all dogs and cats shall be prevented from leaving, while unattended, the real property limits of their owner, possessor or custodian. It is further the intent of this chapter that, unless the Newton County animal control department has a signed running at large complaint on file regarding a specific dog or cat, no dog or cat be impounded and no citations be issued under this section unless the dog or cat is observed off the real property limits of the owner, possessor or custodian, either by a witness who signs a complaint or by the animal control officer. 
B.  Hunting dogs and farm/cattle dogs shall be deemed under control while on land with the consent of the owner thereof and engaged in normal hunting or farming activity for the particular type of dog involved. 
C.  All female dogs and cats that have not been neutered and are in heat, must be securely confined in such a way that they not only cannot run loose, but also cannot be reached by other dogs or cats. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.06.020 - Impoundment of dogs and cats. 
    Where the director or any animal control staff member either observes or receives a proper citizen complaint of a dog or cat running at large, it shall be the duty of said director, supervisor or officer(s) to capture and take charge of any such animal found to be running at large, as defined in Section 6.02.010 of this title, within the boundaries of the city, and take such animal to the animal control center or other designated place, there to be impounded and detained for a period of three calendar working days. Cat traps will be made available free of charge to citizens of the city with nuisance cat complaints. If a dog or cat which has been delivered or admitted to the animal control center is wearing a vaccination tag not more than two years old or any other type of identification, the director, supervisor or designee shall notify the owner of such animal by telephone, door hanger, or by mail that the animal has been received by the animal control center. The mailing of notice shall be deemed sufficient notice under this section if it is mailed to the owner at his last known address. Dogs and cats wearing a vaccination tag not more than two years old shall be held in designated pens for the owner for six calendar working days from the date the owner was notified as provided herein. On the seventh day following such notice, the animal may be placed for adoption or euthanized at the discretion of the director or his designated representative. Dogs or cats three months of age or older, can be subject to impoundment if said animal does not display a current vaccination. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.06.030 - Redemption after impoundment. 
    Any animal impounded as provided in Section 6.06.020 of this chapter may be redeemed by its rightful owner at the animal control center, after said owner proves ownership to the satisfaction of the director. The person entitled to redeem said animal shall be entitled to have the animal delivered to him at the animal control center upon presentation of satisfactory evidence of ownership (regulations paper, bill-of-sale, photographs, registration and/or vaccination certificates, etc.), and payment of the following charges and/or fees if applicable, provided such animal is not infected or reasonably believed to be infected with rabies or any other infections or contagious diseases: 
A.  Impoundment Fee. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, an impoundment fee as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be charged for each animal impounded. The impoundment fee shall double for each successive impoundment of any animal belonging to the same household. 
B.  Rabies Vaccination Fee. Payment for a current rabies vaccination as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution, provided the dog or cat has no valid vaccination. The owner will be issued a receipt which authorizes a participating veterinarian to inoculate the animal. The veterinarian will submit the receipt to the animal control department indicating that the vaccine was administered and the number of the vaccination tag issued. The animal control department will send the veterinarian a sum as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution per animal vaccinated. 
C.  Boarding Fee. Except as otherwise specifically provided in this chapter, a boarding fee, as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution, shall be charged for each animal impounded. However, when a person seeks delivery of an animal on the first regular working day after a Sunday and/or a national holiday, no boarding fee shall be charged for the immediately preceding Sunday and/or holiday unless such Sunday and/or holiday was within the period of quarantine for rabies observation. 
D.  Fees for Veterinary Services. Impounded or sick animals will be treated for injury or illness when such treatment is found to be reasonably necessary in the judgment of the director or supervisor. The owner shall be required to pay the actual cost of any necessary veterinary services. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 4) 
6.06.040 - Adoption of an impounded animal. 
    It will be the duty of the director to offer for adoption to the public, or transfer to rescue agencies licensed by the Georgia Department of Agriculture, after verification, any and all healthy animals impounded in accordance with this chapter and not redeemed as provided in Section 6.06.030 of this chapter. No animal determined to be dangerous shall be offered for adoption. It is unlawful to remove any animal from the animal control center except as provided for in this title. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.06.050 - Redemption of an adopted animal. 
    Any person entitled to redeem an adopted animal shall exercise such option within a period of thirty (30) days from the date the animal was adopted, and will be required to reimburse the adopter double the adoption fee, five dollars per day for the days the animal was held and cared for by the adopter and any verified expense incurred for qualified veterinary services. Any animal not redeemed in accordance with the provisions of this section shall, after the thirty (30) day period, become the property and responsibility of the adopter. Any animal captured and impounded under the terms of this title which has not been redeemed or adopted as provided in this chapter shall be destroyed of by the department of animal control in the most humane method of euthanasia currently recognized. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.06.060 - Disposition pursuant to court order. 
    If, in the opinion of the director or designated employee, the release of an impounded animal could impair the health or safety of the public, such animal shall be held at the animal control center or an approved veterinary clinic at the expense of the owner pending disposition pursuant to the order of a court of proper jurisdiction. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.06.070 - Surrender of dogs or cats. 
    Any resident of the city may surrender an animal to the Newton County Animal Shelter. Adoption-handling fee shall be charged for each cat or dog so surrendered by its owner or authorized agent as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution. In the event [of] a subsequent litter of puppies or kittens from an animal owned by the same owner who has previously surrendered any animal to the Newton County Animal Shelter, the owner must obtain a kennel license or have the parents neutered by a veterinarian at the owner's expense with proof to be furnished to Newton County animal control within thirty (30) days of such neutering. Failure to comply shall be in violation of this code and subject upon conviction to a penalty as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. An exception may be made in the case of indigent owner or on an individual basis if confirmed by the director or director's designee. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 5) 
6.06.080 - Removal of canine fecal matter. 
A.  Any person owning, possessing or having custody of a dog shall immediately remove and properly dispose of any fecal matter deposited by such dog on any property, public or private, not owned or legally possessed by that person. 
B.  Proper disposal of canine fecal matter shall consist of placement of same in a refuse container which is regularly emptied by the city or depositing it into a sanitary sewage disposal unit designated to convey sewage for proper treatment and disposal. 
C.  Visually impaired persons who have custody or control of a guide dog shall be exempt from the provisions of this section while the guide dog is being used to assist such persons. 
D.  Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 10/19/09, § 1) 
Chapter 6.08 - DANGEROUS OR VICIOUS ANIMALS 
Sections: 

6.08.010 - Dangerous and potentially dangerous dogs. 
    Dangerous dogs and potentially dangerous dogs shall be investigated, classified, controlled and possessed in strict accordance with the Georgia Dangerous Dog Control Law (O.C.G.A. Section 4-8-20), as the same shall be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.08.020 - Vicious animals. 
A.  The owner of any vicious animal other than a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog who does not confine such animal in a building or secure enclosure, or any person who shall release, either willfully or through a failure to exercise due care or control, or take such animal out of such building or secure enclosure in a manner which is likely to cause injury to another person or damage to the property of another person, shall be in violation of this code, and such animal shall be permanently confined by its owner or humanely destroyed. 
B.  It shall be a violation of this code for any person to cause, permit, accompany or be responsible for any vicious animal on the streets or in any other public place in the city at any time, unless, in addition to the other requirements of this section, such animal is securely muzzled to effectively prevent it from biting any person or other animal. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
Chapter 6.10 - LIVESTOCK AND FOWL 
Sections: 

6.10.010 - Livestock and fowl. 
    The running at large of horses, mules, other equidae, cattle, sheep, goats, hogs, domestic rabbits, domestic fowl, ostriches and emus or other such animals with the corporate limits of the city is declared a nuisance, and it shall be a violation of this code for the owner or keeper of any such animal or fowl to permit the same to run at large within the city. It shall be the duty of the director or director's designee to capture and take charge of any such animal found running at large within the city, and to take such animal to the animal control center or other place designated by the director, there to be impounded and detained for a period in accordance with state law. It shall be a violation of this code for any person, other than a duly appointed and qualified law enforcement officer or an authorized employee of the director, or humane organizations approved by the director to engage in the impounding of animals. The foregoing restriction shall not apply to stray animals temporarily contained or impounded until the animal's owner can be located and notified. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.10.020 - Redemption of impounded livestock. 
    The owner of such impounded livestock or fowl shall be responsible for the impoundment and boarding fees as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution, as well as any reasonable fees for veterinary care and hauling. If, at the time of the sale of any livestock under the provisions of state law and this code, the owner has not redeemed the same in accordance with state law and this code, and no purchaser can be found for the animal, the director or director's designee shall cause such animal to be humanely destroyed and shall deposit the carcass in such place as may be designated by the director for such purpose. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 6) 
6.10.030 - Destruction of terminally wounded animals. 
    When from any cause a horse, mule, cow, steer, goat, sheep, dog, cat or other animal within the corporate limits of the city shall be so wounded, maimed or injured as to render its recovery hopeless, then it shall be the duty of the director, or designated animal control officer, to cause such animal to be humanely destroyed as soon after such injury as practicable, and to cause its carcass to be removed to such place as may be set apart by the director for such purpose. When the director has cause to humanely destroy any animal under this section, he shall file a written report of such destruction including: 
A.  A description of the animal and the name of its owner, if known; 
B.  The injury which made destruction necessary, how same was inflicted and by whom, if known; 
C.  The names of at least two reliable witnesses who are conversant with the facts of the injury and the destruction; and 
D.  A veterinarian's description of the injury, if available. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.10.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. dated 3-5-18(2), § 3 reserved section 6.10.040, which pertained to tethering of animals and derived from Ord. dated 8/20/07(part). Ord. dated 3-5-18(2), § 2 laid out new section pertaining to tethering of animals as section 6.02.040. 
Chapter 6.12 - WILD ANIMALS 
Sections: 

6.12.010 - Keeping of wild animals. 
    It is unlawful within the corporate limits of the city for a person to possess, keep, permit, suffer, cause, or allow a wild animal within any residence or within three hundred (300) feet of a residence or building used for human habitation. 
A.  "Wild animal," as used in this section, means and includes any mammal, amphibian, reptile, or fowl which is of a species which is wild by nature, or of a species which, due to its size, vicious nature or other characteristic is, dangerous to humans. Such animals shall include, but not be limited to lions, tigers, leopards, panthers, bears, wolves, raccoons, skunks, apes, gorillas, monkeys of a species whose average adult size weight is twenty (20) pounds or more, foxes, elephants, rhinoceroses, alligators, crocodiles, and all forms of poisonous reptiles. The term "wild animal" as used in this code shall not include gerbils, hamsters, guinea pigs, mice, rabbits, or ferrets. 
B.  A person who violates a provision of this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be subject to a penalty as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. Each day a person continues such violation shall be a separate offense. Further, the keeping of more than one such wild animal in violation of this section shall be a separate offense for each such animal. 
C.  The director or director's designee shall seize and impound all animals found in violation of this section at the animal control center or other suitable place. The director, ACO, or any law enforcement officer within the city may enter any building to seize a wild animal being kept therein in violation of this section upon the consent of an adult occupant of such building or one having the right of possession of such building or under a warrant issued by a court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.12.020 - Redemption of impounded wild animals. 
    Upon showing to the director or his designee of clear, and convincing proof of right to possession of any impounded wild animal, the holder of such right may redeem such animal within seven days of the date of its impoundment upon payment of the fees set forth herein, provided: 
A.  That such animal is not infected or believed to be infected with rabies or any other disease; 
B.  That such person submits a sworn affidavit to the director setting out the location where the animal will be kept and that he will not permit, suffer, cause, or allow such animal to be within a residence or within three hundred (300) feet of a residence in violation of this chapter. If such animal is not redeemed within seven days of the date of initial impoundment, the director shall be authorized to destroy such animal in the most humane manner practicable; 
C.  The following fees shall be charged for impoundment and boarding wild animals: 
1.  Impoundment fee for each animal impounded: fifty dollars ($50.00); and 
2.  A boarding fee of ten dollars ($10.00) per day for animals under thirty (30) pounds; fifteen dollars ($15.00) per day for animals over thirty (30) pounds but not more than one hundred (100) pounds; or twenty dollars ($20.00) per day for animals over one hundred (100) pounds. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.12.030 - Exceptions. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall not apply to animals kept for treatment in a facility operated by a veterinarian, animals kept in publicly owned zoos, animals used for research for teaching purposes by a medical or veterinary school, licensed hospital, Georgia accredited university or college or animals maintained by a Georgia licensed rehabilitation service provider. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.12.040 - Vaccination of wild animals. 
A.  No person shall vaccinate, or attempt to vaccinate, a wild animal, as defined in this chapter, against rabies by the use of live virus vaccine. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection C below, no person shall possess, keep, permit, or allow a wild animal, as defined in this chapter, within the city if such animal has been vaccinated against rabies with the use of live vaccine. 
C.  This section shall not apply to the use of live rabies vaccine for research purposes when such research is conducted by a medical or veterinary school, licensed hospital, Georgia accredited college or university. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
Chapter 6.14 - ADOPTION OF ANIMALS 
Sections: 

6.14.010 - Adoption procedure. 
    Newton County animal control may offer for adoption an animal unclaimed after six days following notification of impoundment pursuant to Section 6.06.020 of this title or an animal that has been surrendered to animal control by its owner, provided each animal offered for adoption is determined by the director or director's designee to be of reasonably good health and temperament. 
    Persons desiring to adopt an animal must make application for adoption with Newton County animal control, meet requirements associated with the humane housing and care of the animal, as determined by the director, and pay the required fees. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.14.020 - Mandatory sterilization. 
    Animals adopted from Newton County animal control shall be sterilized in strict accordance with the Georgia Spay/Neuter Law (O.C.G.A. Section 4-14-1, et seq.), as the same may be amended from time to time. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
6.14.030 - Issuance of licenses. 
    Before a kennel or breeders license is issued by Newton County, the animal control center shall be required to investigate the petitioner, the location and facilities to determine the legitimacy of the petition and whether the location, facilities and environment are such as will insure against so called puppy mills and provide humane and proper care of the animals. All kennels and breeders shall be registered with the animal control center, and animal control personnel may make periodic inspections of the animals and facilities. Any operator of a kennel in the city who fails to obtain a license and/or fails to maintain registration with the animal control center shall be subject to fines and/or penalties for violations as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
Title 8 - HEALTH AND SAFETY 
Chapters: 
Chapter 8.04 - GARBAGE, YARD TRIMMINGS AND WEEDS 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Sections: 
Article 1 - In General 

8.04.010 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of enforcing this chapter any person living on any premise shall be deemed an occupant, and any person receiving the rest in whole or in part of any premises shall be deemed an agent; or any premises where construction of any kind is in progress and where employees or workmen eat their dinner or lunches, in or about said premises; or scatter lunch or food in or about such premises, the contractor or foreman or other person in charge over such workmen shall be deemed an occupant; the person in charge of any market or stall in any market shall be deemed an occupant. 
    "Commercial wastes" means all types of solid waste generated by stores, offices, restaurants and other non-manufacturing activities, as well as solid waste generated by manufacturing or industrial processes or operations, including without limitation all waste by-products of manufacturing and commercial establishments, cinders, ashes from commercial boilers, card board and wooden boxes, crates and barrels. 
    "Composting" means the controlled biological decomposition of organic matter into a stable, odor-free humus. 
    "Household garbage" means waste composed of food scraps, paper, cans, wrappings, small discarded items, rags, and such other waste matter normally to be disposed of from residences, churches and other small establishments. No flammable, poisonous or hazardous materials may be placed in household garbage. 
    "Leachate collection system" means a system at a landfill for collection of the leachate which may percolate through the waste into soils surrounding the landfill. 
    "Other refuse and trash" means any solid waste other than household garbage, recyclable material and yard waste. This category includes, but is not limited to waste such as construction and building material, discarded furniture and appliances, boxes, cardboard, metal, machinery, tires, rugs, soil, ashes, any garbage not contained in city roll carts and any recyclable material not contained in city recycling containers. 
    "Municipal solid waste disposal facility" means any facility or location where the final deposition of any amount of solid waste occurs, whether or not mixed with commercial or industrial solid waste. 
    "Person" means any individual, firm, corporation, association or organization. 
    "Premises" means land, buildings or other structures, vehicles, or parts thereof, upon or in which refuse is stored. 
    "Recyclable material" means materials which are specified by the city to be collected for recycling, such as glass bottles, plastics, metal cans, newspapers and other such materials. Information on the city's recycling program is provided for citizens and is available from the city's public works department. 
    "Sanitary superintendent" means the sanitary superintendent of the city, or his authorized representative. 
    "Yard trimmings" means leaves, brush, grass and hedge trimmings, weeds, shrub and tree prunings, tree limbs, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals and vegetative matter resulting from landscaping development and maintenance other than mining, agricultural and silvicultural operations. 
(Ord. dated 5/16/11, § 2; Ord. dated 5/17/10, §§ 1-3; prior code § 11-1) 
8.04.020 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4 of an ordinance adopted May 17, 2010, deleted § 8.04.020, which had pertained to disposal location, and derived from prior code § 11-2. 
8.04.030 - Offense delineated. 
    It is unlawful for any person to pick from or disturb the contents of any garbage container or vessel or other containers provided for in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 11-3) 
8.04.040 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 4 of an ordinance adopted May 17, 2010, deleted § 8.04.040, which had pertained to containers to be covered, and derived from prior code § 11-4. 
8.04.050 - Billboard owners responsible for clean condition of sign and environs. 
    The owners of billboards, within the city limits, shall be required to see that all loose papers, bills, or other litter, be promptly removed, thus removing all liability or chance of such loose papers, bills or litter to be blown on the sidewalks or streets. 
(Prior code § 11-5) 
Article 2 - Garbage 

8.04.055 - Collection of household garbage-Roll cart system. 
    Except as provided in this section the roll cart system shall be the only approved method of collecting household garbage from residential customers in the city and shall be conducted and administered pursuant to the following regulations: 
A.  Provision of Roll Carts. One roll cart will be provided by the city to each residential dwelling unit (house or apartment) utilizing city collection services for household garbage. 
B.  Household Garbage to be Contained in Roll Carts. All household garbage placed for collection must be contained in roll carts. No household garbage may be placed for collection on the ground or pavement outside of roll carts. 
C.  Carts to Remain Property of City. Roll carts shall remain the property of the city and will be assigned by the city to affected residences for collection of household garbage. 
D.  Placement of Garbage for Collection. The person having responsibility for controlling disposal of garbage in each household shall cause all garbage collected in such household to be placed in a city roll cart container and placed at the street curb at the time hereinafter designated on scheduled collection days. 
E.  Exemption from Collection Requirement. Citizens who are unable due to disability, health or age to place roll carts for collection as specified in this section may apply to the city clerk for written approval for collection of roll carts from their premises. 
F.  Weight of Roll Cart and Contents. The combined weight of a roll cart and its contents shall not exceed two hundred (200) pounds, and shall not be filled beyond the point at which the lid can be completely closed. 
G.  Identification of Containers. Where more than one family occupies a dwelling or apartment building, roll carts shall be marked by the city to indicate the family using the particular roll cart. Roll carts may be identified by placing thereon the apartment number or name of the applicable household. When roll carts are so identified they may be used only by the persons whose name or other identification is shown thereon. 
H.  Lost, Stolen or Damaged Roll Carts. Any roll cart provided by the city which becomes lost, stolen or damaged shall be replaced by the city, and the cost for such replacement shall be borne by the city or by the property owner, depending upon the circumstances of such damage or disappearance. The city shall be the sole determiner of responsibility for replacement costs. Roll carts which are damaged through normal usage shall be repaired or replaced by the city. 
I.  Maintenance of Roll Cart. It shall be the responsibility of customers to maintain roll carts serving their residence or properly in a clean and sanitary manner, free of noxious odors, maggots, insects, rodents, or any other condition which may render them unhealthy to occupants of the residence or the neighborhood. Roll carts and the garbage therein, shall be maintained in compliance with city, state, and county health code requirements. 
J.  Location of Roll Carts. Roll cart garbage containers provided to residences by the city shall be placed for collection in an area between sidewalk and curb, or between residential property and street pavement, or in other street-side areas approved by the city's public works department. Roll carts shall be placed at said locations no earlier than seven p.m. on the day preceding the collection day, and shall be removed from said locations within twenty-four (24) hours next following collection. No roll cart shall be placed for collection in a location that obstructs gutters, drains, walkways or streets. 
K.  Collection Schedule. The city public works department shall provide to each residence receiving city garbage collection service a schedule which shall indicate the days on which such collection will be made. 
L.  Additional Roll Carts. Residents of any dwelling unit or members of any establishment requiring more than one roll cart for the regular disposal of household garbage may request additional roll carts at an additional service charge of eight dollars ($8.00) per month. 
(Ord. dated 5/17/10, § 5) 
8.04.060 - Removal of container cover an offense except when done by authorized person. 
    When such garbage container is placed outside of any premises, it is unlawful and a violation of this chapter for any person engaged in the removal of garbage or for any other person to remove the cover from such garbage container except for the purpose of emptying its contents into a duly authorized garbage collector. It is also a violation of this chapter to throw such garbage container on the street or sidewalk, and all persons engaged in the removal of garbage shall, after emptying said container replace said cover tightly on said container. 
(Prior code § 11-8) 
8.04.070 - Disposal of commercial waste. 
    Commercial wastes which cannot be placed in roll cart containers as specified in this chapter or which fill more than four roll carts will be required to use a city provided front load, or more commonly called "Dempsey Dumpster", box. The sizing of said box and frequency of pickups will be determined by the city's solid waste manager based on the needs of the establishment. Thirty-yard and forty-yard roll off containers will also be available from the city, as is the ability to haul roll off compactor units. Compactor units shall be purchased and maintained by the customer. 
(Ord. dated 5/17/10, § 6) 
8.04.080 - Platform for garbage cans. 
    Wherever garbage cans from commercial establishments remain outside, a suitable platform, preferably of concrete, not less than eighteen (18) inches in height must be provided as a base for the garbage cans. 
(Prior code § 11-10) 
8.04.085 - Collection of recyclable materials-Recycling system. 
    In order to provide for the responsible reuse of materials and to reduce the amount of waste entering sanitary landfills the city will collect and dispose of recyclable materials pursuant to the following regulations: 
A.  Provision of Recycling Containers. The city will provide to each residential dwelling unit one or more recycling bins for the collection of recyclable materials. Residents may request through the city clerk the number of recycling bins necessary for their particular household. 
B.  Recycling Containers Remain Property of City. Recycling bins shall remain the property of the city and will be assigned to residents only for the collection of recyclable materials. 
C.  Placement of Recyclable Materials for Collection. The person in any household having authority to control the disposal of recyclable materials shall cause recyclable materials collected therein to be placed in city recycling bins and placed at the street curb on scheduled collection days. 
D.  Exemption from Placement Requirement. Citizens who are unable for reasons of disability, health, or age to place recycling bins for collection at the street curb may make written arrangements with the city clerk for collection of such bins from their premises. 
E.  Identification of Containers. Where more than one family occupies a dwelling or apartment building single recycling bins shall be marked by the city to identify the household using them. 
F.  Lost, Stolen or Damaged Recycling Bins. Any recyclable materials bin provided by the city which becomes lost, stolen or damaged shall be replaced by the city, and the cost for such replacement shall be borne by the city or the property owner, depending upon the circumstances of such damage or disappearance. The city shall be the sole determiner of responsibility for replacement costs. Recycling bins which are damaged through normal usage shall be repaired or replaced by the city. 
G.  Maintenance of Recycling Bins. It shall be the responsibility of the occupant to maintain all recycling bins serving his or her property in a clean and sanitary manner, free of noxious odors, maggots, insects and rodents, or any other condition which may render them unhealthy to occupants of the residence or the neighborhood. Recycling bins and the contents therein, shall be maintained in compliance with city, county, and state health code requirements. 
H.  Location of Recycling Bins. Recycling bins provided to residences by the city shall be placed for collection in an area between sidewalk and curb, or between residential property and street pavement, or in other street-side areas approved by the city's public works department. Recycling bins shall be placed at the street no earlier than seven p.m. on the day preceding the collection day, and shall be removed from said locations within twenty-four (24) hours next following collection. No recycling bin shall be placed in a location that obstructs gutters, drains, walkways or streets. 
I.  Collection Schedule. The city public works department shall provide to each residence receiving city recyclable materials collection service a schedule which shall indicate the days on which such collection will be made. 
(Ord. dated 5/17/10, § 7) 
8.04.090 - Mandatory garbage collection by city-Collection policies and collection fees. 
A.  Mandatory Use of Municipal Garbage Collection Services. All residents of the city, whether residing in an apartment or a single-unit home, and all establishments (including for profit or nonprofit and charitable) with a location of any type within the city, whether holding a business license or not, shall utilize the city's sanitation department garbage collection services and pay the fees imposed therefor by the mayor and council of the city as hereinafter provided. 
B.  Garbage Collection Services. The mayor and council shall from time to time by resolution, after concurring with the city manager and the public works superintendent, establish policies and procedures for the city's garbage collection and sanitation services. The policies and procedures aforesaid may address such items as requiring sufficient garbage containers be provided for each residence and business location and the sizing thereof, and the use of common collection facilities commonly known as "Dempsey Dumpsters" for nonresidential garbage collection. 
C.  Garbage Collection Fees. The mayor and council shall from time to time by resolution establish a schedule of fees and charges for the city's garbage collection and sanitation services provided in accordance with the provisions of this section and regulations and resolutions promulgated hereunder. Until such fees are changed by resolution adopted subsequent to the effective date of this section, the schedule of fees and charges shall be as follows: 
1.  All premises offered residential garbage collection services shall be charged a garbage collection fee per residence of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) per month; provided, however, that any resident who has filed with the city manager satisfactory proof that the principal resident and head of household of a residence is over sixty-five (65) years of age, the monthly fee for garbage collection services at such location shall be sixteen dollars and fifty cents ($16.50). 
2.  The monthly charge for garbage collection services for each nonresidential establishment shall be thirty dollars and fifty cents ($30.50). 
3.  For each garbage pickup from Dempsey Dumpster boxes the charge shall be as follows: 
Dumpster Size # P/Us Per Week Monthly Charge 4 yard 1 $ 69.27 2 138.54 3 207.83 4 277.10 5 346.36 6 415.63 6 yard 1 103.91 2 207.83 3 311.72 4 415.63 5 519.54 6 623.45 8 yard 1 138.54 2 277.10 3 415.63 4 554.18 5 692.73 6 831.26  
4.  Roll off boxes and compactor users will be charged a hauling fee of sixty dollars ($60.00) plus forty-one dollars ($41.00) per ton of waste hauled for each collection. 
D.  Billings for Garbage Collection Fees. The charges for garbage collection fees in accordance with the provisions of this section shall be included as a separate cost item on the city's monthly utility bill to the person or legal entity receiving such services. The failure of any person or legal entity to pay the garbage collection fees properly billed to them shall authorize the city's refusal to provide future such services to that customer. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 5/17/10, § 8; Res. dated 5/18/09, §§ 1-3; Res. dated 8/4/08 §§ 1-3; Res. dated 4/2/01 §§ 1, 2; prior code § 11-11) 
Article 3 - Yard Waste[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 10 of an ordinance adopted May 17, 2010, retitled Article 2, Yard Trimmings, to read as herein set out. 

8.04.100 - Disposal of yard waste. 
    The city will provide periodic collection and disposal of yard waste pursuant to the following regulations: 
A.  Placement of Yard Waste for Collection. Permitted yard waste may be placed upon city street rights-of-way for collection by the city, but only on the street frontage of the premises from which such yard waste was generated. However, no yard waste may be placed so as to block any gutter or drainage ditch or to impede the passage of traffic upon city streets. 
B.  No Inclusion of Trash or Refuse Among Yard Wastes. Only plant materials may be placed for collection as yard waste. No other trash, garbage, or refuse of any kind may be incorporated into yard waste put out for collection. It shall be the responsibility of property owners and tenants to arrange for the disposal of solid waste, trash, refuse, and recyclable materials other than those solid wastes which are collected by the city in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
C.  Placement of Other Wastes for Disposal. No waste materials other than those specified by this chapter for collection by the city may be placed upon street rights-of-way. Residents utilizing private collection services for refuse, trash, yard wastes and recyclable materials must arrange for such materials to be collected from their premises, and not from city street rights-of-way. 
D.  Disposal of Wastes and Recyclable Materials at County Center. Solid wastes other than those specified for collection by the city may be taken for disposal or recycling to Newton County recycling and waste disposal centers. The city will provide to citizens a list of the locations of such disposal centers. 
E.  Permit and Fee Required for Disposal of Excessive Yard Waste. The garbage collection fees of the city of Covington include services for usual and normal disposal of yard waste placed at right-of-way for pick up. The garbage collection fees do not cover costs to the city for pick up and disposal of large amounts of yard waste from tree removal, shrub or brush trimming or brush removal. For large amounts of such yard waste, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  The city will not collect waste from the removal of trees over five inches in diameter. It shall be the responsibility of the property owner or resident to dispose of waste from tree removal. 
2.  Within the normal monthly garbage fee, the maximum amount of yard waste which may be placed at right-of-way for collection by city shall be six cubic yards (approximately one full pickup truck load) per week. 
3.  Residents or property owners desiring the city to pick up and dispose of larger amounts of trimmings, brush, or limbs must apply at Covington city hall on the form for same supplied by the city for a permit to place such wastes at the street. Application for permit shall state: (a) the address of property from which waste is to be generated; (b) proposed date of placement of waste at the street; and (c) a signed agreement that the resident or property owner will pay to the city the actual costs of pick up and disposal of the excessive waste. A minimum fee of fifty dollars ($50.00) shall be paid upon submission of said application. Actual costs of disposal shall be determined by the city's public works department, and any amount over minimum fee shall be billed to resident or property owner. 
4.  Violations. Residents or property owners placing excessive amounts of brush or trimmings at right-of-way without a permit shall be notified that a permit is required. Failure to obtain a permit shall be held to be a violation of this chapter, and shall be subject to penalties which may include, but are not limited to: (a) billing from the city for costs of excessive waste pick up and disposal; and/or (b) summons to Covington Municipal Court for such violation, as provided in Section 8.04.110 of this article. 
(Ord. dated 5/16/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/17/10, § 9) 
8.04.110 - Notification of and penalties for violation of this article. 
A.  It shall be unlawful to place solid waste materials of a kind or in any manner except as expressly permitted under this Article 3. 
B.  Upon the first such violation the city shall notify the offender of same and allow the offender a reasonable time, not to exceed ten (10) days, to remedy the offending condition or practice. 
C.  In the event that no corrective action is taken by the offender within the time allowed, or upon a subsequent such violation, the offender shall be cited to Covington Municipal Court, and, upon conviction of said offence, subject to the general penalty provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
D.  Property owners and tenants of rental property shall be jointly and severally responsible for proper disposal of solid waste originating from property owned or occupied by either of them and jointly liable for violations of this Article. 3. 
(Ord. dated 5/17/10, § 11) 
8.04.120 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 9 of an ordinance adopted May 17, 2010, deleted § 8.04.120, which had pertained to building debris excepted from city collection, and derived from prior code § 11-17. 
Article 4 - Weeds and Refuse 

8.04.130 - Keeping premises free from weeds and refuse-Required. 
    For the health, safety and sanitation of the residents of this city, all premises within the city, whether vacant or occupied, shall be kept free and clean of weeds and other like growths, trash, paper, rags, shavings, garbage, rubbish, filth and all other such refuse. Owners of property shall not permit weeds or grass to grow on such property to a height exceeding twelve (12) inches. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 1; prior code § 11-19) 
8.04.140 - Violation-Notice to responsible persons. 
    If any such property should not be maintained in compliance with the provisions of Section 8.04.130 of this article the city shall notify the persons responsible therefor to bring such property in compliance with the provisions of said Section 8.04.130. Such notice shall be given in writing by first class mail addressed to the last known address of the person or persons to whom the notice is directed. The notice shall state that such property must be brought into compliance with said section within ten (10) days; and for this purpose, notice shall be deemed effective beginning one day after such notice is deposited in a receptacle maintained by the U. S. Post Office Department for the deposit of mail, being sufficient postage and the last known address of the person or persons to whom such notice is directed. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 2) 
8.04.150 - Penalty. 
    It is unlawful for any person responsible therefor, as provided in Section 8.04.130 of this article, to fail or refuse to clean such property within said ten (10) day period, after having been duly notified by the city to do so, as provided by Section 8.04.140 of this article. Upon conviction of such offense by the Covington Municipal Court, an offender may be punished in accordance with Section 1.12.010 of this code; and for this purpose, each day that such property is allowed to remain in a condition which violates the provision of Section 8.04.130 of this article shall constitute a separate offense punishable as aforesaid. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 3: prior code § 11-22) 
8.04.160 - Abatement as nuisance as additional remedy. 
    Any accumulation of weeds or refuse, as described in Section 8.04.130 of this article, on any lot, property, premises, public street or alley or other public or private place not permitted by this chapter is declared to be a nuisance. Failure of the owner, occupant or agent to correct and remove any such accumulation of weeds or refuse after appropriate notice, as provided in Section 8.04.140 of this article, shall raise the presumption that such person intended to violate the provisions of this article and such violation may be treated as a nuisance and prosecuted as provided in Chapter 8.12 of this title. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 4) 
8.04.170 - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions of this article are cumulative of all other provisions of this code regarding the maintenance of property in a clean, safe and sanitary condition, and remedies in cases of properties which do not meet the standards prescribed by this code. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 5; prior code § 11-24) 
Chapter 8.08 - HEALTH AND SANITATION GENERALLY 
Sections: 

8.08.010 - Decayed matter-Abatement of nuisance in accordance with state law. 
    No owner or occupant of any lot within the city shall suffer to remain on his lot any decayed flesh, vegetables or any other thing which would allow the existence of a nuisance on his lot. Such conditions shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 8.12 of this code. 
(Prior code § 12-1) 
8.08.020 - Control of hazardous conditions-Preventable diseases and metabolic disorders. 
    All elected and appointed city officials and employees shall fully cooperate with the department of human resources and the Newton County board of health in reporting diseases and disorders and hazardous conditions that are subject to regulation in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 12, Title 31, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
(Prior code § 12-2) 
Chapter 8.12 - NUISANCES GENERALLY 
Sections: 

8.12.010 - Nuisance defined. 
    A nuisance is anything that works hurt, inconvenience, or damage to those persons who come within its scope of operation or effect, though it may vary in its effects on individuals; and the fact that the act or thing or condition complained of may otherwise be lawful shall not keep it from being a nuisance. The inconvenience herein referred to shall not be fanciful, or such as would affect only one of fastidious taste, but it shall be such as would affect an ordinary reasonable person. 
(Prior code § 13A-1) 
8.12.020 - Specified acts, things, conditions or noises constituting nuisances. 
    In addition, the following are specifically declared to be nuisances: any building, structure or condition maintained in violation of any ordinance of this city; any continued act of omission or commission prohibited by any ordinance of this city; and any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise made or continued or caused or allowed to be made or continued in violation of any ordinance of this city. 
(Prior code § 13A-2) 
8.12.030 - Abatement of nuisances-Procedure. 
A.  Complaint. Any person having a complaint against any activity, condition or noise which, in such person's opinion, constitutes a nuisance under the provisions of this chapter, may file such complaint in writing with the clerk of the Covington Municipal Court. Such complaint must clearly describe the activity, condition or noise complained of, state that the complainant verily believes that the activity, condition or noise complained of constitutes a nuisance as defined and specified by this chapter, and state the names and addresses of the persons causing, allowing, permitting or responsible for the activity, condition or noise specified in the complaint. 
B.  Summons. Thereupon the clerk shall cause a summons to issue directed to the person or persons alleged to be causing, allowing, permitting or responsible for the activity, condition or noise specified in the complaint. The summons shall state the date, time and place of hearing on the complaint before the Covington Municipal Court. 
C.  Service of Summons and Complaint. Such summons and a copy of the complaint shall be personally served by the Covington police department upon each person therein named who resides in Newton County, and a copy shall be mailed to the complainant, not less than ten days before such complaint is scheduled to be heard. If a person named in the complaint resides outside of Newton county service of the complaint and summons may be perfected in the manner provided for such cases in O.C.G.A. Section 9-11-4. In all such cases an appropriate proof of service shall be made to the Covington Municipal Court as provided by O.C.G.A. Section 9-11-4. 
D.  Hearing. At the hearing on such complaint before the municipal court of the city, the complainant and the person or persons named in the summons may appear in person or by their attorneys. The complainant shall present evidence supporting the complaint, and the respondent or respondents named in the summons shall present any defense to such complaint. The rules of evidence applicable in the state courts of this state shall be applicable at such hearing. 
E.  Action After Hearing. At the conclusion of such hearing, if the judge finds that the activity, condition or noise complained of does not constitute a nuisance as defined by this chapter, the complaint shall be dismissed. On the other hand, if the judge finds that the activity, condition or noise complained of does constitute a nuisance as defined by this chapter, the judge shall order the person or persons found to be causing, allowing, permitting or responsible for the nuisance to abate the same within a specified number of days, but not less than ten (10) days. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 §§ 6-9, 10 (part); prior code § 13A-3) 
8.12.040 - Order of abatement-Form-Notice. 
    In all cases in which the judge finds that a nuisance does exist, the order of abatement shall be in writing, directed to the person or persons found to be causing, allowing, permitting or responsible for the same. Such order shall clearly define the activity, condition or noise constituting the nuisance, and shall specify the number of days within which the same must be abated. Such order shall further state that if the nuisance is not abated by the time specified, the city may abate the same at the expense of such person or persons, and that such person or persons, if convicted, may be punished as provided by this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 10 (part); prior code § 13A-4) 
8.12.050 - Notice-Nonresidents. 
    In all cases in which the judge issues an order of abatement, a copy of the same shall be served on all the parties to the proceeding, both complainants and respondents. Such service shall be made personally or by mail. In the case of non-resident respondents, service shall be by mail addressed to the last known address of the person or persons to whom the order is directed; and in such cases, service shall be deemed effective beginning one day after such order is deposited in a receptacle maintained by the U.S. Post Office Department for the deposit of mail, bearing sufficient postage and the last known address of the person or persons to whom such order is directed. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 10 (part); prior code § 13A-5) 
8.12.060 - Failure to abate nuisance-Penalty. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to wilfully fail or refuse to abate a nuisance, after having been ordered to do so by the judge. Upon conviction of such offense by the recorder's court, the offender may be punished as provided by Section 1.12.101 of this code; and for this purpose, each day that such person wilfully fails or refuses to comply with, such order of abatement shall constitute a separate offense. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 §§ 10 (part), 11; prior code § 13A-6) 
8.12.070 - Abatement by city entry on private property. 
    In any case in which any person shall fail or refuse to comply with an order of abatement, the city may, at the expense of such person, abate the nuisance described in the order. The abatement shall in all such cases be appropriate to the nuisance. If the nuisance is a condition, the condition shall be rectified by appropriate action. If the nuisance is a noise or other activity of animal or fowl, the animal or fowl constituting such nuisance may be impounded or destroyed. If the nuisance is the erection or use of a building or structure, such building or structure may be padlocked, removed or demolished. And for these purposes, the city may, in all such cases, enter upon private property, when necessary, to abate such nuisances. The provisions of this section, however, shall be cumulative of, and not exclusive of, the provisions of the immediately preceding section, so that the city may abate the nuisance complained of and also punish the offender, if convicted, as provided in Section 8.12.060. 
(Prior code § 13A-7) 
8.12.080 - Costs of abating nuisance-Execution-Levy. 
    In all such cases in which a property owner shall fail or refuse to comply with an order of the judge to abate a nuisance on such property, and such nuisance is abated by the city as hereinabove provided, the expenses of such abatement shall be charged to such property owner. The city clerk shall in such cases issue execution in the name of the city and against such property owner in the amount of such expenses, 
which execution shall issue and be levied in the same manner as provided in Title 48, O.C.G.A. the collection of ad valorem taxes. Such execution shall constitute a lien against such property and all other property of such property owner. Such property owner shall have the right to contest such execution, or the amount thereof, or the levy thereof, in the same manner as provided by the laws of this state governing illegalities and claims where executions are levied. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 §§ 10 (part), 12; prior code § 13A-8) 
8.12.090 - Provisions cumulative. 
    The provisions of this chapter are cumulative of all other provisions of this code, whether heretofore or hereafter enacted, regarding nuisances and the abatement thereof. 
(Prior code § 13A-9) 
Chapter 8.16 - INOPERATIVE VEHICLES[2] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Oct. 17, 2011 repealed the former section 8.16.010 and enacted a section 8.16.010 as set out herein. The former section 8.16.010 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from an Ord. dated June 20, 2011, § 1; and an Ord. dated May 21, 2007, § 13. 

8.16.010 - Inoperative vehicles. 
A.  No inoperative vehicle, as that term is defined in subsection B. of this section, shall be parked or stand on any private property or public roads for longer than thirty (30) days after written notice to remove such vehicle has been delivered by the city to the record owner of such vehicle or to the owner of the property on which such vehicle is located. Such vehicles are hereby determined to create conditions tending to reduce the value of private property, to promote blight and deterioration, to invite plundering and vandalism, to create fire hazards, to constitute an attractive nuisance creating a hazard to the health and safety of minors, to create a harborage for rodents and insects, and to be injurious to the health, safety and general welfare of the public and, when on city streets, to create a traffic hazard and endanger public safety. This section shall not be the exclusive regulation of abandoned, wrecked, dismantled, or inoperative vehicles within the corporate limits of the city, but shall be supplemental and in addition to other regulations and regulatory codes, zoning ordinances, statutes, or provisions of law heretofore and hereafter enacted by the city, county, state or other legal entity or agency having proper jurisdiction. 
B.  An inoperative condition shall include, but not be limited to, any automobile, truck, vehicle, mobile machinery or trailer of any kind or type, or part thereof, the condition of which is one or more of the following: 
1.  Wrecked; 
2.  Dismantled; 
3.  Partially dismantled; 
4.  Inoperative; 
5.  Abandoned; 
6.  Discarded; or 
7.  One which does not have a valid license plate attached hereto. 
C.  The following conditions will permit the parking or standing of an inoperative vehicle on private property within the corporate limits of the city, provided that: 
1.  Such vehicle shall be fully enclosed within a building in NR1, NR2 and NR3 zoning districts, provided the owner or occupant of the building is in the process of repairing or reconditioning the vehicle for his personal use. 
2.  Such vehicle shall not be stored for the purpose of salvage or parts, but shall be in the process of repair or reconditioning. 
D.  Whenever any public officer of the city has reasonable cause to believe that an inoperative vehicle is being unlawfully maintained, or allowed to exist on any premises within the corporate limits of the city, such officer may enter said premises at all reasonable times for the purpose of inspecting said vehicle; provided that if said premises is occupied the public officer shall present proper credentials to the occupant prior to a request for entry. If said premises is not occupied, the public officer shall make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having control of the premises. If entry is refused, the public officer shall have recourse to every legal remedy to secure entry, including application for an inspection warrant from Covington Municipal Court. 
(Ord. dated 10/17/11 §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 7/7/11, § 1) 
Chapter 8.20 - NOISE CONTROL 
Sections: 

8.20.010 - Scope. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to the control of all sound originating within the geographical limits of the city and outside the city limits, within all territory to which the jurisdiction of the city extends. 
(Prior code § 14A-1) 
8.20.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following definitions shall apply: 
    "A-weighted sound pressure level" means the sound pressure level as measured with a sound level meter using the A-weighting network. The standard notation is DB(A) or dBA. 
    "Alarm" means any fire, burglary, motor vehicle or civil defense alarm, whistle or similar stationary emergency signaling device. 
    "Commercial area" means an area within the CM, NM or TCM use districts established under Title 16 of this code. 
    "Construction" means any site preparation, assembly, erection, substantial repair, alteration, demolition or similar action, for or of public or private rights-of-way, structures, utilities or similar property. 
    "Emergency" means any occurrence or set of circumstances involving actual or imminent physical trauma to persons or property damage demanding immediate attention. 
    "Emergency vehicle" means a motor vehicle belonging to a fire department or certified private vehicle belonging to a volunteer fireman or firefighting association, partnership or corporation, an ambulance, a motor vehicle belonging to a private security agency or a motor vehicle belonging to a federal, state, county or municipal law enforcement agency; provided said vehicles are in use as an emergency vehicle by one authorized to use said vehicle for that purpose. 
    "Emergency work" means any work for the purpose of preventing or alleviating the physical trauma to persons or property damage threatened or caused by an emergency. 
    "Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR)" means the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of a single motor vehicle. In cases where trailers and tractors are separable, the gross combination weight rating, which is the value specified by the manufacturer as the recommended maximum loaded weight of the combination vehicle, shall be used. 
    "Industrial area" means an area within the M-1 of M-2 use districts established under Title 16 of this code. 
    "Land use category" has the meaning and relationship to compatible zoning districts ascribed thereto under the provisions of Section 16.04.050 of this code. 
    "Motor vehicle" means a vehicle with two or more wheels, or a machine, propelled or drawn by mechanical power and used on the public roads and highways in the transportation of passengers and property, or any combination thereof, but does not include any vehicle, locomotive or car operated exclusively on rail or rails. 
    "Multifamily dwelling," means building or other shelter that has been divided into separate units to house more than one family. 
    "Noise sensitive area" means an area where a school, hospital, nursing home, place of worship, funeral home, court, or public library is located. 
    "Person" means any individual, association, partnership or corporation and includes any officer, employee, department, agency or instrumentality of the United States. 
    "Powered model vehicle" means any self-propelled airborne, waterborne or land borne plane, vessel, or vehicle which is not designed to carry persons, including, but not limited to, any model airplane, boat, car or rocket. 
    "Public right-of-way," means any street, avenue, boulevard, highway, sidewalk, alley or similar place normally accessible to the public which is owned or controlled by a governmental entity. 
    "Public space" means any real property or structures thereon owned by a governmental entity and normally accessible to the public, including, but not limited to, parks and other public recreational areas. 
    "Real property line" means a line along the surface and its vertical plane extension which separates the real property owned, rented or leased by one person from that owned, rented or leased by another person, excluding intrabuilding real property division. 
    "Residential area" means an area within the NR-1, NR-2, NR-3 and TCR use districts established under Title 16 of this code. 
    "Sound level" means the A-weighted sound pressure obtained by use of a sound level meter as specified in American National Standards Institute specifications for sound level meters (ANSI SI.41971, as amended). 
    All terminology used herein and not defined shall be in conformance with applicable publications of the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
(Ord. dated 2/6/12, § 1; Prior code § 14A-2) 
8.20.030 - Maximum permissible sound levels. 
    It is unlawful, except as expressly permitted herein, to make, cause or allow the making of any noise or sound which violates the provisions of this chapter. 
A.  No person shall operate or cause to be operated any source of sound from any location in such a manner as to create a sound level which exceeds the limits set forth in Table 8.20.040 for the receiving land use category during more than ten (10) percent of any measurement period, which period shall not be less than ten (10) minutes when measured at or beyond the property boundary of the land use category from which the sound emanates; provided, however, that in the case of a multifamily dwelling land use category, the sound level shall be measured within an adjacent intrabuilding dwelling. 
B.  For any source of sound, the sound level shall not exceed the maximum permissible sound level limit set forth in Table 8.20.040 by 15dB(A) for all land use categories. 
C.  Sound level measurement shall be made with a sound level meter using the A-weighting scale in accordance with the standards promulgated by the American National Standards Institute (ANSI). 
Table 8.20.030 
Maximum Permissible Sound Levels 
By Receiving Land Use Category 
Land Use 
Category Times Sounds Level 
Level (dB(A)) Residential, noise-sensitive area, public space 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 60 
55 Multifamily dwelling 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 50 
45 Commercial 7:00 a.m.-10:00 p.m. 
10:00 p.m.-7:00 a.m. 65 
60 Industrial At all times 75  
(Ord. dated 2/6/12, § 2; Prior code § 14A-4) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Feb. 6, 2012, § 2, repealed § 8.20.030 in its entirety and renumbered §§ 8.20.040-8.20.110 as 8.20.030-8.20.100 respectively. Former § 8.20.030 pertained to excessive noise prohibited and derived from prior code § 14A-3. 
8.20.040 - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from the sound level limits of Table 8.20.040 of Section 8.20.040: 
A.  Domestic power tools, lawn mowers and agricultural equipment, when operated with a muffler. 
B.  Noises resulting from any authorized emergency vehicles when responding to an emergency. 
C.  Noises resulting from the operation of the Covington Municipal Airport. 
D.  Noises made during an event such as a parade, fair, or concert, by persons having obtained an appropriate permit therefor issued for such event by the chief of police pursuant to the provisions of Section 12.08.010 of this code. 
E.  Any noise resulting from activities of a temporary duration, for which a special permit has been granted pursuant to this chapter, and which conforms to the conditions and limits stated thereon. 
F.  Noises from bells or chimes emanating from places of worship. 
G.  Noises from construction activity are exempt from Table 8.20.040 of Section 8.20.040 except that the industrial sound level limit shall apply in all land use categories. 
(Ord. dated 2/6/12, §§ 2-4; Prior code § 14A-5) 
Editor's note- See § 8.20.030 editor's note. 
8.20.050 - Specific prohibitions. 
    In addition to the general prohibitions set out above, the following specific acts are declared to be in violation of this chapter: 
A.  Horns, Signaling Devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any motor vehicle or any street or public place in the city continuously and/or incessantly for a period in excess of sixty (60) seconds, except as a danger warning. 
B.  Street Sales. The offering for sale by shouting or outcry within any residential, commercial or noise-sensitive area, except by permit issued by the city. 
C.  Animals. The owning, possessing or harboring of any animal which frequently, or for continued duration, howls, barks, meows, squawks or makes other sounds which create excessive and unnecessary noise across a residential or commercial real property line or within a noise-sensitive area. For the purpose of this chapter, "barking dog" shall mean a dog that barks, bays, cries, howls or makes any other noise continually and/or incessantly for a period of ten (10) minutes, or barks intermittently for one-half hour or more to the disturbance of any person at any time of day or night, regardless of whether the dog is physically situated in or upon private property; provided, however, that a dog shall not be deemed a "barking dog" if, at the time the dog is barking or making any other noise, a person is trespassing or threatening to trespass upon property in or upon which the dog is situated. 
D.  Powered Model Vehicles. The operating of, or permitting the operation of, powered model vehicles in such a manner as to exceed the levels set for public space land use, measured at a distance of not closer than thirty (30) meters (one hundred (100) feet) from the operator. 
E.  Emergency Signaling Devices. 
1.  Except in case of an emergency or training, the intentional sounding of any alarm. 
2.  The testing of any alarm for a period in excess of sixty (60) seconds at any time. 
3.  The testing of a complete emergency signaling system, including the signaling device and the personnel response to the signaling device, more than once in each calendar month, and the sounding of said emergency signaling system for a period in excess of fifteen (15) minutes. 
(Ord. dated 2/6/12, §§ 2, 5; Prior code § 14A-6) 
Editor's note- See § 8.20.030 editor's note. 
8.20.060 - Motor vehicles. 
A.  Maximum Sound Levels. No person shall operate a motor vehicle at any time in such a manner as to exceed the sound level limits for the category of motor vehicle shown in Table 8.20.070. The sound level shall be measured at a distance of at least seven and five-tenths meters (twenty-five (25) feet) from the near side of the nearest lane(s) being monitored and at a height of at least four feet above the immediately surrounding surface. This section shall apply to the total noise from a vehicle. 
Table 8.20.060 
Maximum Permissible Sound 
Levels for Motor Vehicles 
Sound Level Limit Applies to All Land Use Category Speed Limit 35 MPH or Less Speed Limit Over 35 MPH Motor vehicle with manufacturer's gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) or gross combination weight rating (GCWR) of 10,000 pounds or more, or any combination of vehicles towed by such motor vehicle 91 95 Any other motor vehicle or any combination of vehicles towed by any motor vehicle 78 78  
B.  Adequate Mufflers or Sound Dissipative Devices. No person shall operate or cause to be operated any motor vehicle or motorcycle not equipped with a muffler in good working order and in constant operation. No person shall remove or render inoperative or cause to be removed or rendered inoperative any muffler or sound-dissipative device on a motor vehicle or motorcycle other than for purposes of maintenance, repair or replacement. 
(Ord. dated 2/6/12, §§ 2, 6; Prior code § 14A-7) 
Editor's note- See § 8.20.030 editor's note. 
8.20.070 - Special permits. 
A.  Any person desiring relief from any provision of this chapter shall apply for a special permit to cause or create a noise at sound levels which would otherwise be in violation of this chapter. Applications for a special permit shall be made in writing to the city council, or the designee of the city council, on forms provided for that purpose. Payment of a fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall accompany the application. The council or designee shall grant said special permit upon a showing by the applicant that: 
1.  Additional time is necessary for the applicant to alter or modify the activity in order to comply with the provisions of this chapter; 
2.  The activity, operation or noise source will be of a temporary duration and cannot be done in a manner that would comply with the provisions of this chapter; and 
3.  No reasonable alternative is available to the applicant. 
B.  Any permit granted pursuant to this section shall contain thereon all conditions upon which said permit has been granted, including, but not limited to, the effective date, time of day, location, sound level limit or equipment limitation; provided, however, that no special permit shall be issued for a period in excess of fifteen (15) consecutive days. Any special permit hereunder may be renewed upon a showing that the reasons for which the permit was granted still exist. 
(Ord. dated 2/6/12, § 2; Prior code § 14A-8) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 7) 
Editor's note- See § 8.20.030 editor's note. 
8.20.080 - Enforcement responsibility. 
    The Covington Police Department shall be responsible for the issuance of special permits under the provisions of Section 8.20.080 as well as enforcement of all other provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 2/6/12, §§ 2, 7; Prior code § 14A-9) 
8.20.090 - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates any provision of this chapter shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of section 1.12.010 of this code; provided, however, that in the case of a violation involving a motor vehicle, the person charged with a violation may be granted a period of fifteen (15) days in which to correct the source of the sound. 
(Ord. dated 2/6/12, §§ 2, 8; Prior code § 14A-10) 
Editor's note- See § 8.20.030 editor's note. 
8.20.100 - Cooperation of city departments. 
    All city departments and agencies shall, to the fullest extent consistent with their authority, carry out their programs in such a manner as to further the policy of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 2/6/12, § 2; Prior code § 14A-11) 
Editor's note- See § 8.20.030 editor's note. 
Chapter 8.24 - UNFIT BUILDINGS 
Sections: 

8.24.010 - Statement of purpose. 
A.  The mayor and council of the city find that there exist in the city dwellings, buildings or structures which are unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial or business uses due to dilapidation and defects increasing the hazards of fire, accidents or other calamities; lack of adequate ventilation, light or sanitary facilities; or other conditions rendering such dwellings, buildings or structures unsafe or unsanitary, or dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety or welfare or otherwise inimical to the welfare of the residents of the city; or vacant, dilapidated dwellings, buildings or structures in which drug crimes are being committed, and that it is accordingly appropriate for the city to exercise its police power to repair, close or demolish the aforesaid dwellings, buildings or structures in the manner provided in Section 41-2-7 and Sections 41-2-8 through 41-2-17, O.C.G.A. 
B.  All the provisions of this chapter including method and procedure, may also be applied to private property where an accumulation of weeds, trash, junk, filth and other unsafe or unsanitary conditions shall create a public health hazard or general nuisance to those persons residing in the vicinity. A finding by the building inspector that such property is a health or safety hazard shall constitute prima facie evidence that such property is in violation of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 12-120) 
8.24.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the term: 
    "Applicable codes" means and includes all municipal code provisions and/or regulations or standards promulgated hereunder, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property, including without limitation fire or life safety codes, and minimum standard building or housing codes. 
    "Closing" means causing a dwelling, building or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
    "Drug crime" means an act which is a violation of Article 2 of Chapter 13 of Title 16, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the "Georgia Controlled Substance Act." 
    "Dwellings," "buildings," or "structures" means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith. 
    "Interested party" means: 
1.  Owner; 
2.  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the State Bar of Georgia; 
3.  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. Section 48-3-9; or 
4.  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the city or records maintained in the Newton County public records. "Interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected; and 
5.  Persons in possession of said property and premises. 
    "Owner" means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
    "Public authority" means any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of the city relating to health, fire, or building regulations or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures in the city. 
    "Repair" means altering or improving a dwelling, building or structure so as to bring such structure into compliance with applicable city codes, and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash and other materials which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building or structure. 
    "Resident" means any person residing within the corporate limits of the city on or before the date on which an alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. dated 8/17/04 §§ 1-4; prior code § 12-121) 
8.24.030 - Designation of public officer. 
    The judge of the municipal court of the city shall exercise the powers prescribed by this chapter and is hereinafter referred to as the "public officer." 
(Prior code § 12-122) 
8.24.040 - Procedure for remediation of unfit dwellings, buildings or structures. 
A.  It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or property with the city to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or property in violation of such codes or ordinances. 
B.  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the city charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall cause an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property to be made by the city. If the city's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the city may issue a complaint in rem against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or public nuisance exists and shall cause summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the record property owner and any other person or entity having an interest in such dwelling, building or structure, as disclosed by examination of real property title records maintained in the office of the Clerk of Newton Superior Court. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference, state with particularity the factual basis for the action, and contain a statement of the relief sought by the city to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the owner that a hearing will be held before the public officer at a date and time certain and at the municipal courtroom of the city. Such hearing shall be held not less than fifteen (15) days nor more than forty-five (45) days after the filing of said complaint in municipal court. The owner shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for hearing. 
C.  If, after such notice and hearing, the public officer determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state in writing findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
1.  To repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation and, if applicable, to secure the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
2.  To demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
3.  In no event shall the mayor and council require removal or demolition of any dwelling, building, or structure except upon a finding that the cost of repair, alteration, or improvement thereof exceeds one-half the value that such dwelling, building or structure will have when repaired to satisfy the minimum requirements of this article. 
D.  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer may cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved or to be vacated and closed or demolished. Such abatement action shall commence immediately after the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by an injunction issued pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 41-2-13 or any other equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the time by which such abatement action must commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: 
"This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(Ord. dated 10/17/11, § 1; Ord. dated 7/18/11; Ord. dated 2/21/11, §1; Ord. dated 8/17/04, § 5; Ord. dated 5/21/07, § 14) 
8.24.041 - Lien for abatement costs. 
    The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the county tax commissioner and all other costs necessarily associated with an abatement action under this chapter, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. Such lien shall be perfected and enforced as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 41-2-9(b). 
(Ord. dated 8/17/04 § 6) 
8.24.050 - Criteria for determining unfit buildings or structures. 
A.  The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building, or structure is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use if he finds that conditions exist in such building, dwelling, or structure which are dangerous or injurious to the health, safety, or morals of the occupants of such dwelling, building, or structure; of the occupants of neighborhood dwellings, buildings, or structures; or of other residents of the city. Such conditions may include the following (without limiting the generality of the foregoing): 
1.  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
2.  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
3.  Dilapidation; 
4.  Disrepair; 
5.  Structural defects; and 
6.  Uncleanliness. 
B.  The public officer may determine that a dwelling, building or structure is vacant, dilapidated and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes upon personal observation or report of a law enforcement agency and evidence of drug crimes being committed. 
(Prior code § 12-124) 
8.24.060 - Powers of the public officer. 
    The public officer is authorized to exercise such powers as may be necessary or convenient to carry out and effectuate the purpose of this chapter, including without limitation the following powers in addition to others expressly granted in this chapter: 
A.  To investigate the dwelling conditions in the city in order to determine which dwellings, buildings, or structures therein are unfit for human habitation or are unfit for current commercial, industrial, or business use or are vacant, dilapidated, and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; 
B.  To administer oaths and affirmations, to examine witnesses, and to receive evidence; 
C.  To enter upon premises for the purpose of making examinations; provided, however, that such entries shall be made in such manner as to cause the least possible inconvenience to the persons in possession; 
D.  With the prior approval of the mayor and council, to appoint and fix the duties of such officers, agents and employees as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this chapter; 
E.  To delegate any of his functions and powers under this chapter to such officers, agents employees as he may designate. 
F.  To obtain inspection warrants as hereinafter provided in Section 8.24.080 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 3/6/00; prior code § 12-125) 
8.24.070 - Service of complaints or orders upon interested parties. 
A.  At least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing pursuant to Section 8.24.040(B) of this chapter, the public officer shall cause copies of the complaint to be mailed by first class mail by depositing in a receptacle maintained by the U. S. Post Office Department for the deposit of mail, bearing sufficient postage and the last known address of the person or persons to whom such notice is directed. Copies of the complaint shall also be mailed by first class mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants of the property, if any, and shall be posted on the property at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. 
B.  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in Newton County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
C.  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of Newton Superior Court. Such notice shall have the same force and effect as other lis pendens notices provided by law. 
D.  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on any interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
E.  Nonresidents of Georgia, whose mailing address is known, shall be served by first class mail by depositing the notice in a receptacle maintained by the U. S. Post Office Department for the deposit of mail, bearing sufficient postage and the last known address of the person or persons to whom such notice is directed at least fourteen (14) days prior to the date of the hearing. For nonresidents whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in Newton County once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing. 
F.  In the event either any interested party is a minor, an estate, an incompetent person, or person laboring under disabilities, the guardian or other personal representative of such person shall be served and if such guardian or personal representative resides outside Newton County or is a nonresident of Georgia, he or she shall be served as provided for in subsection E of this section. If such interested party has no guardian or personal representative, service shall be perfected by serving the judge of the probate court of Newton County at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing, which judge shall stand in the place of and protect the rights of such minor, estate, or incompetent person or appoint a guardian ad litem for such person. 
G.  In the event of unknown persons or unborn remaindermen who are likely to have any rights in the property or interest or the proceeds thereof, the judge of the probate court of Newton County shall be personally served at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the hearing, and it shall be the duty of the said judge to stand in the place of and protect the rights of such unknown parties or unborn remaindermen. 
H.  In the event the whereabouts of any owner or party in interest is unknown and the same cannot be ascertained by the public officer in the exercise of reasonable diligence or if any owner or party in interest cannot, after due diligence, be served as provided in this section, the public officer shall make an affidavit to that effect and serve by publication in the manner provided in subsection C of this section, and such publication shall be sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 15; Ord. dated 8/17/04 § 7) 
8.24.080 - Inspection warrant procedure. 
    Whenever it is necessary for the housing inspector to obtain an inspection warrant, the following procedure shall be employed. 
A.  The housing inspector or any person authorized to make inspections for the city shall make application to a judge of the municipal court of the city. 
B.  An inspection warrant shall be issued only for good cause shown and when supported by an affidavit particularly describing the place, dwelling, structure, or premises to be inspected and the purpose for which the inspection is to be made. In addition, the affidavit shall contain either a statement that consent to inspect has been sought and refused or facts or circumstances reasonably justifying the failure to seek such consent. Cause shall be deemed to exist if either reasonable legislative or administrative standards for conducting a routine or area inspection are satisfied with respect to the particular place, dwelling, structure or premises, or if there is reason to believe that a condition exists with respect to the particular place, dwelling, structure or premises rendering the same unfit as set forth in Section 8.24.010 of this chapter. 
C.  An inspection warrant shall be effective for the time specified therein, but not for a period of more than ten days next following the date of issuance, unless extended or renewed by the judicial officer who signed and issued the original warrant, upon satisfying himself that such extension or renewal is in the public interest. Such inspection warrant must be executed and returned to the judicial officer by whom it was issued within the time specified in the warrant or within the extended or renewed time. After the expiration of such time, the warrant, unless executed, shall be void. 
D.  A resident inspection pursuant to an inspection warrant shall be made between eight a.m. and six p.m. of any weekday. Inspections of nonresidential premises shall be made at any time during operating or regular business hours. An inspection shall not be performed in the absence of an owner or occupant of the particular place, dwelling, structure or premises unless specifically authorized by the judicial officer upon a showing that such authority is reasonably necessary to effectuate the purpose of the regulation being enforced. An inspection pursuant to a warrant shall not be made by means of forcible entry, except that the judicial officer may expressly authorize a forcible entry where facts are shown which are sufficient to create a reasonable suspicion of the existence of a condition described in Section 8.24.050 of this chapter, which, if such condition existed, would be an immediate threat to health or safety of persons occupying or proximately affected by such place, dwelling, structure or premises. 
E.  The willful refusal of the tenant in possession or the owner of a place, dwelling, structure or premises subject to the issuance of an inspection warrant shall be a violation punishable in accordance with Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
F.  The foregoing provisions shall not be deemed to be in lieu of any other rights and privileges the city or the city housing inspector may have to insure compliance with this chapter, but the housing inspector or any other appropriate city official or any person who would be damaged by a violation of this chapter in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action or proceeding in any court of competent jurisdiction to compel compliance with this chapter or to abate any violations thereof, including the prohibiting of occupancy of any dwelling unit not in conformity with the minimum requirements of this chapter or Chapter 15.08 of the code. 
(Ord. dated 3/6/00 § 2; prior code § 12-127) 
8.24.090 - Conflicts with other ordinances. 
    To the extent that any provisions of this article conflict with the provisions of Chapters 8.12 and 15.08 of this code or the provisions of the SBCCI Standard Housing Code or the provisions of the SBCCI Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code, the provisions of this shall prevail; provided, however that nothing in this shall be construed to abrogate or impair the powers of the municipal court of the city to enforce any provisions of its charter or its other ordinances nor to prevent or punish violations thereof, and the powers conferred by this chapter shall be in addition to and supplemental to the powers conferred by any other law. 
(Ord. dated 3/6/00 § 2 (part); prior code § 12-128) 
Chapter 8.28 - LITTER CONTROL 
Sections: 

8.28.010 - Statement of purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide for the public health, safety and general welfare through the regulation and control of litter by providing for uniform prohibition throughout the city of any and all littering on public or private property, thereby curbing the desecration of the beauty of the city and harm to the public health, safety and general welfare and degradation of water and aquatic resources caused by litter. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
8.28.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Litter" means any organic or inorganic waste material, rubbish, refuse, garbage, trash, hulls, peelings, debris, grass, weeds, ashes, sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, metal containers, glass containers, broken glass, dead animals or discarded materials of every kind and description which are not "waste" as such term is defined in O.C.G.A. § 16-7-51 (6). 
    "Public or private property" means and includes, without limitation, the right-of-way of any street, road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores, banks or beaches thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
(Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
8.28.030 - Littering on public or private property or in waters. 
    It is unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, place, throw, or leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property or in any waters in the city, unless: 
A.  The property is designated by the state or by any of its agencies or political subdivisions for the disposal of such litter, and such person is authorized by the proper public authority to use such property; 
B.  The litter is placed into a litter receptacle or container installed on such property. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 16; Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
8.28.040 - Construction and demolition sites. 
    All construction and demolition contractors shall provide on-site solid waste receptacles, bulk containers or detachable containers for loose debris, paper, building material waste, scrap construction/demolition waste and other trash produced by those working at the construction site. Separate receptacles, traps or other appropriate containers shall be provided for the collection, storage and proper disposal of concrete truck washout, chemical and/or sanitary waste generated at the construction site. The number and type of solid waste or other receptacles or containers shall be determined in conformity with regulations promulgated by the public works department of the city, a copy of which shall be maintained at City Hall for public inspection during normal business hours. Dirt, mud, construction materials or other debris upon any public or private property belonging to a person other than the owner of the construction site shall be removed by the contractor as generated. Building material originating from private property preliminary to, during or subsequent to the construction of new building, alterations or additions to an existing building of whatever type or from demolition of existing structures shall be removed by the owner of the property or by the contractor. All solid waste from construction and related activities shall be kept on site in such manner as to eliminate wind-driven debris and unsightly litter in and about the site. 
(Ord. dated 11/15/04 § 1) 
8.28.050 - Prima face evidence-Rebuttal presumption. 
A.  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of Section 8.28.030 of this chapter, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this chapter. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection A of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown or left on public or private property in violation of Section 8.28.030 of this chapter is discovered to contain any article, including without limitation letters, bills, publications or other writings which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the article belongs or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person violated this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 11/15/04 § 2 (part); Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
8.28.060 - Penalties. 
    Any person who violates this chapter shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as follows: 
A.  By a fine of not less than one hundred dollars ($100.00) and not more than one thousand dollars ($1,000.00); 
B.  In addition to the fine set out in subsection A of this section, the violator shall reimburse the city for the reasonable cost of removing the litter when the litter is or is ordered removed by the city; and 
C.  1.  In the sound discretion of the judge of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public street, road or highway or public right-of-way in the city for a distance not to exceed one mile any litter he has deposited and any and all litter deposited thereon by anyone else prior to the date of execution of sentence, or 
2.  In the sound discretion of the judge of the municipal court, the person may be directed to pick up and remove from any public property, private right-of-way, or, with prior permission of the legal owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property, any private property upon which it can be established by competent evidence that he has deposited litter, any and all litter deposited thereon by him or anyone prior to the date of execution of sentence; 
D.  The municipal court may also publish the names of persons convicted of violating this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 11/15/04 § 2 (part); Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
8.28.070 - Enforcement. 
    All law enforcement agencies, officers and officials of this state or any political subdivision thereof, or any enforcement agency, officer or any official of any commission of this state or any political subdivision thereof, are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to enforce compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 11/15/04 § 2 (part); Ord. dated 7/15/02 (part)) 
Title 9 - PUBLIC PEACE, MORALS AND WELFARE 
Chapter 9.04 - OFFENSES AGAINST PROPERTY 

9.04.010 - Water tanks or towers-Climbing or painting. 
    It is unlawful for any person other than authorized employees or agents of this city to paint or mark upon any portion of the water towers or tanks of this city or to enter upon the lots on which such water towers or tanks are located or to climb or attempt to climb portion of said water towers or tanks. 
(Prior code § 14-42) 
Chapter 9.08 - OFFENSES BY OR AGAINST MINORS 

9.08.010 - Responsibility for conduct of minors. 
    The parents and/or legal guardians of minors shall be responsible for the conduct of their minor wards as same affects the residents of the city, and the property of said city. The duty of the parents and legal guardians of minors shall be as provided by Georgia law and the enforcement of such duties and the enforcement of the general laws of the state and the ordinances of the city shall be in accordance with the provisions of the juvenile codes of the state and in particular, the Juvenile Court code of Georgia. 
(Prior code § 14-3) 
9.08.020 - Curfew. 
A.  This section is adopted in order to promote the general welfare and protect the general public through the reduction of juvenile violence and crime within the city, promote the safety and well-being of the city's youngest citizens, persons sixteen (16) years of age or younger, whose inexperience renders them particularly vulnerable to becoming participants in unlawful activities and to foster, strengthen, encourage and facilitate parental responsibility for children. 
B.  It shall be unlawful for any minor sixteen (16) years of age or younger to remain in or upon any public place, establishment, vacant lot or any place unsupervised by an adult having the lawful authority to be at such place, between the hours of 9:30 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; provided, however, that on Fridays and Saturdays, the effective hours are between 11:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. For purposes of this section, "remain" is defined as follows: 
(1)  To stay or linger at or upon a place; and/or 
(2)  To fail to leave a place when requested to do so by a law enforcement officer or by the owner, operator or other person in control of that place. 
    For purposes of this section, "public place" is defined as any place to which the public has access, including, but not limited to, streets, lanes, highways, roads, sidewalks, alleys, avenues, playgrounds, parks and/or common areas of schools, hospitals, apartment houses, office buildings, transportation facilities, and shops. 
    For purposes of this section, "establishment" is defined as any privately-owned place of business within the city operated for a profit, to which the public is invited, including, but not limited to, any place of amusement or entertainment. 
    The provisions of this subsection B. shall not apply in the following instances: 
1.  When a minor is supervised and accompanied by (i.e., in the physical presence of) his or her parent, guardian, or an adult authorized and approved by a parent of such minor to take said parent's place in accompanying said minor for a designated period of time and purpose within a specified area. 
2.  When a minor is involved in an emergency. An "emergency" shall mean unforeseen circumstances, or the status or condition resulting therefrom, requiring immediate action to safeguard life, limb, or property. The term "emergency" shall include, but is not limited to, fires, natural disasters, automobile accidents, or other similar circumstances. 
3.  When a minor is upon an errand at the direction of his or her parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor provided that the minor has in his or her possession written permission from such adult, which should include the adult's contact information and a description of the authorized errand. 
4.  When a minor is returning home by a direct route (without any unnecessary detours or stops) from and within thirty (30) minutes of the termination of a school activity, an activity of a civic association concerned with or contributory to the promotion of the general welfare and the betterment of life for the citizens of the city, or an activity of a religious association, as long as any such activity is supervised by adults, or from a place of licensed public entertainment, such as a movie, play or a sporting event. 
5.  When a minor is returning home by a direct route (without any unnecessary detours or stops) from and within thirty (30) minutes of leaving lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the above-referenced places during the proscribed period of time. 
6.  When a minor is exercising First Amendment rights protected by the United States Constitution, such as the free exercise of religion, freedom of speech and the right of assembly, provided that the exercise of such right is clearly evidenced by the minor's conduct. In order for this exception not to apply, law enforcement must make reasonable inquiry and determine that probable cause exists to believe the minor is not exercising First Amendment rights. 
7.  When a minor is in a motor vehicle with parental consent and engaged in bona fide interstate movement through, or beginning and ending in, the city. 
8.  When a minor is on the sidewalk directly abutting the place where such minor resides with a parent or guardian or on the sidewalk of either next-door neighbor who has not communicated an objection to the police. 
C.  It shall be unlawful for a parent or guardian having legal custody of a minor to knowingly permit or by inefficient control to allow a violation of this section by a minor in his or her custody. The term "knowingly" includes knowledge which a parent should reasonably be expected to have concerning the whereabouts of a minor in that parent's legal custody. It is intended to continue to keep neglectful or careless parents up to a reasonable community standard of parental responsibility through an objective test. It shall be no defense that a parent was completely indifferent to the activities or conduct or whereabouts of such minor. 
D.  Any minor violating the provisions of subsection A. of this section shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Any parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor violating subsection C. of this section shall be charged with such violation and tried in the municipal court. 
(Ord. dated 12/15/14(1), § 1) 
Chapter 9.12 - WEAPONS 

9.12.010 - Knives, razors and ice picks. 
    It is unlawful for any person to have, possess, or carry upon the streets, alleys, sidewalks, or in any public place in the city any of the following implements unless same are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: 
A.  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring, or other device in the handle, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
B.  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than two inches. 
C.  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which when open projects from the handle more than three inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives and/or knives which do not close and any type knife with the blade open. 
D.  Any razor or razor blade. 
E.  Any ice pick or similar device having a sharp point, except this shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Prior code § 14-39) 
9.12.020 - Discharging firearms in city. 
    It is unlawful for any person to discharge any firearm in the corporate limits of the city except in defense of person or property, or for recreational purposes in an indoor firing range. This section shall not apply to authorized officers of the law. 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 17; prior code § 14-40) 
9.12.025 - Use of firearms for elimination of rodents, raccoons and armadillos. 
A.  For purposes of this section the term "rodent" shall mean any of the various mammals of the order Rodentia, including, but not limited to rats, mice, squirrels, chipmunks, muskrats and beaver. 
B.  Notwithstanding any provision in Section 9.12.020 of this chapter to the contrary, the discharge of certain firearms within the corporate limits of the city by adults for the purpose of elimination of rodents, raccoons or armadillos shall be permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  Only .410-gauge shotguns with shells loaded with number 6 or smaller shot or .22-caliber rifles or pistols loaded with "rat" or "scatter" shot cartridges may be discharged pursuant to this section. 
2.  An annual permit for discharging firearms under this section must be obtained from the Covington Police Department upon payment of such permit fee and under such further rules and regulations as may be promulgated by the Covington Police Department with the approval of the mayor and council. 
3.  Such permits shall be valid for shooting squirrels or raccoons only during seasonal dates prescribed for same under regulations promulgated by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, as amended from time to time. 
4.  Applicants for such permits must provide proof of having been issued a current valid hunting license issued by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
5.  Discharge of firearms under this section shall be limited to private property either owned by the permittee or other private property with the express permission of the owner of such property. 
(Ord. dated 7/2/12, § 1) 
9.12.030 - Slingshot-Bows and arrows-Air rifles. 
    It is unlawful for any person to use, discharge or shoot any slingshot, air rifle, or guns discharged by forcing of air, gas, pressure or any other manner, or bow and arrow in the city limits. Provided, however, that this section shall not apply to any person discharging archery equipment on that person's own property or other areas within the corporate limits of the city which are at least one hundred (100) yards from the nearest inhabited dwelling. 
(Ord. dated 8/16/10, § 1; prior code § 14-41) 
Chapter 9.16 - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 

9.16.010 - Loitering or prowling. 
A.  A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when within the city he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. 
B.  Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances makes it impractical, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for an offense under this section, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarms or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of an offense under this section if the law enforcement officer fails to comply with the foregoing procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Ord. dated 2/18/02 § 1) 
9.16.020 - Disorderly conduct. 
    A person commits the offense of disorderly conduct when such person commits any of the following: 
A.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby such person is placed in reasonable fear for the safety of such person's life, limb, or health; 
B.  Acts in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another person whereby the property of such person is placed in danger of being damaged or destroyed; 
C.  Without provocation, uses to or of another person in such other person's presence, opprobrious or abusive words which by their very utterance tend to incite to an immediate breach of the peace, that is to say, words which as a matter of common knowledge and under ordinary circumstances will, when used to or of another person in such other person's presence, naturally tend to provoke violent resentment, that is, words commonly called "fighting words"; 
D.  Without provocation, uses obscene and vulgar or profane language in the presence of or by telephone to a person under the age of fourteen (14) years which threatens an immediate breach of the peace; or 
E.  Recklessly or knowingly commits any act which may reasonably be expected to prevent or disrupt a lawful meeting, gathering or procession. 
(Ord. dated 2/18/02 § 2) 
9.16.030 - Public drunkenness. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to be and appear in an intoxicated condition in any public place or within the curtilage of any private residence not his own, other than by invitation of the owner or lawful occupant, which condition is made manifest by boisterousness, by indecent condition or act, or by vulgar, profane, loud or unbecoming language. 
(Ord. dated 2/18/02 § 3) 
9.16.040 - Panhandling. 
(A)  As used in this section, panhandling means any solicitation made in person upon any street, sidewalk or other public place in the city, in which a person requests an immediate donation of money or other gratuity from another person, and includes but is not limited to seeking donations: 
(1)  By vocal appeal or for music, singing, or other street performance; and 
(2)  Where the person being solicited receives an item of little or no monetary value in exchange for a donation, under circumstances where a reasonable person would understand that the transaction is in substance a donation. 
    However, panhandling shall not include the act of passively standing or sitting or performing music, singing or other street performance with a sign or other indication that a donation is being sought, without any vocal request other than in response to an inquiry by another person. 
(B)  It shall be unlawful to engage in an act of panhandling at any time within the corporate limits of the city. 
(C)  Each act of panhandling prohibited by this section shall constitute a separate violation and each violation shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(2), § 1) 
Title 10 - VEHICLES AND TRAFFIC 
Chapters: 
Chapter 10.04 - GEORGIA UNIFORM RULES OF THE ROAD 
Sections: 

10.04.010 - Adopted. 
    There is adopted as and for the traffic regulations of the city with like effect as if recited herein, Chapter 6 of Title 40 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, as fully as if same were set out herein including all future amendments to the aforesaid Uniform Rules of the Road. 
(Prior code § 20-1) 
Chapter 10.08 - PARKING AND THROUGH TRAFFIC[1] 
Sections: 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- The title of Ch. 10.08 was amended by § 1 of Ord. dated 8/3/04. 

10.08.010 - Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts. 
    In all districts of the city zoned NR-1, NR-2, NR-3, CR and TCR, the parking of any commercial vehicle (other than an automobile, pickup truck, panel truck or van used to provide daily transportation to and from work; or a commercial vehicle parked temporarily while making a delivery or providing a service) and any vehicle identified by the Federal Highway Administration's Vehicle Inventory and Use Survey as having a gross vehicle weight rating class greater than "3" shall be prohibited except under the following circumstances: 
1.  Any vehicle may park in said zoning districts within a fully enclosed structure that meets all other criteria of the city building and zoning regulations for such districts as set forth in this code; and 
2.  Any government vehicle or other vehicle used for the primary purpose of transporting children to and from churches, synagogues, mosques, other religious institutions or state licensed or accredited schools may park in said districts provided such vehicle is parked off any public thoroughfare and in the side or rear yard of the driver's dwelling. 
(Ord. dated 11/15/10, § 1) 
10.08.011 - Through traffic in residential districts. 
A.  In any district of the city zoned R-1, R-2, R-3, R-4 or R-P, through traffic of tandem axle vehicles or any other motor vehicle with a carrying capacity in excess of one and one-half tons is prohibited. As used in this section the term "tandem axle" shall be defined as provided in Section 32-6-26(a)(7), Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
B.  Authorized emergency vehicles and school buses shall be exempt from the prohibition of this section. As used in this section the terms "authorized emergency vehicle" and "school bus" shall be defined as provided in O.C.G.A. §§ 40-1-1(5) and 40-1-1(55), respectively. 
(Ord. dated 8/3/04, § 2) 
10.08.012 - Off road through traffic on private property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for an operator of a motor vehicle to operate such vehicle on private property in the city for the purpose of avoiding traffic control devices for the public road bounding such property. 
(b)  This section shall be enforceable upon the erection by the owner of such private property of a sign or signs adjacent to the line of the right-of-way of said public road, clearly visible to drivers and bearing the message, "NO THROUGH TRAFFIC. VIOLATORS WILL BE PROSECUTED. O.C.G.A. 40-6-252(a)". 
(Ord. dated 5/2/16(1), § 1) 
10.08.020 - Parking regulations. 
A.  Subject to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 40-6-200(c), angle parking may be permitted on any city street, provided that the city engineering department has determined that the street is of sufficient width to permit such parking without interfering with the safe and free movement of traffic. 
B.  The duration of parking of a vehicle in a single parking space shall be limited to two hours on all streets bounding the city square and on all streets forming the boundaries of the eight city blocks within one block distance from the city square, except those parking spaces contiguous to the city square. 
C.  Parking of a vehicle in any parking space located on the streets designated in Paragraph B of this section, including those parking spaces contiguous to the city square, for over twelve (12) consecutive hours shall be a violation punishable as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 1/20/09, § 3) 
10.08.030 - Penalties. 
    Unless another penalty is expressly provided by law, every person convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter shall be punished by a fine of not more than five hundred dollars ($500.00) or by imprisonment of not more than thirty (30) days, or both such fine and imprisonment. 
(Prior code § 20-2101; Ord. dated 1/20/09, § 3) 
Chapter 10.12 - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 
Sections: 

10.12.010 - Driving across firehose prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for anyone to drive any vehicle of any kind over or across any firehose of the city. 
(Prior code § 10-10) 
10.12.020 - Railroad trains. 
A.  It is unlawful for the directing officer or the operator of any railroad train to direct the operation of or to operate the same in such a manner as to prevent the use of any street for purposes of travel for a period of time longer than five minutes, except that this provision shall not apply to trains or cars in motion other than those engaged in switching. 
B.  It is unlawful for any railroad train, engine, or car to be operated in the city at a rate of speed in excess of forty (40) miles per hour. 
(Prior code § 20-1701) 
Chapter 10.16 - ROLLER SKATES, SKATEBOARDS AND SIMILAR DEVICES 
Sections: 

10.16.010 - Use of roller skates, skateboards, coasters, toy vehicles and similar devices restricted. 
A.  No person upon roller skates or a skateboard or riding in or by means of any coaster, toy vehicle or similar device shall go upon any street or roadway except while crossing a street on a crosswalk, and when so crossing such person shall be granted all of the rights and shall be subject to all the duties applicable to pedestrians. This paragraph shall not apply to any street which has been designated as a play street by duly adopted resolution of the city. 
B.  There shall be no such skating or riding on the sidewalks except in expressly designated areas and under such terms and conditions as are authorized by duly adopted resolution of the city. 
C.  It is unlawful for persons so skating or riding on such designated play streets or on sidewalks in areas designated as provided in subsection B of this section to take hold of or hang onto any automobile or other vehicle, or in any way to interfere with the natural progress of vehicular traffic along such play streets, or for two or more persons to join hands while so skating or riding on such designated sidewalks. Any persons so skating or riding shall yield the right-of-way to and in no way interfere with pedestrians on such designated sidewalks. 
D.  Any person violating any provision of this section shall be subject to the penalties provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code; provided, however, that any such offenses committed by an offender under the age of seventeen (17) years shall be processed as provided by Georgia law creating juvenile courts. 
E.  The parent of any child or the guardian of the person of any ward shall not authorize or knowingly permit any child or ward to violate any of the provisions of this section. 
(Prior code § 17-6) 
Chapter 10.18 - MOTORIZED CARTS 
Sections: 

10.18.010 - Findings; definition. 
    The city council finds that all streets located within the corporate limits of the city, other than the streets hereinafter specifically excepted, are designed and constructed so as to safely permit their use by motorized carts in combination with regular vehicular traffic. "Motorized cart" as used in this chapter is defined as an electric or gasoline powered motor vehicle, having no less than three wheels and an unladen weight of one thousand three hundred (1,300) pounds or less, commonly called a golf cart, which is not designed for speeds in excess of twenty miles per hour. 
(Ord. dated 11/3/08 (part)) 
10.18.020 - Registration; inspection certification. 
A.  The owner of every motorized cart operated on the streets of the city shall cause such cart to be registered with the Covington Police Department within ten (10) days of the date of its purchase. Upon such registration, the Covington Police Department shall issue two numerical identification decals to the owner and shall maintain a record of each identification number, along with the name and address of the registered owner. The identification decals shall be affixed to the front windshield and rear fender area of the cart so as to be fully visible when the cart is in operation. A registration fee shall be payable at the time of registration in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution, and the registration shall be effective for a period of five years. If the cart is transferred to another owner for operation in the city, the registration shall also be transferred to the new owner within ten (10) business days of the date of transfer of the cart, and a transfer fee shall be paid to the city in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution. 
B.  1.  The exhaust system of every registered cart which is powered by a gasoline engine shall be maintained in proper working condition. 
2.  It is unlawful for any registered cart on which any device installed thereon by the manufacturer for the purpose of controlling exhaust emissions has been removed or altered so as to interfere with its operation to be operated on any city street. 
(Ord. dated 11/3/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 8) 
10.18.030 - Operation regulations. 
A.  Operation of motorized carts in the city shall comply in every respect with the requirements of Georgia law, including, without limitation, the provisions of O.C.G.A. Sections 40-6-330 and 40-6-331, and all other statutory regulations applicable to vehicular traffic and safety equipment. 
B.  Only persons possessing a valid driver's license or instruction permit issued by the state of Georgia, another state of the United States of America or an appropriate international agency shall be permitted to operate a motorized cart on the streets of the city. 
C.  Motorized carts shall not be operated on sidewalks in the city. 
D.  Motorized carts shall not be operated on any street within the city for which the posted speed limit is over thirty-five (35) miles per hour, nor on or across any street on which such operation is determined by the mayor and council to be otherwise unsafe. 
E.  Motorized carts may cross any street within the corporate limits of the city at intersections of such street with streets designated in subsection D. of this section. 
F.  Crossing of Georgia state highways by motorized carts shall only be permitted at crossings approved by the Georgia Department of Transportation. 
G.  Golf carts shall only be operated on city streets that are posted with signage authorizing such operation as required by O.C.G.A. 40-6-331. Signage will be erected on a case-by-case basis when requested of and approved by the city of Covington mayor and city council. 
(Ord. dated 11/3/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 9/6/11, §§ 1-3; Ord. dated 6/1/09, §§ 1-3) 
10.18.040 - Penalties. 
    Any person who is convicted of violating the provisions of this chapter shall be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 11/3/08 (part)) 
Title 12 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND PUBLIC PLACES 
Chapter 12.04 - STREETS AND SIDEWALKS GENERALLY 

12.04.010 - Encroachments on public property. 
A.  It is unlawful for any person to erect, maintain or permit to be erected or maintained, any encroachment or obstruction whatsoever upon, over or under the public property or ways of the city without the written permission of the governing body. The city clerk is authorized to issue permits for temporary encroachments or obstructions of public property or ways which encroachments or obstructions shall not exceed ninety (90) days. 
B.  If at any time it shall appear that any person is unlawfully encroaching upon, or maintaining any unlawful obstruction in any part of a public way, it shall be the duty of any law enforcement officer to give notice to the party, ordering the removal of such encroachment or obstruction; and if such encroachment or obstruction be not removed within twenty-four (24) hours after receipt of such notice, or such other reasonable time as may be designated by the governing body, it shall be the duty of the law enforcement officer to cause any such encroachment or obstruction to be summarily removed, and the cost and expense thereof shall be charged to the person maintaining the same. 
(Prior code § 14-12) 
12.04.020 - Obstruction of streets and sidewalks prohibited. 
    No person shall obstruct or otherwise interfere in any manner with the full and free flow of vehicular traffic on city streets or pedestrian traffic on city sidewalks without the prior written approval of the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. dated 5/16/05) 
12.04.030 - Display of merchandise on street-Prohibited-Exceptions. 
A.  Except in accordance with subsection B of this section, no merchant or other person shall use or occupy for the display of goods, wares or merchandise of any kind any space on sidewalks or street rights-of-ways of the city. 
B.  The provisions of subsection A of this section shall not apply to merchants who may display goods, wares or merchandise on sidewalks and/or street rights-of-ways (but not within the actual pavement of the street) immediately adjacent to such merchant's store premises, provided all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The merchant holds a then-current license from the city for the sale of goods and merchandise of the type that will be displayed on city sidewalks or rights-of-way. 
2.  The merchant executes an indemnification agreement in favor of the city in form and substance satisfactory to the city and provides the city with a certificate of comprehensive general liability insurance in form and substance satisfactory to the city showing at all times during the term of such permit that the merchant is maintaining comprehensive general liability insurance that covers the city's premises for which the permit encompasses with limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence. 
3.  The merchant shall at all times have a person in charge of the laying out of merchandise on city property and to ensure that same does not unduly restrict the flow of pedestrian traffic. The merchant must leave a minimum pedestrian walkway of no less than three feet in width completely unobstructed. 
4.  Merchandise may be located on city property only during such times as the merchant has a current "sidewalk sale" permit issued by the city. 
5.  The mayor and council shall, from time to time, adopt reasonable regulations upon the recommendation of the building and zoning department, the city manager, the Downtown Merchants Association, and other merchant associations restricting the times of day and number of days per year that permits may be issued to merchants for utilization of city property in accordance with this section. Such rules and regulations shall include the specification of a written permit for sidewalk sales (including the duration thereof and fees for) and other forms of indemnification and insurance certificates as may be recommended by city employees and the city attorney. 
C.  1.  Notwithstanding any provision of this section to the contrary, for and during the continuation of certain permitted activities taking place within the town center mix zoning district and for a reasonable period before and after same, restaurants physically located and currently operating within said district, and for which the applicable occupation tax has been fully paid, may apply to the Covington police department for a permit for the display, sale and consumption of food and nonalcoholic beverage items on city sidewalks and street rights-of-way exterior to the curbing of such streets. 
2.  The applicant for such permit shall execute an indemnification agreement in favor of the city in form and substance acceptable to the city and provide the city with a certificate of comprehensive general liability insurance in form and substance satisfactory to the city showing that at all times during the term of such permit the applicant has a policy of such insurance in force which covers the city's property on which such activities are scheduled to take place with coverage limits of not less than five hundred thousand dollars ($500,000.00) per occurrence. 
3.  All permitted activities under this subsection shall be conducted under the supervision of the person designated on the application as the representative of the applicant and in compliance with any permit restrictions, state law and ordinances of the city. 
4.  In the conduct of such permitted activities persons engaged therein shall not position themselves or display food or beverages so as to block any business entrance or interfere with the flow of pedestrian or vehicular traffic. 
D.  The provisions of subsection A. of this section shall not apply to the holder of any temporary vending permit, while operating in accordance with the terms of such permit, when such permit is issued in accordance with any temporary vending permit policy duly adopted by resolution of the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. dated 9/3/13, § 1; Ord. dated 8/2/10, § 1; prior code § 17-2) 
12.04.040 - Awnings. 
    All awnings on the streets or public square of the city shall be kept by the owners in a safe condition and in good repair. In default thereof such awnings shall be removed by the owners or by the city at the expense of such owners. 
(Prior code § 17-3) 
12.04.050 - Handbilling. 
    Any person may hand out or distribute, without charge to the recipient thereof, any handbill, in any public place to any person willing to accept such handbill, provided that those engaged in such handbilling activities shall not engage them in such a manner so as to block any public doorway, driveway, sidewalk or street intersection or so as to unduly interfere with the flow of traffic, whether pedestrian or vehicular. Such activity shall be conducted in a manner consistent with the maintenance of public health and safety. 
(Prior code § 20-1601.1) 
Chapter 12.08 - PARADES AND PUBLIC GATHERINGS 

12.08.010 - Parades and public gatherings. 
A.  Any person, persons or groups desiring to hold a parade or public gathering upon public streets, sidewalks, or Academy Springs Park shall make application for a permit to the city not later than four p.m., two days prior to the date that such proposed activity is intended to be held or carried out. Such application shall be filed with the city clerk, who shall forward the same to the chief of police before five p.m. on the date said application is filed. 
    Such permit shall be granted by the chief of police, but the chief of police shall be empowered to determine and restrict the time and duration of the proposed activity, the number of units or automobiles to be involved, the number of persons to participate in such activity, and the streets or locations where such activities shall be allowed, so as not to impair the health or safety of the public generally. No distinction shall be made on the basis of the content of the message, the identification of the participants, or any other matter which does not directly and substantially impact public health and safety. 
    The city official considering such application shall act upon such application by five p.m. two days after such application is filed or by five p.m. on the day before the date such proposed activity is intended to be held or carried out, whichever occurs first. 
    Short notice provision. Notwithstanding the foregoing, the chief of police or his designee shall have the authority to issue a permit to engage in the activities described herein upon one hour's notice. Such permit shall be granted unless the chief or his designee determines in good faith that granting of the permit on one hour's notice presents an unreasonable risk to public health or safety. The chief or his designee shall be available on a twenty-four (24) hour basis. 
B.  An application and permit shall be required for each parade or public gathering, provided however, only one application and permit shall be required for each parade or public gathering. 
    Should the permit so granted include a restriction or restrictions, said restriction(s) and the grounds for such restriction(s) shall be stated specifically on the face of the permit granted. Any person or group whose permit has been restricted shall be notified in writing of same and shall, in such writing, be informed of the grounds for such restriction(s) and the procedure for appeal of any restriction(s). Any such restrictions shall be based on a compelling interest in public health or safety and shall be narrowly tailored to meet that end. 
C.  Appeal From Restriction(s). Any person aggrieved by the restriction(s) placed upon a permit shall have the right to appeal the restriction at the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council. The city council shall act upon the appeal at such meeting. 
    In the event the activity for which such restricted permit has been granted is set to occur prior to the date of the next regularly scheduled meeting of the city council, the applicant shall have the option of: 
1.  Postponing the proposed activity until a date following the city council's next regularly scheduled meeting during which such appeal may be considered (said date to be identified in writing to the chief of police along with written notification to the chief of police that said activity has been postponed); or 
2.  Filing an emergency appeal to the city manager of the city, who shall act in the place of and with all powers delegated herein to the city council as appellate body; or 
3.  Proceeding with the proposed activity and, thereby, accepting such restriction(s) without waiving the right to appeal. 
D.  On appeal, the city council (or, if applicable as set out in subsection (C)(2)), the city manager shall review all applications so appealed de novo, and shall be empowered to determine and restrict the time and duration of the proposed activity, the number of units or automobiles to be involved, the number of persons who are to participate in such activities, and the streets or locations where such activities shall be allowed to the extent reasonably necessary to ensure the safety and health of the public. No distinction shall be made on the basis of the content of the message, the identification of the participants, or any other matter which does not directly and substantially impact public health and safety. Such de novo review shall include the power to eliminate, adopt or modify restrictions placed on any permit prior to said appeal. The appellate body shall enumerate in writing the grounds for any restrictions on the permit reviewed. 
E.  All activities under the permit granted shall be conducted under the supervision of the person designated on the permit application as the representative of the group applying for such permit, and shall be conducted in a peaceable and orderly manner in compliance with the permit restriction(s), if any, and the laws and ordinances of the city and the state of Georgia. 
F.  In the conduct of any such activities upon the sidewalks or streets of the city, persons engaged in such activities shall not position themselves or place signs, shields or banners so as to block any doorway, driveway or street intersection, and shall not interfere with the general flow of traffic, whether pedestrian or vehicular. 
G.  For the purposes of this section, a "parade" shall be and is defined as any procession, excepting funerals, and those involving government agencies acting within the scope of their governmental functions, containing twenty-five (25) or more persons or five or more vehicles in or upon any street in the city. 
H.  For the purposes of this section, the term "public gathering" shall be and is defined as any event involving eight or more people acting in concert and occupying a portion of the public streets, sidewalks, or Academy Springs Park. 
(Prior code § 20-1601) 
12.08.020 - Penalty. 
    A wilful, knowing violation of this chapter after notice may be subject to a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) which may be enforced by the contempt powers of the recorder's court of the city. No fine shall be assessed against any person who has not first received notice of Ordinance No. 1994-238, including the short notice provision. 
(Prior code § 20-1601.2) 
Chapter 12.12 - TREES AND SHRUBBERY 

12.12.010 - Trees, cutting or defacing. 
    It is unlawful for any person to cut, deface or destroy any shade tree on public property in the city unless authorized by the governing body. 
(Prior code § 14-36) 
12.12.020 - Trees, shrubberies, etc., obstructing vision of drivers motor vehicles-Declared nuisance. 
    Any person who plants, fixes or maintains any tree, shrubbery, or any other object upon any public or private property within the city adjacent to the intersection of any streets in the city, which obstructs the driving vision of the operator of any vehicle is declared to be guilty of committing a nuisance. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(3), § 1; Prior code § 20-1801) 
12.12.030 - Notice to owner to remove-Duty to comply. 
    Whenever the chief of police of the city, after investigation, shall determine that any tree, shrubbery or other object planted or fixed upon any public or private property in the city adjacent to a street intersection, obstructs the driving vision of the operators of vehicles passing over or through such street intersection, he shall cause to be served upon the owner or occupant of the property abutting such public property, or the owner of the property upon which such trees, shrubbery or other objects are planted or fixed in violation of this section, a written notice requiring such owner or occupant to remove such tree, shrubbery or other object, or to trim such tree or shrubbery or reduce the height and width of other objects so as to comply with the provisions of this section. The notice herein provided for shall be served upon the owner or occupant of the property herein described and shall require the owner to comply with the directions contained in the written notice, within fifteen (15) days after the service of the notice. Such notice may and can be served by placing a copy thereof at a conspicuous place upon the property abutting the public property, if the offending object be thereon, or upon the private property upon which the offending object may exist. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(3), § 2; Prior code § 20-1802) 
12.12.040 - Appeal. 
    The owner of any property affected by the directions of the above notice can within the time specified in such notice appeal to the governing body of the city and until the governing body shall act upon such appeal, the appellant shall not be required to comply with the notice. 
(Prior code § 20-1803) 
12.12.050 - Failure of owner to comply with notice-Removal or abatement by city. 
    If after the service of the notice as provided in Section 12.12.030, the owner does not comply with the directions contained in the notice within the time specified, if the traffic hazard can be removed by the trimming of trees or shrubbery, the city shall trim such trees or shrubbery to such dimensions as to relieve and terminate such traffic hazard. Should it become necessary in order to relieve such traffic hazard to remove trees or shrubbery or other objects, such removal shall be made by the city. 
(Prior code § 20-1804) 
12.12.060 - Sections 12.12.020 to 12.12.050 not to prohibit the erection or maintenance of buildings. 
    Nothing contained in Sections 12.12.010 through 12.12.050 shall prohibit the owner of any property from erecting or maintaining the buildings or structures as permitted by any laws or ordinances of the city. 
(Prior code § 20-1805) 
Chapter 12.16 - MISCELLANEOUS REGULATIONS 

12.16.010 - Spitting upon sidewalk. 
    All persons are forbidden to spit upon any paved sidewalk in the corporate limits of the city. 
(Prior code § 12-3) 
12.16.020 - Advertising on light poles, etc. 
    No bills, cards, written or printed notices, shall be placed on tree boxes or electric light poles on the streets and parks nor on power poles within or without the city. It is unlawful for any person to cut or otherwise deface said tree boxes or any of the trees on said streets. 
(Prior code § 14-1) 
12.16.030 - Removing dirt, materials, etc., from public property. 
    It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to move, disturb, or take any earth, stone or other material from any public property. 
(Prior code § 14-33) 
12.16.040 - Disposing of liquids on streets and sidewalks. 
    No occupant of any lot shall throw or discharge, or permit to be thrown or discharged, from his premises, any water or wet substance, so as to put any of the streets, lanes, or alleys, in bad order. However, any such person may get permission from the committee on streets, and may, under their direction, construct a drain or hollow pavement for such water or wet substance to pass off. 
(Prior code § 17-4) 
12.16.050 - Downspouts and drains of water on sidewalks. 
    In all cases where water falls upon the sidewalks from the roof of any building or shelter attached thereto, it shall be the duty of the owner thereof to prevent the same by attaching sufficient guttering, or gutter pipe, to such building, and to conduct the water to the outer edge of adjoining sidewalk, by sufficient sewer pipe, laid below the surface of the sidewalk, and to keep such guttering and sewer pipe in good order. 
(Prior code § 17-5) 
Chapter 12.20 - PARKS 

12.20.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases used in this chapter shall have the meaning hereinafter designated: 
    "Academy Springs Park" means that municipal park located in the southeast quadrant of the city of Covington, Georgia, bounded on the north by the southern right-of-way of Conyers Street; on the east and on the south by the western and northern right-of-way of Park Circle; and on the west by the eastern right-of-way of Legion Drive, including all improvements, buildings and structures therein. 
    "City parks and recreation facilities" mean and include: 
Academy Springs Park; 
Baker Field; 
Conyers Street Gym; 
Chimney Park; 
City Pond Park; 
Judicial Building Park; 
Old Cousins Gym; 
Pactiv Field; 
Rota-Dyne; 
South Street Park; 
Spillers Park; 
Nelson Heights Community Center; 
Trailblazers Park; 
Turner Lake Park. 
    "Designated parking areas" means only the areas and parking lots within the park designated for automobile parking and such future areas as may be cleared and provided by the city of Covington and designated as a parking area. 
    "Park Circle" means that municipal street and the shoulders thereof maintained as such that begins at the southern right-of-way of Conyers Street across from the southern end of Smith Street and runs in a southerly direction, thence curving and running in a westerly direction to the eastern side of the right-of-way of Legion Drive in Covington, Georgia. 
    "Park hours" means daily from eight a.m., until eleven p.m., and at other times only during a permitted park activity. 
    "Permitted park activity" means any activity or use of the park in conjunction with either the Lions Pavilion therein or the Boy Scout Hut therein for which a permit has been issued by either the Covington Lions Club or the Covington Boy Scouts of America in conjunction with the use of their respective facilities. 
(Ord. dated 2/18/13, § 1) 
12.20.020 - Establishment of park hours and designated parking areas. 
A.  The park hours, as herein defined, are specified as the only hours that the park shall be used by the public and, accordingly, the use or otherwise being in the park at any time other than during park hours is explicitly prohibited and violation of this provision shall constitute a violation of a municipal ordinance punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code. Nothing contained herein, however, shall preclude a person or persons from being in the park for a permitted park activity or when escorted by a member of the Covington police department or Newton County Sheriff's Department for the purpose of conducting an official inspection or investigation of a condition in the park or any improvements therein. 
B.  The parking, leaving unattended or abandonment of any motorized vehicle, including automobiles, trucks, motorcycles or similar vehicles, on Park Circle or in the park at any place other than at designated parking areas and in a designated parking space is expressly prohibited and a violation of this provision shall be punishable in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 14-62) 
12.20.030 - Tobacco-free parks and recreation facilities. 
A.  It shall be unlawful for any person to use tobacco in any form, including without limitation cigarettes, cigars, pipes, E-cigarettes or smokeless tobacco in any part of a city park or recreation facility. 
B.  The city will assist the Newton County Recreation Commission in the installation and maintenance of appropriate signage notifying the public of the restrictions on the use of city parks and recreation facilities set forth in paragraph A. of this section. 
C.  The city, in conjunction with the Newton County Recreation Commission, will promote the use of the QuitLine, a free service offered by the Georgia Department of Community Health. 
D.  Violations of this section shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 2/18/13, § 2) 
Chapter 12.24 - CEMETERIES 

12.24.010 - Cemetery construction requirements. 
    Borders, walls or other such structures added for improvement of cemetery lots shall be constructed of stone, brick or masonry stucco, limited in height to not more than thirty (30) inches and situated so as not to impede pedestrian access to adjacent cemetery lots. 
(Ord. dated 10/6/14(1), § 1) 
12.24.020 - Construction plan approval. 
    Plans for such structures, mausoleums or columbariums to be constructed on city cemetery lots shall be submitted to the city planning and zoning department for review and approval prior to commencement of construction thereof. 
(Ord. dated 10/6/14(1), § 1) 
Title 13 - PUBLIC SERVICES 
Chapter 13.04 - UTILITY SYSTEMS GENERALLY 

13.04.010 - "System" construed. 
    The term "system" includes all real and personal property used for the production, treatment and distribution of electricity, water, gas and like utilities. 
(Prior code § 22-1) 
13.04.020 - Title, composition, separate financial entities. 
    The public utility systems shall be known as the water, gas and light departments, and shall be composed of the electric, water and gas systems and any additions that may be added thereto from time to time. 
    Each of these systems is a separate financial entity and shall be operated separately under the control of the governing authority and all payments due for utility services shall be paid into the city treasury. 
(Prior code § 22-2) 
13.04.030 - Utilities committees, appointment. 
    The mayor shall appoint three members of the governing authority who together with the mayor shall advise the governing authority as to all matters pertaining to the activities of their assigned utility system. There shall be a committee appointed for each of the utility systems. 
(Prior code § 22-3) 
13.04.040 - Departmental superintendents-Jurisdiction. 
    The superintendent for the water, gas and light departments shall be the head and executive officer of the department, and shall have jurisdiction over all persons employed therein. 
(Prior code § 22-4) 
13.04.050 - Departmental superintendents-Rules and regulations, authority to promulgate. 
    In matters not covered by this code or any ordinances the superintendents of the water, gas and light departments shall have the authority, subject to the approval of the governing authority, to prescribe rules and regulations governing the use of utilities furnished by the city. It shall be the duty of the superintendents to enforce or cause to be enforced this chapter, all ordinances, rules and regulations governing the sale of water, gas and electricity, and the operation, maintenance and improvement of these systems. 
(Prior code § 22-5) 
13.04.060 - Departmental superintendents-Salaries. 
    The superintendents of the water, gas and light departments shall be paid such salary as may be fixed by the governing authority prior to appointment of his office. 
(Prior code § 22-6) 
13.04.070 - Meters-Required, furnished, and installed by departments. 
    The city will furnish water, gas and electricity through meters only; said meters to be furnished and installed by the water, gas and light departments. 
(Prior code § 22-7) 
13.04.080 - Meters-Procedure when failure to register properly. 
    In the event that the meters installed by the city fail to register properly during any period, the bill will be estimated by the city from readings for a like billing period or periods. 
(Prior code § 22-8) 
13.04.090 - Equipment, property of city-Seals required-Responsibility for maintenance of seals-Discontinuance of service where seals found broken-Reconnection fees and charges where seals found to be broken-Unlawful tampering-Accessibility. 
A.  All meters, valves, pipes, fittings, transformers, regulators, wires, etc, furnished by the city and installed on or over private property shall remain the property of the city. The city shall have access to its meters at all reasonable hours. Should the customer through the enlargement of a building or the closing off, in any manner, of the area where the meter is installed, make it not readily accessible, then the said customer shall be required to bear the cost of relocating the meter. 
B.  All electric meters furnished to electricity customers of the city shall be sealed by the city utility department. In the event such seal is broken in the normal course of business and/or maintenance of said meter by employees of the city, said seal shall be immediately replaced upon such meter at the time said city employees leave the premises of the customer. 
C.  The maintenance of said seals on the electric meters of the city shall be the sole responsibility of the customer. In the event that the seal on any meter furnished by the city to any customer is found to be broken, service to such customer shall, upon ten (10) days' written notice to the customer, be immediately discontinued. The city manager shall have the authority to waiver the requirement of discontinuance in situations where he is able to determine on the basis of proper evidence, that the seal on such customer's meter was broken through no fault of the customer. 
D.  In the event that service to a customer is discontinued under the provisions of this section, service shall be reconnected to such customer only upon payment of reconnection fees as follows: 
1.  To industrial electric customers of the city, the reconnection charge shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00); 
2.  To electric customers other than industrial electric customers of the city, the reconnection charge shall be seventy-five dollars ($75.00). 
E.  It is unlawful for any person other than employees of the electric department of the city to handle in any manner any of the meters or equipment owned by the city. 
(Prior code § 22-9) 
13.04.100 - Credit regulations-Application for service. 
    Each prospective customer desiring utility service must make application for the same in accordance with the provisions of this section and on such forms and pursuant to such further regulations as may be promulgated by the public utilities department of the city. A cash deposit in an amount equal to a multiple of the average monthly bill for the applicable utility or utilities, such multiple to be determined according to the applicant's reported credit history, shall be required of the applicant to guarantee payment of utility bills and the protection of the city's property installed on the applicant's premises. The city reserves the right to require that the original deposit be increased whenever, in the judgment of the city, such increase becomes necessary for the city's full protection. 
    The city will issue to the customer a receipt covering the amount of the deposit. When service is discontinued, the amount of the deposit less the amount of damages if any, to the property of the city on the customer's premises, will be credited on the final bill to the customer. 
    The receipt of deposit cannot be assigned by the customer without the written consent of the city. 
    Application for service will not be accepted by the city until the applicant has paid to the city all sums at any time owing and then unpaid by him for utility services rendered by the city for any purpose, whether at these or at any other premises. 
    Any residential customer who has received utility service at the same location for twenty-four (24) months and who has paid his monthly utility bills promptly and regularly, and is not, at the end of that period, delinquent in the payment of such utility bills, shall be automatically refunded the cash deposit required by this section within thirty (30) days next following the end of said twenty-four-month period. 
(Ord. dated 5/6/02; prior code § 22-10; Ord. dated 6/17/13, § 1) 
13.04.105 - Security deposit rates. 
    The security deposits required for residential service pursuant to the provisions of Section 13.04.100 hereof shall be calculated on the basis of the following rate guidelines, based upon the applicant's reported credit history: 
Indicated Deposit Category Deposit Amount No deposit None Minimum Average monthly bill for year immediately preceding application, not to exceed $200.00 Extra Double average monthly bill for year immediately preceding application, not to exceed $300.00 Maximum Triple average monthly bill for year immediately preceding application, not to exceed $400.00  
    Where no Social Security identification is available from applicant, the maximum deposit category shall apply. 
    Where no credit score is available for the applicant, the minimum deposit category shall apply. 
    Where there is no service usage record available for the applicant's address, the maximum deposit category for all services shall apply. 
    Where there is no service usage record available for the applicant's address, two-thirds of the extra deposit category for either gas or electric, with water and sewer shall apply. 
    Where there is no service usage record available for the applicant's address, one-third of the minimum deposit category for either gas or electric, with no water or sewer shall apply. 
    In the event that the report of applicant's credit history from a credit reporting agency indicates the requirement of the maximum deposit amount, the applicant may tender a two-year satisfactory payment record from a previous utility service provider in order to qualify for the minimum deposit category amount. 
    The foregoing deposit rate guidelines shall also apply to commercial service applicants, except that there shall be not maximum deposit amount applicable for the maximum deposit category. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(1), § 1) 
13.04.110 - Meter reading and billing, dates payment due and delinquent, penalty and discontinuance of service for nonpayment-Reconnections-Responsibility of utility customer to provide adequate means for receipt of bill. 
A.  Meters shall be read at intervals of approximately one month and bills mailed as soon thereafter as is practicable. The charges which shall be for service up to the meter reading immediately preceding the mailing of the bill, shall be payable within twenty (20) days from the mailing of the bill. Should the charges for any utility service not be paid within twenty (20) days from the mailing of the bill, the same shall include a late fee in the amount of ten (10) percent of the amount originally billed. United States post office postmarks will be accepted as the payment date on receipts by mail. Whenever the final date of the net bill falls on a Sunday or legal holiday, the accrual of a ten (10) percent late fee shall be postponed one day. 
B.  Upon the thirty-fifth (35th) day from the mailing of the bill for utility service, if same shall remain unpaid, it shall be declared delinquent. As soon as practicable thereafter, service shall be discontinued. After service has been discontinued for nonpayment of a bill, such service shall not be reconnected until all arrears, in addition to a reconnect fee in the amount of thirty dollars ($30.00), have been paid. In the event the customer requests a service reconnection after normal business hours and service is reconnected after normal business hours, such service shall not be reconnected until an additional after-hours reconnect fee in the amount of thirty-five dollars ($35.00), has been paid. Any delinquent cutoff which is not reconnected within thirty (30) days from the date of cutoff shall be considered as a seasonal cutoff and any seasonal charges applicable shall be applied in addition to delinquent fees. 
C.  Anything herein contained to the contrary notwithstanding, a customer's utility service shall not be terminated for nonpayment, without the customer first having an opportunity for a fair hearing of any and all disputes or allegations that the customer may have concerning the propriety or accuracy of the charges by the city for such services. The city manager is designated as the representative of the city for the purpose of hearing and determining all disputes concerning the propriety of utility bills that a customer may question or dispute. A utility customer is entitled to a hearing of his allegations of impropriety or incorrectness of a billing by filing with the city manager (or his designee as hereinafter provided) at city hall a written notice of such dispute and the customer's evidence and contentions concerning same. Upon receipt of a written notice in accordance with the provisions of the foregoing sentence, the city manager or his designee shall apprise the customer in question that a hearing will be held on the customer's contentions on a date certain, at least three days subsequent to the date notice of such hearing is given to the customer involved, at which time the customer shall present all evidence and contentions concerning the billing involved. The city manager or his designee may extend the hearing as so set for cause shown. If the person hearing the customer's dispute determines that the customer's contentions are without merit, then the utility services of that customer may be terminated for nonpayment as hereinbefore provided and without further notice to the customer. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall require the city to reinstate utility services once same are terminated if the complaining customer does not file written notice of a disputed account with the city prior to the delinquency cut-off date specified in the immediately preceding paragraph. Further, nothing contained in this paragraph shall be deemed to prohibit the city manager's right to delegate his authority for the conducting of the hearings on disputed accounts under this section as such right of delegation may otherwise appear in the charter of the city. All utility bills for the city shall contain a notation to the effect that the city manager should be contacted at city hall concerning any disputed billings or charges and that otherwise, service will be disconnected and a reconnection fee charged if a utility bill is not paid within fifteen (15) days after due date of any unpaid billing. 
D.  It is the responsibility of each customer for utility services or any other city service including, but not limited to, garbage pickup and cable television service provided by the city to provide a correct mailing address and adequate means (whether by mail receptacle or delivery to an agent for the customer) to receive such bills mailed by the city to the customer via the United States Postal Service. The city shall have no responsibility to deliver such billings to a customer where the customer fails to provide an adequate mail receptacle or an appropriate mailing address to ensure the delivery of such billings from the city. Any city service billing that cannot be delivered by the United States Postal Service to the customer in whose name the bill appears (or their designated agent) which results in the city's having to make arrangements for personal delivery of a billing or notice of the billing to such customer, shall be subject to the imposition of a service fee of ten dollars ($10.00) for each such personal delivery of a bill or notice thereof. The aforesaid ten dollar ($10.00) service fee, if assessed by the city, shall be due at the same time and under the same circumstances as the bill for which the service fee applies. Nothing contained herein, however, shall be deemed to create an obligation on the city to require personal delivery of any service bill for services provided by the city that cannot otherwise be delivered by the United States Postal Service, but the city is expressly excused from such effort; however, if the city elects to provide personal delivery or notice of any service bill provided for hereunder to a customer, then the city may impose such ten dollar ($10.00) service fee to offset the cost of such personal delivery. 
(Prior code § 22-11) 
(Ord. dated 4/5/10, §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 9-6-11, § 1; Ord. dated 8/15/16(1), § 1) 
13.04.120 - Charge for service connection, when made. 
    There shall be no charge for service connections made during regular working hours. 
(Prior code § 22-12) 
13.04.130 - Rate schedules subject to change without notice. 
    The rates schedules hereinafter specified are subject to review and change by the governing authority without notice to the user. 
(Prior code § 22-13) 
13.04.140 - Work on streets or private property, responsibility for protection of utility pipes, cables or equipment, public liability and property damage. 
    Any person or contractor doing work of any nature within the right-of-way of city streets or roadways or on private property shall be held responsible for the protection of all water pipes, gas pipes, underground cables, meters and other equipment which are the property of the city. If it becomes necessary for the city to protect, move, or replace any equipment because of such work then the cost shall be charged to and paid by the person or contractor responsible. Such person or contractor shall also hold the city harmless with reference to any public liability or property damage resulting from such activity. 
(Prior code § 22-14) 
13.04.150 - Application of rules and regulations. 
    All rules and regulations not specified as inside or outside the city limits shall apply to the entire utility system or systems. 
(Prior code § 22-15) 
13.04.160 - Violations, discontinuance of service until corrected. 
    Upon the discovery of the violation of any provision of this code or any ordinance regulating the use of utilities or any rule adopted by the governing authority for utility operation, it shall be the duty of the superintendent to discontinue utility service to the person guilty of the violation until such violation is corrected and any charges connected therewith paid. 
(Prior code § 22-16) 
13.04.170 - Penalty for violation of chapter provisions. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this title, other than the nonpayment of bills for utility service, which nonpayment shall be handled in the authorized and usual commercial practice, shall upon conviction therefor by the recorder or mayor in the recorder's court of the city, be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 22-17) 
13.04.180 - Procedure for termination of utility services. 
    Except as expressly provided in Section 13.04.110, no utility service of any customer shall be terminated by the city for any reason given in this title, except in accordance with the following provisions: 
    When the city feels that it has just cause for the suspension or termination of any utility service to a customer, written notice shall be given to said customer by hand delivery to the customer or by United States first class mail to the address indicated in the files of the city for utility billing purposes. Said notice shall specify that the city intends to discontinue certain utility services to the person so notified, the services sought to be discontinued, the reason or reasons for discontinuing of such services, the date on which the city intends to discontinue such services, and shall notify the customer of the customer's opportunity for a fair hearing of any and all disputes or allegations that the customer may have concerning the propriety or accuracy of the reason or reasons for discontinuing such services. The city manager is designated as the representative of the city for the purpose of hearing and determining all disputes concerning the propriety of discontinuing of services that a customer may question or dispute. A utility customer is entitled to a hearing of his allegations of impropriety or incorrectness of discontinuing of such services by filing with the city manager (or his designee as hereinafter provided) at city hall a written notice of such dispute and the customer's evidence and contentions concerning same. Upon receipt of a written notice in accordance with the provisions of the foregoing sentence, the city manager or his designee shall apprise the customer in question that a hearing will be held on the customer's contentions on a date certain, at least three days subsequent to the date notice of such hearing is given to the customer involved, at which time the customer shall present all evidence and contentions concerning the customer's objection to the reason or reasons for discontinuing such services. The city manager or his designee may extend the hearing as so set for cause shown. If the person receiving notice of proposed suspension or termination of utility service, as specified in the preceding subparagraph, does not appear in person or by his designated agent at the hearing scheduled by the city for the purpose of determining whether or not a customer's utility service or services should be suspended or terminated, or if after such hearing is conducted, the person hearing the subject matter determines that the customer has violated the provisions of this title of the city or that the city otherwise has just cause for suspending or terminating the said customer's utility service or services, then and thereafter, the utility service or services of such customer shall be promptly suspended or terminated. Nothing contained in this paragraph shall require the city to reinstate utility services once same are terminated if the complaining customer does not file written notice of a dispute with the city prior to the date of intended discontinuation of service specified in the notice to the customer. Further, nothing contained in this paragraph shall be deemed to prohibit the city manager's right to delegate his authority for the conducting of the hearings under this section as such right of delegation may otherwise appear in the charter of the city. 
(Prior code § 22-18) 
(Ord. dated 9/6/11, § 2) 
13.04.190 - Application of the City of Covington's Utilities Specification Handbook. 
    Anything contained in this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, the City of Covington's Utilities Specifications Handbook (hereinafter called Utilities Handbook), shall apply to all utility systems governed by this chapter. Accordingly, the Utilities Handbook is adopted as a part of this chapter by reference for the purpose of acknowledging possible additions or variations in the other provisions of this chapter. In the event of any direct conflicts between the Utilities Handbook and any other provisions of this of this code, the Utilities Handbook shall control. 
(Prior code § 22-19) 
Chapter 13.08 - ELECTRIC SYSTEM 
Article 1 - Generally 

13.08.010 - Application for service-Terms of contract. 
    Each person or corporation desiring to become a customer for electric service supplied by the city shall make application for service, either in person or by duly authorized agent, upon the city's regular forms. The application will not be accepted by the city unless all the conditions and provisions of this chapter are complied with. When the application is accepted by the city, it constitutes a contract and becomes operative on the day the customer is connected to the city's system. Unless otherwise specified, such contract is for the term of one year, and shall be considered renewed from term to term of like duration thereafter unless written notice to the contrary is given by either party to the other at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration of the contract or any renewal thereof. 
(Prior code § 22-21) 
13.08.020 - Rates, choice of-Responsibility of consumer, of city. 
A.  When two or more rates are available for certain classes of service, the conditions under which each is applicable to the requirements of the individual customer are plainly set forth in the city's published rate schedules. The choice of such rates lies with the customer. In the special case of multiple unit dwellings, standard practice requires that each separate unit be separately metered at the regular residential service rate. However, in those cases where the provision of a separately metered circuit to each separate dwelling unit is impracticable, all service may be supplied through a single meter at the multiple residential service rate. Combined service so rendered shall not be sub-metered to the individual tenant. The multiple residential rate is the only rate applicable to two or more separate dwelling units served through a single meter, except as otherwise provided under the general service rate. 
B.  The city will at any time upon request advise any customer as to the rate best adapted to existing or anticipated service requirements as defined by the customer, but the city does not assume responsibility for the selection of such rate or for the continuance of the lowest annual cost under the rate selected should the volume or character of service change. 
C.  A customer, having selected a rate adapted to his service, may not change to another rate within a twelve (12) month period unless there is a substantial change in the character or conditions of his service. A new customer will be given reasonable opportunity to determine his service requirements before definitely selecting the most favorable rate therefor. 
(Prior code § 22-22) 
13.08.030 - Exclusive right of service. 
A.  All electric current required or used for any purpose at any time during the term of the contract for service, or any renewal thereof, in or upon the customer's premises, and all extensions and enlargements thereof, shall be taken by the customer from the city, provided that the city is at the time able to supply the same, except only in those cases where special contracts are made for breakdown service or limited service under the rates prescribed for that particular type of service. 
B.  Electric service will not be supplied in competition with the city's service, either wholesale or retail, or for distribution or supply or resale in any territory occupied by the distribution system of the city or proposed to be occupied by the distribution system of the city. 
    Such service as is supplied under the contract is for the customer's use within or upon his premises and for the purposes designated in the application. The customer shall not extend service from one location to another by crossing rights-of-way or public streets, roads, alleys or property owned by others. The customer shall not supply electrical energy to anyone else or allow anyone to take same, nor shall he use or permit same to be used at any other premises or for any other purposes (either directly or indirectly by transformation or regeneration) than those designated in the application. Where the customer's service requirements indicate that modification of the above rule is reasonable, then such modification may be made by the proper city official upon application. 
(Prior code § 22-23) 
13.08.040 - Enlarged facilities, change of location, cost. 
    Increased service requirements shall be supplied, when practicable, through the existing service facilities. When enlarged service facilities are required, but no change in location is involved, the city will provide such facilities as required by the character of service and the applicable rate schedule, without cost to the customer up to three and one-half times the estimated new annual revenue to be received. When a change in location only is involved, the entire expense shall be borne by the party requesting such change. When both enlarged service facilities and change in location are involved, the costs shall be shared by the two parties as provided above. In all cases the customer shall make, at his own expense, all changes to his wiring, and provide those enclosures and metering connections on his premises that are required for the enlargement of, or change in the location of the metering equipment. The customer shall give reasonable advance notice to the city of additions of electrical equipment which affect the connected load under contract to the end that the city will have ample time to provide adequate service facilities. 
(Prior code § 22-24) 
13.08.050 - Suspension of service. 
    The city reserves the right to suspend service to any customer, without notice and without terminating the agreement for service, when in the opinion of the city the instruments, contrivances, and/or appliances used in conducting, supplying, measuring, or registering electricity on the customer's premises are altered, and/or changed in any way as to cause such instruments, contrivances, and/or appliances to destroy and/or prevent the registration of the service received, or if for any other reason in the opinion of the city the customer is receiving or about to receive the benefit of service without compensation to the city for the full amount of service rendered. The city shall not be required to restore service after suspension in accordance with this rule until the customer has complied with all reasonable rules of the city designed to prevent a recurrence and the city has been reimbursed for the full amount of the service rendered. 
(Prior code § 22-25) 
13.08.060 - Ingress, egress to premises, required. 
A.  Permission for ingress and egress to and from the customer's premises shall be provided at reasonable times by the customer to enable the properly identified employees of the city to read meters, install, maintain, and remove the city's property, located thereon. 
B.  The wiring and electrical equipment in or upon the premises of the customer to the point of service cut-in, must have the approval of the constituted authority of the municipal government, and must conform to the requirements of the National Electric Code and the service regulations of the city, before it can be connected to the system. 
(Prior code § 22-26) 
13.08.070 - Service cut-in, location-Support, etc. 
    The location of the service cut-in shall be determined by agreement with a representative of the city, and must conform to the service regulations of the city. The customer shall provide suitable means of supporting service wires to his building which will provide the minimum ground clearances and give adequate clearance over driveways and other obstructions as provided by Part II of the National Electric Safety Code. In no case will the city build without cost to the applicant more service line than is necessary to reach a cut-in point satisfactory to the city, even though the additional line would still fall within the free allowance as hereinafter defined. 
(Prior code § 22-27) 
13.08.080 - Payments for service. 
    Payments for any service rendered by inspectors, agents, or employees of the city shall be made only upon presentation of formal statement by the city. 
(Prior code § 22-28) 
13.08.090 - Damage to property responsibility. 
A.  All property of the city that is placed in or upon the customer's premises, and used in supplying service to him, is placed there under his protection. The cost for any loss or damage to such property, normal wear and tear excepted, shall be payable by the customer. 
B.  Neither the customer nor the city shall be responsible for damage to the machinery, apparatus, appliances, or other property of the other caused by lightning or by defects in or failure of the machinery, apparatus or appliances of the one suffering such damage from such causes; and the city shall not be in any way responsible for the transmission or control of said electrical energy beyond the point of connection to the customer's premises, and shall not be liable for damages on account of injuries to person or property resulting in any manner from the receiving, use or application by the customer of such electrical energy. The customer must agree to keep his, her or its machinery, lines, apparatus and appliances in a safe condition and shall indemnify and save harmless the city from the payment of any sum or sums of money to any person whomsoever, including attorney's fees and court costs, which it may be called upon to pay on account of damage to property or fatal or personal injuries to individuals resulting from or which may be in any way caused by the operation and maintenance of the machinery, lines, apparatus and appliances belonging to the customer. 
(Prior code § 22-29) 
13.08.100 - Corrective apparatus, when required. 
    Neon fluorescent, or other types of lighting equipment haying similar low power factor characteristics, where the customer's aggregate connected load of this type exceeds two hundred fifty (250) watts, shall be equipped, either individually or as a group, with corrective apparatus to increase the power factor of such equipment to at least ninety (90) percent lagging. 
(Prior code § 22-30) 
13.08.110 - Voltage load regulations. 
A.  The responsibility for providing unusually close voltage regulation, where required by the nature of the customer's load, shall rest with the customer. 
B.  The load of any three phase service shall be reasonably balanced between phases by the customer. 
C.  Standard secondary voltages which will be provided by the city under the appropriate conditions are: 
1.  From overhead retail distribution lines: 
115 volts, single phase, two wire; 
115/230 volts, single phase, three wire; 
115/230 or 120/208 volts, three phase, four wire. 
    Only for loads of 100 kW demand or more: 
460 volts, three phase, three wire; 
266/460 volts, three phase, four wire. 
2.  From underground retail distribution lines: 
120 volts, single phase, two wire; 
120/208 volts, three phase, four wire. 
    Only for loads of 600 kW demand or more: 
266/460 volts, three phase, four wire. 
(Prior code § 22-31) 
13.08.120 - Easements. 
A.  The city's regular easement form shall be executed by the applicant to cover any portion of a line extension to be built by the city over private property of the applicant, before the city shall be required to begin construction on any part of such line extension. 
B.  The city shall not be required to build any portion of a line extension across the private property of one person to serve another, unless both parties desire service from the extension, or, in the opinion of the city, the best interests of all parties are served thereby. In this latter event, subsection A of this section shall apply to the same extent as though the property owner and the applicant were the same party. 
(Prior code § 22-32) 
13.08.130 - Extensions, regulations of. 
A.  The city reserves the right to refuse to build any extension, even with contribution from the applicant as provided in this chapter, when, in the opinion of the city, the revenue to be derived therefrom is insufficient to cover maintenance and operating expenses thereon. The city further reserves the right to refuse to build any extension into territory generally recognized as being within the area served by an-other electric system; nor shall the city be required to render service within its service area for transmission into, and ultimate use within, territory generally recognized as being within the area served by another electric system. 
B.  All line extensions, service wires and connections, no matter who pays or contributes toward paying the cost thereof, are to be made by the city and remain the property of the city. The city shall not be required to serve any customer over a line built, owned, operated and maintained by the customer or a third party. The sole exception to this general rule applies to an underground service connection from an overhead line, which shall be provided, owned, operated and maintained by the customer. 
(Prior code § 22-33) 
13.08.140 - Exception to chapter. 
    Whenever it is necessary for the city to secure a priority rating from an agency of the federal government in order to obtain supplies and materials required in constructing a line extension or providing a new or enlarged service connection, or to replace stock charged out for such purpose, these rules and regulations, where they bind the city to make line extensions or to provide service under certain specified conditions, shall be suspended. In such case, all applications for service involving construction or new equipment will be taken only on a tentative basis subject to the delivery of the necessary materials. 
(Prior code § 22-34) 
Article 2 - Retail Distribution Line Extension and Service Connection Regulations 

13.08.150 - Definitions. 
    For purposes of these regulations, an existing overhead retail distribution line is defined as any pole line carrying primary and/or secondary circuits of twenty-five thousand (25,000) volts or less, nominal rating, or a similar line operating at twenty-five thousand (25,000) volts or less, provided such line is not serving as a transmission or wholesale distribution line. A single phase line shall not be considered as an existing retail distribution line in the case of application for three phase service, but in such case "existing overhead retail distribution line" shall be interpreted to mean the nearest available three phase line which meets the above definition. Urban lines are defined as those lines lying within the corporate limits of communities having a population of one thousand (1,000) or more. Rural lines are defined as all lines not embraced within the above definition of urban lines. 
(Ord. dated 10/2/06 § 1; prior code § 22-37) 
13.08.160 - Installation of equipment-Extension of lines, cost. 
A.  Upon receipt and acceptance of the application for service as provided in Article 1 of this chapter, the city will proceed to do such work and to provide and install such equipment as it may be required to do in order to render the service, including the extension of an existing line when necessary, as determined by the location and character of the service and the terms of the rate schedule to be applied; but the city shall not be required to so expend three and one-half more times than the estimated annual revenue to be derived from the service. Should the net cost of the job exceed three and one-half times the estimated annual revenue, the service may nevertheless be provided (in most instances) upon contribution by the applicant of such excess. 
B.  Extensions from existing overhead retail distribution lines to supply new customers single phase service may be made upon a footage basis, if such basis is more advantageous to the applicant or applicants than the revenue ratio basis. Should such basis be elected, then the city will extend such line an average of four hundred (400) feet per equivalent customer, but not to exceed an average of one-thousand-fifty-six (1,056) feet per actual customer, exclusive of service cut-ins, and provide service without charge. Should the required extension exceed in length such free allowance, the extension may nevertheless be made (in most instances) upon contribution by the applicant or applicants of the pro rata part of the line cost of the job represented by such excess. 
(Prior code § 22-38) 
13.08.180 - Estimated revenue, determination of. 
    Estimated revenues shall be determined on the basis of anticipated use by the particular customer involved and the existing applicable rate schedule. In no case will revenue be credited to a job or line extension from any customer who could be served without undertaking the job or making the extension. 
(Prior code § 22-40) 
13.08.190 - Cost, items of. 
    Net cost of the job shall include all charges thereto for materials, labor and overheads, in furnishing and erecting poles, towers, cross arms and fixtures, stringing wire, making service connections, providing transformation and metering equipment, etc., in accordance with Section 13.08.160 less credits for salvage, if any. Line cost includes only those items pertaining to the line extension itself, omitting service connections, transformers and meters. 
(Prior code § 22-41) 
13.08.200 - Method of service, determination to be made by city. 
A.  Applications for service to a load drawing an inrush current in excess of the limits specified: (a) in the case of residential service, the residential rate schedule or (b) in the case of other classes of service, the booklet entitled "Electric Service and Metering Installations"; or applications for three phase service shall be given special consideration by the city to determine the most economical method of serving the load, taking into account the availability of supply lines, the nature and location of the load to be served and its effect upon service rendered to neighboring customers, the relative merits of providing single or three phase service, and other factors of weight in reaching a decision. Such decision shall rest solely with the city, but should the applicant desire service of a different type or rendered in a different manner, service may be so supplied, at the option of the city, provided the applicant contributes, in addition to his contribution toward receiving service (if any), the increased cost occasioned thereby. In any event, should three phases need to be supplied to a single motor of less than five HP, or to an aggregate motor load of less than fifteen (15) HP, it shall be contingent upon the applicant signing the three phase clause releasing the city from the obligation of providing three phase service for the same motor load at any other location. 
B.  Application for commercial power service requiring excessive capacity because of large momentary current requirements, or to provide unusually close voltage regulation (transformer type welders, X-ray machines, etc.) shall be given special consideration by the city to determine the most economical method of serving the load without causing objectionable voltage fluctuations. It may or may not be necessary to isolate such load from other services by providing a separate transformer and separate connection to the primary circuit, but the surcharge provided in the rate schedule shall apply whether or not such separate connection is actually made. Such surcharge covers the excess capacity required by the customer and in no case is to be determined by the equipment or capacity actually installed by the city at the time service of this type is initiated. 
(Prior code § 22-42) 
13.08.210 - Underground distribution system, cost of extension and for connection. 
    Where the city can readily provide overhead electric service, but the applicant requests that underground service be provided instead the city can, subject to its evaluation and discretion, provide underground service in accordance with the following: 
A.  For subdivisions, condominiums, apartments or other multiple occupant developments, the applicant shall pay to the city the full estimated cost of underground facilities prior to the start of construction of such facilities. Where site conditions result in unforeseen additional cost to the city, the applicant shall reimburse the city for such additional cost. 
B.  For individual properties, not part of a subdivision, the applicant shall pay the city a charge equal to the cost of providing facilities at each end of the underground service line plus a per foot charge equal to the city's cost of the service line and its installation. 
C.  Privately owned secondary voltage service lines may be provided and maintained by the applicant at its expense and be terminated upon the city's pole or other facility, as designated by the city. 
D.  Where the city does not have overhead lines within four hundred (400) feet of the requested underground connection that could serve as the source of power for the underground system and additional overhead or underground lines of adequate capacity must be extended, the applicant shall be required to pay the city's cost of such extension. 
(Ord. dated 10/2/06 § 3) 
13.08.220 - Prerequisites to construction of extensions. 
    The city shall not be required to begin construction on any extension of its retail distribution lines until signed service contracts have been obtained covering the business upon which the estimated revenue is based, nor until at least seventy-five (75) percent of the signed customers have either wired their premises to permit the utilization of the service contracted for or have executed bona fide contracts covering such wiring. 
(Prior code § 22-44) 
13.08.240 - Temporary service, regulation of. 
    The foregoing extension and connection regulations do not apply to temporary service. Temporary service includes all classes of service required by the applicant for a single continuous period of less than one year. All extensions and connections for a temporary service shall be made in accordance with the following: 
A.  When temporary service is desired at premises which are already wired and connected to the retail distribution system, and the city has no expense in establishing service other than the installation of the necessary metering equipment, no connection charge will be made. 
B.  In case the provision of temporary service involves cost for labor and material other than the meter installation, the applicant shall pay in advance the total estimated cost of establishing and dismantling the service facilities, less salvage value of the material used. 
(Prior code § 22-46) 
13.08.250 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. dated April 2, 2018, § 1, repealed § 13.08.250, which pertained to security lighting and derived from prior code § 22-47. 
Article 3 - Schedules 

13.08.260 - Commercial time of use service. 
A.  Availability. Available in all areas served by the city and subject to its service rules and regulations. 
B.  Applicability. This rate is applicable to commercial customers at one service point of standard voltage. 
C.  Type of Service. Three phase, sixty (60) hertz, at a standard voltage, at a single point of delivery. 
D.  Term. Customers who choose to be on this rate shall remain on this rate for two years. After an initial two-year term, this rate (and any subsequent revisions thereof) shall be automatically renewed for successive terms of one year, unless terminated by thirty (30) days' written notice received by the city prior to the next following anticipated anniversary date. 
MONTHLY RATE: 
Base Charge ..... $205.00 
Energy Charge: 
Summer (April through October usage) 
Super peak ..... 16.00¢/kWh 
Peak ..... 7.20¢/kWh 
Off-peak ..... 4.80¢/kWh 
Winter (November through March usage) 
Peak ..... 7.20¢/kWh 
Off-peak ..... 4.20¢/kWh 
Demand Charge: 
Super peak kW (July and August) ..... 12.00/kW 
Maximum kW (every month) ..... 8.00/kW 
E.  Rating Periods. Peak rating periods occur on weekdays only and do not apply on national holidays (New Years, MLK, Memorial, Independence, Labor, Thanksgiving and Christmas). Peak periods are stated in Eastern Standard or Daylight Savings Times, whichever is currently in effect during the measuring period. Peak period hours are defined as follows: 
1.  Summer Super Peak: The four-hour period from one o'clock p.m. through five o'clock p.m. for the months of July and August only. 
2.  Summer Peak: The eight-hour period from eleven o'clock a.m. through seven o'clock p.m. for the months of April through October, excluding summer super peak hours. 
3.  Winter Peak: The four-hour period from six o'clock a.m. through ten o'clock a.m. for the months of November through March. 
4.  Off-Peak: All other hours except summer super peak, summer peak, and winter peak hours. 
F.  Environmental Compliance Cost Recovery (ECCR). The amount calculated at the above rates will be subject to increase under the provisions of the effective environmental compliance cost recovery rider, as provided in Section 13.08.380A. of this chapter. 
G.  Purchased Power Adjustment (PCA). The amount calculated at the above rates will be subject to increase or decrease under the provisions of the effective power cost adjustment clause; Schedule "PCA", as provided in Section 13.08.380B. of this chapter. 
H.  Determination of Billing Demand. 
Super Peak kW: shall be the highest thirty-minute kW measurement during the summer super peak period, as defined above, for the current month. 
Maximum kW: shall be the highest thirty-minute kW measurement during the current month. 
I.  Excess Reactive Demand Penalty. Where there is an indication of power factor less than ninety (90) percent lagging, metering equipment may be installed to measure reactive demand. The reactive demand shall be defined as the highest thirty-minute kVar measured during the month. Excess reactive demand shall be the reactive demand which is in excess of one-half of the maximum measured kW in the current month. Such excess kVar shall be billed at the rate of fifty cents ($0.50) per kVar. 
(Ord. dated 1/20/16(1), § 1) 
13.08.270 - Residential service. 
A.  Applicability. To domestic use throughout the city's service area from lines of adequate capacity. 
B.  Type of Service. Power will be supplied under this rate to a separately metered family dwelling unit at 115/230 volts, single phase, sixty (60) hertz. Three-phase service may be furnished, where available. 
C.  Monthly Rate: 
Summer - May through October Usage 
Base charge ..... $10.00 
First 600 kWh ..... 8.6¢/kWh 
Next 400 kWh ..... 11.0¢/kWh 
Over 1,000 kWh ..... 11.8¢/kWh 
Nonsummer - November through April Usage 
Base charge ..... $10.00 
First 600 kWh ..... 8.6¢/kWh 
Next 400 kWh ..... 8.2¢/kWh 
Over 1,000 kWh ..... 7.8¢/kWh 
Minimum Monthly Bill: $10.00 
D.  Environmental Compliance Cost Recovery (ECCR). The amount calculated at the above rate shall be subject to increase under the provisions of the effective environmental compliance cost recovery rider, as provided in Section 13.08.380A. of this chapter. 
E.  Purchased Power Adjustment. The amount calculated at the above rate is subject to increase or decrease under the provisions of the effective power cost adjustment clause; Schedule "PCA", as provided in Section 13.08.380B. of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 2/3/14, § 2) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Feb. 3, 2014, § 2, amended § 13.08.270 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 13.08.270 pertained to residential service (Schedule "R500", 120/240 volts, single phase and derived from Ord. dated Mar. 5, 2001 § 1; Ord. dated May 1, 2000 § 1; prior code § 22-51. 
13.08.280 - Commercial nondemand service. 
A.  Applicability. To nonresidential customers where the average monthly energy consumption is less than three thousand (3,000) kWh per month. The city will annually review each applicable customer's usage history. Where the average monthly kWh usage is greater than three thousand (3,000) [kWh], the customer will be transferred to the commercial demand tariff. 
    A high load factor customer using an average of no less than one thousand (1,000) kWh per month and served under this rate schedule may petition the city to be classified to the commercial demand tariff. At the sole discretion of the city, a demand meter will be installed and such customer reclassified for a minimum period of not less than twelve (12) months. 
B.  Type of Service. Single or three-phase, sixty (60) hertz, at a standard voltage. 
Summer - May through October Usage 
Base charge ..... $16.00 
All kWh ..... 16.0¢/kWh 
Nonsummer - November through April Usage 
Base charge ..... $16.00 
All kWh ..... 14.0¢/kWh 
Minimum Monthly Bill: $16.00 
C.  Environmental Compliance Cost Recovery (ECCR). The amount calculated at the above rate shall be subject to increase under the effective environmental compliance cost recovery rider, as provided in subsection 13.08.380A. of this chapter. 
D.  Purchased Power Adjustment. The amount calculated at the above rate is subject to increase or decrease under the provisions of the effective power cost adjustment clause; Schedule "PCA", as provided in Section 13.08.380B. of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 2/3/14, § 3) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Feb. 3, 2013, § 4, amended § 13.08.280 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 13.08.280 pertained to general service (Schedule "GS-500", 120/240 (120/208) volts, single-phase) Three-phase service in accordance with three-phase clause and derived from Ord. dated Mar. 5, 2001 § 2; Ord. dated May 1, 2000 § 1; prior code § 22-52. 
13.08.285 - Commercial demand service. 
A.  Applicability. This rate is applicable to commercial, industrial, governmental and all other non-residential usage which does not qualify for any other standard rate and where the annual maximum monthly energy consumption exceeds three thousand (3,000) kWh. This rate may also apply to temporary construction or seasonal service. Resale of energy purchased under this tariff is not permitted without the express written consent of the city. 
B.  Type of Service. Single or three-phase, sixty (60) hertz, at a standard voltage. 
MONTHLY RATE 
Base Charge ..... $25.00 
Energy Charge: 
All consumption (kWh) not greater than 200 hours times the billing demand: 
First 3,000 kWh ..... 16.0¢/kWh 
Next 7,000 kWh ..... 14.6¢/kWh 
Next 40,000 kWh ..... 13.2¢/kWh 
Over 50,000 kWh ..... 10.6¢/kWh 
All consumption (kWh) in excess of 200 hours and not greater than 400 hours times the billing demand ..... 4.8¢/kWh 
All consumption (kWh) in excess of 400 hours times the billing demand ..... 4.2¢/kWh 
Minimum monthly bill: $25.00 plus $10.00 per kW of billing demand. 
C.  Environmental Compliance Cost Recovery (ECCR). The amount calculated at the above rate shall be subject to increase under the provisions of the effective environmental compliance cost recovery rider, as provided in Section 13.08.380A. of this chapter. 
D.  Purchased Power Adjustment. The amount calculated at the above rate is subject to increase or decrease under the provisions of the effective power cost adjustment clause; Schedule "PCA", as provided in Section 13.08.380B. of this chapter. 
E.  Determination of Billing Demand. The maximum billing demand shall be based on the highest thirty-minute kW measurement during the current month and the preceding eleven (11) months. 
    For the usage months of June through September, the billing demand shall be the highest of: 
1.  The current actual demand; 
2.  Ninety-five (95) percent of the highest actual demand occurring in any previous applicable summer month (June through September); or 
3.  Sixty (60) percent of the highest actual demand occurring in any previous applicable winter month (October through May). 
    For the usage months of October through May, the billing demand shall be the greater of: 
1.  Ninety-five (95) percent of the highest previous summer month (June through September), or 
2.  Sixty (60) percent of the highest winter month (October through May), including the current month. 
    In no case shall the billing demand be less than the highest of: 
1.  The contract minimum demand; 
2.  Fifty (50) percent of the total contract capacity; or 
3.  Five (5) kW. 
F.  Excess Reactive Demand Penalty. Where there is an indication of power factor less than ninety (90) percent lagging, metering equipment may be installed to measure reactive demand. The reactive demand shall be defined as the highest thirty-minute kVar measured during the month. Excess reactive demand shall be the reactive demand which is in excess of one-half (1/2) of the maximum measured kW in the current month. Such excess kVar shall be billed at the rate of fifty cents ($0.50) per kVar. 
(Ord. dated 2/3/14, § 4) 
13.08.290 - Industrial service. 
A.  Availability. Available in all areas served by the city and subject to its service rules and regulations. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  An industrial customer is defined as any customer: 
a.  Manufacturing a finished product; 
b.  Involved in the extraction, fabrication or processing of a raw material; 
c.  Transporting or preserving a raw material or finished product; or 
d.  Other legitimate power requirements in the operation of an industrial plant. 
    Incidental office or lighting consumption may be included where the primary purpose of the business is industrial in nature as defined above. 
    Service under this tariff may not be resold or used in the operation of a related commercial enterprise. 
2.  The maximum monthly measured demand must be in excess of two hundred fifty (250) kilowatts. 
C.  Type of Service. Three-phase sixty (60) hertz at a standard voltage. 
MONTHLY RATE 
Base charge ..... $200.00 
Generation demand charge ..... 5.50/kW of GBD 
Transmission demand charge ..... 2.50/kW of TBD 
Energy Charge: 
All consumption (kWh) not greater than 200 hours times the billing demand: 
First 50,000 kWh ..... 6.2¢/kWh 
Next 150,000 kWh ..... 5.8¢/kWh 
Over 200,000 kWh ..... 5.4¢/kWh 
All consumption (kWh) in excess of 200 hours and not greater than 400 hours times the billing demand ..... 4.8¢/kWh 
All consumption (kWh) in excess of 400 hours and not greater than 600 hours times the billing demand ..... 4.2¢/kWh 
All consumption (kWh) in excess of 600 hours times the billing demand ..... 4.0¢/kWh 
Minimum Monthly Bill: $200.00 plus $10.00 per kW of generation billing demand. 
D.  Environmental Compliance Cost Recovery (ECCR). The amount calculated at the above rate shall be subject to increase under the provisions of the effective environmental compliance cost recovery rider, as provided in Section 13.08.380A. of this chapter. 
E.  Purchased Power Adjustment. The amount calculated at the above rate is subject to increase or decrease under the provisions of the effective power cost adjustment clause; Schedule "PCA", as provided in Section 13.08.380B. of this chapter. 
F.  Determination of Generation Billing Demand. The generation billing demand (GBD) shall be the highest of: 
1.  The current monthly metered demand (June through September only); 
2.  Ninety-five (95) percent of the highest monthly metered demand occurring in any preceding summer month (June through September); or 
3.  Sixty (60) percent of the highest monthly metered demand occurring in any preceding nonsummer month (October through May). 
G.  Determination of Transmission Billing Demand. The transmission billing demand (TBD) shall be the current monthly metered demand. 
H.  Excess Reactive Demand Penalty. Where there is an indication of power factor less than ninety (90) percent lagging, metering equipment may be installed to measure reactive demand. The reactive demand shall be defined as the highest thirty-minute kVar measured during the month. Excess reactive demand shall be the reactive demand which is in excess of one-half (1/2) of the maximum measured kW in the current month. Such excess kVar shall be billed at the rate of fifty cents ($0.50) per kVar. 
I.  Incremental Billing Demand. 
1.  Applicability. Applicable to any industrial customer of the city receiving such service as of January 1, 2019. Customer must notify the city in writing of the start date of the expansion period. This subsection applies to incremental (increased) consumption and demand only which are defined as: 
a.  Baseline: the historical usage and demand from twelve (12) months prior to the start date of expansion. 
b.  Incremental consumption: the difference in kWh between the customer's consumption in the current billing month and the consumption from the corresponding baseline month. 
c.  Incremental demands: 
i.  Incremental transmission demand (ITD): the difference in kW between the customer's demand occurring on the date and time of MEAG's system peak in the current billing month and customer's demand occurring on the date and time of MEAG's system peak from the corresponding baseline month. 
ii.  Incremental reserve demand (IRD): the difference in kW between the customer's peak demand in the current billing month and the peak demand from the corresponding baseline month. 
2.  Standard Monthly Billing. Baseline consumption and demand will be billed at applicable standard rate and riders. In any month in which actual consumption is less than baseline consumption, actual consumption and demand will be used for billing. Applicable standard rate and riders will apply in this case. 
3.  Duration. The monthly rate for incremental consumption under this subsection will be effective as to any expansion for five years from the start date of such expansion. 
4.  Type of Service. This subsection applies to single or three-phase, sixty (60) hertz, at a standard voltage. 
5.  Monthly Rate. The monthly charge for the incremental consumption is calculated using the following formula: 
Incremental Consumption Charges = (Base Bill $ + Margin $) + Tax $ 
Whereas: 
Base Bill $ = Cost ENERGY + Cost TRANS + Cost RES 
Cost TRANS = ITD × Transmission Rate 
Cost RES = IRD × Reserve Rate 
Cost ENERGY = S(kWh Hr × Market Price Hr 
Margin $ = Base Bill $ × Margin % 
6.  Definitions. For the purpose of interpreting this subsection, certain words, terms, symbols and abbreviations shall be defined as follows: 
"IRD" means incremental reserve demand × 1.15, in kW. 
"ITD" means incremental transmission demand in kW. 
"kWh Hr " means customer's kWh usage in the specific hour. 
"Margin %" means five percent. 
"Price Hr " means MEAG Power's Posted Hourly Market Price in $/kWh. 
"Reserve rate." See provision for reserve capacity rate. 
"Reserve capacity rate" is a reserve demand rate determined by MEAG Power for the billing year. 
"Tax $" means applicable state and local sales tax(es) and will apply to all components of the rate. 
"Transmission capacity rate" (in $/kW-month) is based on the MEAG Power annual budget transmission rate for the billing year. 
"Transmission rate." See "transmission capacity rate". 
"S" means sum over all hours of the monthly billing period. 
7.  Pricing Transparency. Customer shall receive a detail bill from the city which shall illustrate exactly how the bill was computed for the particular billing month. 
8.  Mandatory Riders. The environmental compliance cost recovery (ECCR) and power cost adjustment (PCA) will not apply to the incremental consumption. 
(Ord. dated 2/3/14, § 5; Ord. dated 10/20/14, § 1; Ord. dated 12/12/16(2), §§ 1-3; Ord. dated 1/22/19(2), § 1) 
13.08.300 - Large industrial service. 
A.  Availability. Available in all areas served by the city and subject to its service rules and regulations. 
B.  Applicability. 
1.  An industrial customer is defined as any customer: 
a.  Manufacturing a finished product; 
b.  Involved in the extraction, fabrication or processing of a raw material; 
c.  Transporting or preserving a raw material or finished product; or 
d.  Other legitimate power requirements in the operation of an industrial plant. 
    Incidental office or lighting consumption may be included where the primary purpose of the business is industrial in nature as defined above. 
    Service under this tariff may not be resold or used in the operation of a related commercial enterprise. 
2.  The maximum monthly measured demand must be in excess of six thousand (6,000) kilowatts. 
C.  Type of Service. Three-phase sixty (60) hertz at a standard voltage. 
MONTHLY RATE 
Base charge ..... $200.00 
Generation demand charge ..... 5.50/kW of GBD 
Transmission demand charge ..... 2.50/kW of TBD 
Energy Charge: 
All consumption (kWh) not greater than two hundred (200) hours times the billing demand: 
First fifty thousand (50,000) kWh ..... 6.0¢/kWh 
Next one hundred fifty thousand (150,000) kWh ..... 5.4¢/kWh 
Over two hundred thousand (200,000) kWh ..... 4.8¢/kWh 
All consumption (kWh) in excess of two hundred (200) hours and not greater than four hundred (400) hours times the billing demand ..... 4.2¢/kWh 
All consumption (kWh) in excess of four hundred (400) hours and not greater than six hundred (600) hours times the billing demand ..... 3.6¢/kWh 
All consumption (kWh) in excess of six hundred (600) hours times the billing demand ..... 3.0¢/kWh 
Minimum Monthly Bill: Two hundred dollars ($200.00) plus ten dollars ($10.00) per kW of generation billing demand. 
D.  Environmental Compliance Cost Recovery (ECCR). The amount calculated at the above rate shall be subject to increase under the provisions of the effective environmental compliance cost recovery rider, as provided in Section 13.08.380A. of this chapter. 
E.  Purchased Power Adjustment. The amount calculated at the above rate is subject to increase or decrease under the provisions of the effective power cost adjustment clause; Schedule "PCA", as provided in Section 13.08.380B. of this chapter. 
F.  Determination of Generation Billing Demand. The generation billing demand (GBD) shall be the highest of: 
1.  The current monthly metered demand (June through September only); 
2.  Ninety-five (95) percent of the highest monthly metered demand occurring in any preceding summer month (June through September); or 
3.  Sixty (60) percent of the highest monthly metered demand occurring in any preceding nonsummer month (October through May). 
G.  Determination of Transmission Billing Demand. The transmission billing demand (TBD) shall be the current monthly metered demand. 
H.  Excess Reactive Demand Penalty. Where there is an indication of power factor less than ninety (90) percent lagging, metering equipment may be installed to measure reactive demand. The reactive demand shall be defined as the highest thirty-minute kVar measured during the month. Excess reactive demand shall be the reactive demand which is in excess of one-half of the maximum measured kW in the current month. Such excess kVar shall be billed at the rate of fifty cents ($0.50) per kVar. 
I.  Incremental Billing Demand. 
1.  Applicability. Applicable to any large industrial customer of the city receiving such service as of January 1, 2019. Customer must notify the city in writing of the start date of the expansion period. This subsection applies to incremental (increased) consumption and demand only which are defined as: 
a.  Baseline: the historical usage and demand from twelve (12) months prior to the start date of expansion. 
b.  Incremental consumption: the difference in kWh between the customer's consumption in the current billing month and the consumption from the corresponding baseline month. 
c.  Incremental demands: 
i.  Incremental transmission demand (ITD): the difference in kW between the customer's demand occurring on the date and time of MEAG's system peak in the current billing month and customer's demand occurring on the date and time of MEAG's system peak from the corresponding baseline month. 
ii.  Incremental reserve demand (IRD): the difference in kW between the customer's peak demand in the current billing month and the peak demand from the corresponding baseline month. 
2.  Standard Monthly Billing. Baseline consumption and demand will be billed at applicable standard rate and riders. In any month in which actual consumption is less than baseline consumption, actual consumption and demand will be used for billing. Applicable standard rate and riders will apply in this case. 
3.  Duration. The monthly rate for incremental consumption under this subsection will be effective as to any expansion for five (5) years from the start date of such expansion. 
4.  Type of Service. This subsection applies to single or three-phase, sixty (60) hertz, at a standard voltage. 
5.  Monthly Rate. The monthly charge for the incremental consumption is calculated using the following formula: 
Incremental Consumption Charges = (Base Bill $ + Margin $) + Tax $ 
Whereas: 
Base Bill $ = Cost ENERGY + Cost TRANS + Cost RES 
Cost TRANS = ITD × Transmission Rate 
Cost RES = IRD × Reserve Rate 
Cost ENERGY = S(kWh Hr × Market Price Hr ) 
    Margin $ = Base Bill $ × Margin % 
6.  Definitions. For the purpose of interpreting this subsection, certain words, terms, symbols and abbreviations shall be defined as follows: 
"IRD" means incremental reserve demand x 1.15, in kW. 
"ITD" means incremental transmission demand in kW. 
"kWh Hr " means customer's kWh usage in the specific hour. 
"Margin %" means five percent. 
"Price Hr " means MEAG Power's Posted Hourly Market Price in $/kWh. 
"Reserve rate." See provision for reserve capacity rate. 
"Reserve capacity rate" is a reserve demand rate determined by MEAG Power for the billing year. 
"Tax $" means applicable state and local sales tax(es) and will apply to all components of the rate. 
"Transmission capacity rate" (in $/kW-month) is based on the MEAG Power annual budget transmission rate for the billing year. 
"Transmission rate." See "transmission capacity rate". 
"S" means sum over all hours of the monthly billing period. 
7.  Pricing Transparency. Customer shall receive a detail bill from the city which shall illustrate exactly how the bill was computed for the particular billing month. 
8.  Mandatory Riders. The environmental compliance cost recovery (ECCR) and power cost adjustment (PCA) will not apply to the incremental consumption. 
(Ord. dated 3/16/15(2), §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 1/22/19(2), § 2) 
13.08.310 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Feb. 3, 2014, § 6, repealed § 14.08.310 in its entirety, which pertained to large industrial service (Schedule "HP-1") and derived from Ord. dated Aug. 20, 2001 and prior code § 22-54. 
13.08.320 - Large industrial customer contracts. 
A.  Under the provisions of Section 46-3-8(a), Official Code of Georgia Annotated, industrial customers having single-metered service and a connected load which at the time of initial full operation of their premises is nine hundred (900) kilowatts or greater (excluding redundant equipment) may be furnished electric service by any of several electric power suppliers. Due to the competition involved in (and benefit of) securing large industrial customers, the city may from time to time need to enter in contract(s) with large industrial customers concerning various aspects of providing of electric power service to such customers. The city recognizes the need for specially tailored contracts with large industrial electric customers and this section does authorize the city to enter into special contracts with such customers for the providing of electric service to them. 
B.  Anything contained in any other provision of this code to the contrary notwithstanding, including, but not limited to, Sections 13.04.080, 13.04.100, 13.04.110, 13.04.130, 13.08.010, 13.08.040 and 13.08.160, the city may from time to time enter into electric power contracts as may be negotiated by and between the city and electric customers qualifying for the industrial service rate contained in Section 13.08.290, provided any such contract is ratified and approved by the mayor and council of the city and incorporated into the minutes of a city council meeting, addressing those matters necessary or appropriate to secure an industrial customer's selection of the city as its supplier of electrical power, including, but not limited to, the following: 
1.  The city's obligation to provide electric service to the premises of the customer including any appropriate substations, transformers, regulator and metering services with the costs thereof allocated as may be approved by the city; 
2.  Standards for the city's operation and maintenance of the facility supplying such customer, including specifications for the city's equipment providing such service; 
3.  The duration of such service, including contracts for multiple years; 
4.  Permitting the customer to install co-generation and emergency generation facilities; 
5.  Providing for the city to insure various risks while on the customer's premises; 
6.  Specifying any limitations on rate increases and/or procedures for input by the customer in rate increases; 
7.  Providing for rules and regulations concerning billing procedures, due dates, deposits and late fees; 
8.  Providing for the arbitration of specified disputes; 
9.  Providing of notices and time periods within which to perform; and 
10.  Such other rules, regulations and provisions that might normally be contained in long-term contracts between industrial customers and any other persons, firms or corporations that could supply electric service to such customer. 
(Ord. dated 2/3/14, § 9; Prior code § 22-55) 
13.08.330 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Feb. 3, 2014, § 6, repealed § 14.08.330 in its entirety, which pertained to wholesale services to municipalities for redistribution and resale (Schedule "WR-4") and derived from prior code § 22-56. 
13.08.340 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Feb. 3, 2014, § 6, repealed § 14.08.340 in its entirety, which pertained to large industrial service (Schedule "HP-2") and derived from Ord. dated July 2, 2012, § 1. 
13.08.350 - Force majeure. 
    The term "force majeure" shall mean and include those events, occurrences or conditions beyond the reasonable control of the city or the customer, including, but not limited to, acts of God; unusually severe weather conditions; strikes or other labor difficulties; war, riots, requirements or actions or failures to act on the part of governmental authorities (other than the city) preventing performance; inability despite due diligence to obtain required licenses; accidents; fire; damage to or breakdown of necessary facilities; results of labor strikes or slowdowns; or transportation delays or accidents, provided, that: 
A.  The nonperforming party gives the other party, within forty-eight (48) hours, written notice describing the particulars of the occurrence; 
B.  The suspension of performance will be of no greater scope and of no longer duration than is required by the force majeure; 
C.  The nonperforming party uses its best efforts to remedy its inability to perform; 
D.  When the nonperforming party is able to resume performance of its obligations, that party shall give the other party written notice to that effect; and 
E.  The force majeure was not caused by or connected with any intentional acts, errors or omissions or failure to comply with any law, rule, regulation, order or ordinance. 
(Prior code § 22-58) 
13.08.360 - Security lighting service. 
A.  Availability. To property owners and tenants in the proximity of low voltage distribution lines of the city. Service may be used to illuminate public thoroughfares and/or private outdoor areas, including, but not limited to, roadways, parking lots and yards. 
B.  Applicability. To unmetered dusk-to-dawn electric service provided by LED, mercury vapor, high pressure sodium vapor or metal halide luminaries supported by short brackets and mounted on either city supplied poles or poles owned by the customer which conform to the city's specifications. The city will furnish, install and maintain electric security lighting for its customers in accordance with the rate schedule set forth herein. New lighting service installations, including special poles, shall require an initial charge or an additional monthly charge to be paid by the customer. 
    The city may install and maintain security lighting fixtures furnished by its customers if such fixtures are, in the opinion of the city's engineering department, commonly used utility grade fixtures manufactured by established manufacturers who will provide necessary repair and replacement parts. The customer shall pay in advance all capital costs of installation of fixtures furnished by any source other than the city. 
MONTHLY RATE PER FIXTURE: 
FIXTURE TYPE LAMP WATTAGE MONTHLY RATE LED 40/60 $10.65 LED 79 $18.00 LED 85 $15.10 LED 120/135 $16.50 LED 170/190 $26.60 LED 267 $38.40 LED 240/274 $38.40 LED 285/290 $40.70 High Pressure Sodium Vapor 100 $10.00 High Pressure Sodium Vapor 150 $12.50 Mercury Vapor 175 $10.00 High Pressure Sodium Vapor 250 $18.00 Mercury Vapor 400 $24.00 High Pressure Sodium Vapor 400 $24.00 Metal Halide Flood 400 $24.00 High Pressure Sodium Vapor 1,000 $42.00 Metal Halide Flood 1,000 $42.00 High pressure 150 watt sodium vapor colonial style decorative fixture mounted on a black fiberglass pole supplied through underground wiring $16.50  
C.  Special Provisions. 
1.  The contract period shall be no less than twenty-four (24) months at the aforesaid rates. 
a.  Residential contracts will be billed monthly according to the rates per fixture set forth above. 
b.  Commercial contracts requiring new construction, including pole setting and wiring, will be billed in advance for the next succeeding 12-month period. 
c.  Commercial contracts for lighting service where such service had previously been provided will be billed on a monthly basis. 
2.  All new lighting service installations shall require LED luminaries. 
3.  Existing luminaries shall be replaced with LED luminaries as each existing non-LED luminary becomes inoperable. 
4.  An installation charge of one hundred twenty-five dollars ($125.00) per pole will be applicable for poles required for lighting service which do not carry a lighting fixture. 
5.  The pole, luminary, bracket and control equipment shall be installed, owned, operated and maintained exclusively by the city. Rates for setting poles to install security lighting shall be: 
a.  30-foot mounting height dark bronze (or black) direct buried aluminum pole with six-foot arm ..... $25.40 
b.  30-foot mounting height dark bronze (or black) direct buried aluminum pole with double six-foot arm ..... $29.20 
c.  26-foot mounting height dark bronze (or black) direct buried aluminum pole with six-foot arm ..... $25.40 
d.  26-foot mounting height dark bronze (or black) direct buried aluminum pole with double six-foot arm ..... $29.20 
e.  16-foot mounting height dark bronze (or black) direct buried aluminum ..... $8.00 
f.  35-foot Class 5 wood pole (30-foot mounting height) ..... $3.50 
6.  The customer must provide adequate pathways and workspace for ingress and egress to customer's premises for the purposes of installing and maintaining the lighting facilities. 
7.  In the event of vandalism or vehicular accident, the customer may be required to reimburse the city for any additional equipment replacement or maintenance work. 
8.  All lighting maintenance performed by the city will be accomplished as soon as it can be reasonably done following notification by the customer that service has been interrupted. However, such maintenance will be performed only during the city's regular working hours. 
9.  A footage rate of four dollars ($4.00) per foot will apply in existing developments or where wiring must be installed elsewhere than in trenches which were dug to install electric distribution liner. A footage rate of two dollars ($2.00) per foot in excess of eighty (80) feet per pole will apply where wiring is buried in the same trench with the distribution system and no trenching is required. Any costs associated with rock trenching or removal and any costs of repairing existing privately-owned facilities shall be owned by the customer. 
(Ord. dated 2/3/14, § 7; Ord. dated 4/2/2018(3), §§ 2, 3) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Feb. 3, 2014, § 7, amended § 13.08.360 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 13.08.360 pertained to security lighting service contracts and derived from Ord. dated April 5, 2010, § 1. 
13.08.370 - Traffic signal service (Schedule TS-1). 
A.  Availability. This rate schedule is available to retail customers throughout the service area of the city and meeting the requirements of subsection B of this section. 
B.  Applicability. This rate schedule applies to roadway traffic signals, flashers and street lights that are owned, operated and maintained by governmental entities or other legally authorized parties. 
C.  Calculation of Consumption. A calculation of monthly kWH consumption based on the number of lamps, including pedestrian indicators, that are "on" simultaneously will be made by the city utilizing the following formula: 
    kWH = [(Number of standard signal lamps "on" at once x 135 watts ÷ 1,000) + (number of pedestrian lamps "on" at once × 69 watts ÷ 1,000)] x 730 hours 
    A purchased power adjustment shall apply to all consumption calculated pursuant to this formula. 
D.  Monthly Rates. 
Base charge $8.50 Energy charges: (cents per KWH)   First 300 kWH 7.50   Over 300 kWH 3.50  
E.  Associated Equipment. Customer owned street lights included in a traffic signal installation will be added to such monthly consumption calculation based on the formula 1/2 [(wattage + 10%) ÷ 1,000] x 730 hours, which assumes twelve (12) hours of operation per day and ballast losses of ten (10) percent. All such street lights must have operable photo-controls. 
(Ord. dated 8/17/04) 
13.08.380 - Riders and adjustments. 
A.  Environmental Compliance Cost Recovery (ECCR). The monthly environmental compliance cost recovery adjustment in cents per kWh shall be added to all metered bills for service. The ECCR shall represent an amount no higher than that which may be calculated using the economic compliance cost reporting issued from time to time by the city's principal electricity supplier, MEAG Power. ECCR changes will normally occur annually with changes becoming effective with the first day of a new fiscal year (July 1). 
    Current monthly environmental compliance cost recovery adjustment rates in cents per kWh may be obtained from the city's billing department Covington City Hall, 2194 Emory Street, N.W., Covington, Georgia. 
B.  Power Cost Adjustment Rider (PCA). This power cost adjustment rider (PCA) is applicable to each of the city's retail tariffs which contains reference to it. The PCA is used to make interim adjustments to monthly rates for service to reflect known and measurable changes in the city's total costs of providing wholesale electricity to its customers. 
    The city's total costs of providing wholesale electricity are defined herein to include power and energy purchased from its primary energy suppliers (MEAG Power and Southeastern Electric Power Administration). 
    PCA changes will normally be made annually with changes becoming effective with the first day of a new fiscal year (July 1). However, the city reserves the right to make changes more frequently if unexpected wholesale energy cost levels are incurred. 
    Current power cost adjustment rates in cents per kWh may be obtained from the city's billing department, Covington City Hall, 2194 Emory Street, N.W., Covington, Georgia. 
C.  Distributed Generation Rider (2017). Applicable to customers in all areas served by the city, under any rate defined in Section 13.08, installing distributed generation on or after January 1, 2017, and subject to its service rules, regulations, terms, policies and procedures, as amended from time to time, which are incorporated herein by this reference, and desiring to sell electrical energy to the city produced by the distributed generation facility, which must be eligible for participation subject to the terms and provisions of the Georgia Cogeneration and Distributed Generation Act of 2001 or successor legislation (the "DG Act"). Customer's account(s) with the city must be in good standing. 
    Distributed generation facility must: 
1.  Be owned (or leased) and operated by an existing customer for production of electric energy; 
2.  Be located on the customer's premises; 
3.  Be connected to and operate in parallel with the city's distribution facilities; 
4.  Be intended primarily to offset part or all of the customer's generator's requirement for electricity; 
5.  Have peak generating capacity of not more than ten (10) kW for residential applications and not more than one hundred twenty-five (125) percent of actual or expected maximum annual peak demand of the premises for commercial applications; and 
6.  Use solar photovoltaic system, wind, fuel cell, or hydro generation. 
MONTHLY METERING COST: 
Bi-directional metering charge ..... $2.50 per month 
Single-directional metering charge: 
Single-phase ..... 4.50 per month 
Poly-phase ..... 11.00 per month 
    The city will install single-directional metering or bi-directional metering depending on the customer's method of installation. All installed costs for metering and associated equipment will be paid by the customer at the time service is initiated under this section. 
    Bi-directional metering is defined as measuring the amount of electricity supplied by the city and the amount fed back to the city by the customer's distributed generation facility during the billing period using the same meter. Bi-directional metering shall be used where distributed generation facilities are connected to the city on the customer's side of the customer's meter. 
    Single-directional metering is defined as measuring electricity produced or consumed during the billing period, in accordance with normal metering practices. Single-directional metering shall be used where distributed generation facilities are connected to the city's distribution system on the city's side of the customer's meter. 
  
MONTHLY CAPACITY COST: 
    The city requires each customer with a distributed generation facility to pay the monthly stand-by capacity charges based on sixty (60) percent of the installed nameplate capacity rating (in kW) of the customer's system. 
Stand-by Capacity Charge 
Residential ..... $10.25 per kW per month 
Commercial non-demand ..... 12.84 per kW per month 
Commercial demand ..... 18.39 per kW per month 
Industrial ..... 18.82 per kW per month 
PAYMENT FOR ENERGY 
Bi-directional Metering. 
1.  When electricity supplied by the city exceeds electricity generated by the customer's distributed generation, the customer will be billed by the city in accordance with the applicable tariff(s). 
2.  When electricity generated by the customer's distributed generation system exceeds electricity supplied by the city, the customer will be billed for the customer charges as provided in the standard rate for that billing period and credited for excess kWh generated during that period at the city's avoided energy cost. 
Single-directional Metering 
1.  For kWhs generated by customer's distributed generation facility, the customer will be compensated at the city's avoided cost of energy (kWh) as determined by the city. The city will only compensate the customer for avoided energy kWhs as determined by metered energy delivered to the city's distribution system. 
2.  The customer's net bill will be calculated using the city calculation for avoided energy cost (as described below) credited to the customer, netted against the billing period charges for the customer's regular service computed according to the applicable tariff based on actual metered energy. 
Avoided Energy Cost 
    Payments by the city to the customer for the billing period metered avoided energy kWhs will be computed by the city in its sole discretion based on the six-month period April through September average monthly wholesale market price as determined by the Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia (MEAG Power), the city's wholesale energy provider. 
    In the event the customer develops a credit balance during a billing period, the balance will remain as a credit on the customer's account. Credit balances remaining at the end of the city's fiscal year will be cleared by the issuance of a check to customer for the credit balance. 
  
SAFETY, POWER QUALITY, AND INTERCONNECTION REQUIREMENTS: 
    The customer will be responsible for the cost of maintaining a safe and reliable interconnection with the city. The city will provide, upon request, the following documents which must be completed and submitted to the city for approval prior to interconnection by the customer to the city's distribution system: 
1.  Application for interconnection of distributed generation facility. 
2.  Interconnection agreement. 
3.  Electrical power exchange agreement. 
    All provisions of the said documents are incorporated by this reference into this rider and made a part hereof. For the avoidance of doubt, the customer shall be deemed to have agreed to such provisions by applying for service under this rider. 
    The city will only be required to purchase energy from eligible distributed generation facilities on a first-come, first-served basis until the cumulative generating capacity of all renewable energy sources from all customers equals the percentage of the city's annual peak demand in the previous year as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 46-3-56(a). Additional energy may be purchased by the city at its sole discretion at a cost agreed to by it and the customer provider. The city shall not be required to purchase energy from customers in excess of amounts required by the DG Act. 
    The city reserves the right to separate the customer's generating equipment from city lines and facilities when, in the city's sole judgment, the continued parallel operation may be unsafe or may cause damage to persons or property. Upon such separation, the city shall promptly notify the customer so that any unsafe condition can be corrected. 
D.  Distributed Generation Rider (Before 2017). Applicable to customers in all areas served by the city, under any rate defined in Chapter 13.08, installing distributed generation prior to January 1, 2017, and subject to the city's service rules, regulations, terms, policies and procedures, as amended from time to time, which are incorporated herein by this reference, and desiring to sell electrical energy produced by a distributed generation facility to the city, which must be eligible for participation subject to the terms and provisions of the Georgia Cogeneration and Distributed Generation Act of 2001 or successor legislation (the "DG Act") and whose account(s) with the city must be in good standing. 
1.  Any distributed generation facility must: 
a.  Be owned by an electric utility customer of the city for solar, wind, or other production of electric energy; 
b.  Be located on premises owned or leased by such customer; 
c.  Be connected to and operate in parallel with the city's distribution facilities; 
d.  Be intended primarily to offset part or all of such customer's requirement for electricity; 
e.  Have a peak generating capacity of not more than ten (10) kW for residential application and not more than one hundred (100) kW for commercial or industrial applications; and 
f.  Utilize a solar photovoltaic, wind, fuel cell or hydro generation system. 
2.  Metering Cost. The city will install bi-directional metering. All installed costs for metering and associated equipment will be paid by the customer at the time service is initiated pursuant to this section. "Bi-directional metering" means measuring the amount of electricity supplied by the city and the amount of electricity fed back to the city by the customer's distributed generation facility during a billing period, using the same meter. 
3.  Payment for Energy. 
a.  When electricity supplied by the city exceeds electricity generated by the customer's distributed generation, the electricity will be billed to the customer by the city in accordance with the current applicable rate. 
b.  When electricity generated by the customer's distributed generation system exceeds electricity supplied by the city, the customer will be billed for appropriate customer charges for that billing period less a credit for excess kWh generated during that billing period at avoided energy cost. 
c.  The city will only be required to purchase energy from eligible distributed generation facilities on a first-come, first-served basis until the cumulative generating capacity of all renewable energy sources from city customers equals 0.2 percent of the city's annual peak demand for the previous year. Additional energy may be purchased from the customer by the city at a cost agreed to by it and the customer. 
4.  Avoided Energy Cost. Payments by the city to the customer for the billing period metered avoided energy kWhs will be computed by the city in its sole discretion based on the six-month period April through September average monthly wholesale market price, as determined by the Municipal Electric Authority of Georgia (MEAG Power), the city's wholesale energy provider. 
5.  Safety, Power Quality and Interconnection Requirements. The city, after appropriate notice and opportunity for comment, may adopt by regulation additional safety, power quality and interconnection requirements for customer generation that the city determines are necessary to protect public safety and system reliability. 
(Ord. dated 2/3/14, § 8; Ord. dated 12/12/16(1), § 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Feb. 3, 2014, § 8, amended § 13.08.380 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 13.08.380 pertained to distributed generation-avoided energy costs and derived from Ord. dated April 5, 2010, § 1. 
Chapter 13.12 - WATER SYSTEM 
Article 1. - In General 

13.12.010 - Water supply property or equipment, interference prohibited. 
    In the interest of public safety it is unlawful for any unauthorized person to interfere with or have anything to do with, the city wells, reservoirs, treatment plants, mains or other equipment related to the city water supply. 
(Prior code § 22-61) 
13.12.020 - Connecting private water systems to city water system pipes limited. 
    It is unlawful to connect any private water system which takes water from a well, pond, or other independent source, to pipes which are connected with the city water system unless such supply and interconnection is inspected and approved by the state department of public health. 
(Prior code § 22-62) 
13.12.030 - Deep wells for waste disposal prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for anyone to dig, within the city limits, a deep well for the disposal of waste of any type. 
(Prior code § 22-63) 
13.12.040 - Department to make or supervise main extensions. 
    The city water department will make, or supervise, all extensions of mains in the public streets and roads, both inside and outside the city limits. 
(Prior code § 22-64) 
13.12.050 - Connection to unmetered pipe or city main, permission required. 
    No person shall make any connection to any unmetered pipe or main containing water from the city system, unless such person has first obtained a written permit for such work from the superintendent of water and light department. 
(Prior code § 22-65) 
13.12.060 - Booster pumps, installation restricted. 
    No booster pump shall be installed in any pipe which is connected to the city water system, except where the usage has been approved by the water department as not detrimental to service in the area and a written permit issued to that effect. 
(Prior code § 22-66) 
13.12.070 - Water taps-Pre-requisites. 
    The applicant for a water tap shall have his service pipe extended to the property line, at a point designated by the city water department and terminating in a stopcock or valve. In consideration of the tapping fee, which shall be paid to the city in advance, the city will tap the main and extend service to the applicant's valve at the property line, subject to the provisions and limitations governing the extension of water mains as set forth in subsequent sections of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 22-67) 
13.12.080 - New construction. 
    In all cases of new construction, the applicant must pay for all water consumed on the premises during the period of construction. 
(Prior code § 22-68) 
13.12.090 - Fees and rates. 
A.  For inspection and approval of water taps and meter installations by developers, tap fees for meters of four inches or less shall apply as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution. Tap fees for meters larger than four inches shall be calculated by the city engineer, based on residential use of three hundred fifty (350) gpd or such actual historic demand data as may be available at the time of such calculation. An oversized tap or meter may not be installed for the purpose of obtaining a more favorable tap fee. 
B.  The foregoing tap fees shall be applicable to all water taps installed in the city water system, wherever such taps are located. 
C.  The following rates shall apply to all customers other than those industrial customers subject to subsection D. of this section, wherever the water is delivered: 
Monthly Billings First 3,000 gallons or less, Minimum $17.00 3,001 to 50,000 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 5.65 All over 50,000 gallons, per 1,000 Gallons 5.80  
D.  The following rates shall apply to all industrial customers utilizing an average in excess of fifty thousand (50,000) gallons per day in a billing cycle, wherever the water is delivered: 
Monthly Billings First 3,000 gallons or less, Minimum $16.60 All over 3,001 gallons, per 1,000 gallons 5.45  
Industrial customer shall have the meaning ascribed at Section 13.08.290.B of this title. The provisions of this subsection shall be effective for all consumption after March 1, 2015. 
(Ord. dated 12/18/17(1), § 1; Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 9; Ord. dated 3/16/15(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 1/7/13, § 1; Ord. dated 5/21/12, § 1; Ord. dated 5/16/11, § 1; Ord. dated 7/19/10, § 1; Ord. dated 6/7/10, § 1; Ord. dated 2/1/10, § 1; Ord. dated 5/18/09, § 1; Ord. dated 12/8/08, § 1; Ord. dated 6/2/08 § 1; Ord. dated 2/6/06 §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 9/23/04 § 1; Ord. dated 7/9/03 § 1) 
13.12.100 - Allowance for old meter when larger meter installed. 
    Where it is necessary to enlarge a water service by installing a meter larger than the one in use, an allowance in the amount of the original cost of meter and service will be given. 
    The allowances authorized are to be made upon the bill requiring a larger service and in no instance shall the same be in cash. 
(Prior code § 22-70) 
13.12.110 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- An ordinance dated Oct. 21, 2013, § 1, repealed § 13.12.110 in its entirety, which pertained to extension beyond city limits and derived from prior code § 22-71. 
13.12.120 - Use of same meter or service pipe by more than one dwelling or business unit. 
    More than one single-family dwelling unit or more than one place of business shall not be supplied with water service by the same service pipe or through the same meter except by special permit from the water department, but when two or more residences or places of business are so supplied by the same service pipe or through the same meter the minimum rate per month for any other single-family dwelling unit or similar place of business shall be paid by the head of each single-family unit thus served or by the owner of each separate business thus served; provided, when the meter through which such service is registered reveals more water has been furnished than is covered by the minimum charge the person using such service and the person in whose name the meter is registered or who signed for same shall pay the regular rate prescribed by ordinance for such excess. 
(Prior code § 22-72) 
13.12.130 - Special fire protection services. 
A.  Any customer desiring special fire protection services shall make written application to the Covington fire marshal, with a duplicate application to the Covington water department, stating the size connection desired. All such connections from existing mains to the customer's property line shall be made by the city or by a licensed plumbing contractor, and the customer shall bear the entire cost thereof. There will be no monthly standby charge for special fire protection service, but no provision of this section shall be deemed to permit the use of unmetered water for any purpose other than extinguishing fires. 
B.  A double check valve manufactured to standards established by a national testing agency shall be installed on any fire main regularly maintained by the customer. The valve may be installed on the riser inside the building so long as the installation is not a greater pipe distance than one hundred (100) feet from the water main tap. If such riser is a greater pipe distance than one hundred (100) feet from the water main tap, then the double check valve shall be installed at the customer's property line or on the customer's side of the water main tap for the customer's automatic fire sprinkler system. All such installations shall be approved in writing by the city engineer. 
C.  Any customer violating the provisions of this section, whether directly or through agents, employees or independent contractors, shall be subject to a maximum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such violation. 
D.  Any customer using a pipe wrench or any other device not designed for use on fire hydrant stems, whether such use is direct or through agents, employees or independent contractors, shall be subject to a maximum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00) for each such violation as well as confiscation and forfeiture of such pipe wrench or other device. 
(Prior code § 22-73) 
Article 2. - Extension of Service 

13.12.140 - Extension of water service to conform to this article. 
    Water service shall not be extended to developed or undeveloped property either within the city or outside the city except in conformity with the requirements of this article. 
(Prior code § 22-76.1) 
13.12.150 - Water lines to be placed in public rights-of-way or public easements. 
    Water lines shall only be placed within public easements established for such purpose or within the right-of-way lines of streets and roads which have been certified as being a part of the public road or street system of either the city or of Newton County. 
(Prior code § 22-76.2) 
13.12.160 - Streets must be at final grade. 
    A water line shall not be placed within a street right-of-way until the street for which such right-of-way was created has been constructed to final grade. 
(Prior code § 22-76.3) 
13.12.170 - Extension of water service into new subdivisions. 
    The following rules shall govern the extension of water service into new subdivisions: 
A.  Subdivisions Within the City. All subdivisions within the city must conform to the subdivision regulations of the city before they shall be eligible to receive water service from the city. 
B.  Subdivisions Outside the City. From and after the date that a governmental jurisdiction adopts subdivision regulations for areas outside the corporate limits of the city, a subdivision thereafter established in such areas shall be required to comply with all applicable provisions of such subdivision regulations before it shall be eligible to receive water service from the city. In the event subdivision regulations are not adopted for areas outside the city, then all subdivision lots established after May 15, 1961, and which are seeking city water service shall be required to comply with the lot area requirements found within the subdivision regulation ordinance of the city. 
(Prior code § 22-76.4) 
13.12.180 - City shall not be a party to the creation of potential health and sanitation problems. 
    When the lots requesting water service have been laid out in such a manner as might cause health and sanitation problems to develop when such lots are developed, the city water service shall only be extended to such lots after the owner of such lots has first devised a method of eliminating the danger of health and sanitation problems which shall meet with the approval of the Newton County health department. 
(Prior code § 22-76.5) 
13.12.190 - Size of lines to be installed. 
    The minimum diameter water line to be installed on any property zoned M-1 (light industrial district) or M-2 (heavy industrial district) pursuant to the provisions of Title 16 this code shall be twelve (12) inches unless an express waiver allowing for a smaller size is first obtained from the city council. For all other installations the size of the water lines to be installed to provide water service shall be determined by the city or its engineers and such determination shall be based on the following factors, among others: 
A.  The minimum length of the line that will be installed; 
B.  Possible future extensions of a proposed line; 
C.  Reasonable estimates of the maximum demands for water services that will be placed on a line; 
D.  The present or future part the line in question will play in a fire protection program. 
(Prior code § 22-76.6) 
13.12.200 - Installation and ownership of water lines. 
    All water lines which are to be made a part of the city water distribution system shall be installed by the city or by a person, firm or company approved by the city; and all such lines shall be installed in accordance with specifications supplied by the city or approved by the city; and all such lines, when installed, shall be the property of the city. 
(Prior code § 22-76.7) 
13.12.210 - Extension of water service to developed property. 
A.  For the purposes of this section, "developed property" is defined as property fronting on an accepted street, and not a part of an unapproved subdivision. 
B.  Whenever an application is presented to the city for an extension of water service to developed property within the city, and the applicant has complied with all other provisions of this chapter, including specifically Section 13.12.070 above, water service shall be extended to the valve on the applicant's service pipe at the applicant's property line, subject to the following limitation and provision, to wit: The city shall not spend more than two hundred dollars ($200.00) to make such extension, and any costs in excess of this sum must be paid by the applicant; and the city may require that such additional costs be paid in advance, at the time the tapping fee is paid. 
(Prior code § 22-76.9) 
13.12.220 - Extension of water service to undeveloped property. 
A.  For the purposes of this section, "undeveloped property" is defined as property lying within an unapproved subdivision. 
B.  Whenever an application is presented to the city for an extension of water service to undeveloped property within the city, the city engineering department shall determine an estimated cost of such extension, and the same shall be presented to the mayor and council. It shall be the established policy of the city to extend water service to the property line of undeveloped property within the city without cost to the developer, subject to the following terms and conditions, to wit: 
1.  Water service shall be extended to all lots within the subdivision at the expense of the developer (applicant), and the city shall take the necessary steps to assure that the developer performs this obligation before the city approves the extension of water service to the property line; and 
2.  The city reserves the right to refuse to extend such service to the property line when the cost of such extension is determined by the mayor and council to be excessive, or when the city does not have funds available for such extension; and in either of such events, the developer and the city may negotiate the financing of such extension on such terms and conditions as the mayor and council may approve. 
(Prior code § 22-76.10) 
13.12.230 - Financing the cost of combined projects. 
    Whenever a project shall include the extension of water service to both developed and undeveloped property, as hereinabove defined, the method of financing the cost shall be as follows: 
A.  The total cost to the applicant or applicants shall be first computed as if the extensions to the developed property were made first; and then 
B.  The total cost to the applicant or applicants shall be computed as if the extensions to the undeveloped property were made first; and 
C.  The procedure resulting in the least expense to the applicants shall be the procedure to be followed in computing what portion of the total expense of such extension shall be borne by the applicants and what portion shall be borne by the city. 
(Prior code § 22-76.11) 
13.12.240 - Other fees and charges. 
    No provision of this chapter shall be construed as restricting the right of the mayor and council from time to time to require the payment of additional fees, charges or deposits in connection with water service within or without the city limits. 
(Prior code § 22-76.12) 
13.12.250 - All projects must be approved by mayor and council. 
    All projects for the extension or maintenance of water service must be first approved and authorized by the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 22-76.13) 
13.12.260 - Application. 
    Application for a project shall be in the form of a work order request. 
A.  A work order request shall be prepared in triplicate and it shall be signed by the city clerk. 
B.  The work order request shall contain all the pertinent facts about the proposed project and shall include a certification that sufficient funds are available to finance the project. 
(Prior code § 22-76.14) 
Chapter 13.16 - SEWER SYSTEMS 
Article 1. - Generally 

13.16.010 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the meaning of terms used in the division shall be as follows: 
    "Biochemical oxygen demand" or "BOD" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    "Building drain" means that part of the lowest horizontal piping of a drainage system which receives the discharge from soil, waste and other drainage pipes inside the walls of the building and conveys it to the building sewer, beginning five feet outside the inner face of the building wall. 
    "Building sewer" means the extension from the building drain to the public sewer or other place of disposal. 
    "Chemical oxygen demand" or "COD" means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the chemical oxidation of organic matter to carbon dioxide and water under standard laboratory procedures, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g. mg/l). 
    "City" means the city of Covington, Georgia. 
    "Commercial user" or "contributor" means a premises or person who discharges industrial wastes which are similar to domestic wastes in nature and do not exceed those parameters which define normal sewage. 
    "Composite" means the make-up of a number of individual samples, so taken as to represent the nature of sewage or industrial wastes. 
    "Constituents" mean the combination of particles or conditions which exist in industrial wastes. 
    "Customer" means and includes any person who occupies any residence, store, building or other structure having plumbing or sewerage facilities therein which are connected directly or indirectly with any sanitary sewerage main, which is in turn connected to any sewage disposal plant or system owned or maintained by the city. 
    "Effluent" means the discharge flow of a treatment facility. 
    "Equalizing units" mean those devices or structures constructed to evenly regulate either or both, the strength and volume of wastes. 
    "Flammable" is defined in accordance with its several applications as more particularly set forth in the Standard International Fire Code adopted pursuant to Section 15.12.010 of this code. 
    "Garbage" means solid wastes from the domestic and commercial preparation, cooking and disposition of food, and from the handling, storage and sale of produce. 
    "Industrial customers" mean firms, corporations or entities which, on account of their particular type of business, discharge into the city sanitary sewer or sewerage system unusual amounts or unusual type of sewage which present special problems in sewage disposal and sewage treatment. 
    "Industrial user" or "contributor" means an industry which discharges wastewaters having the characteristics of industrial wastes, as distinct from commercial wastes or domestic wastes. 
    "Industrial wastes" mean the liquid wastes from industrial processes, trade or business as distinct from sanitary sewage. 
    "Industrial waste surcharge" means the additional service charge assessed against industries in the city whose waste characteristics exceed those of normal sewage. 
    "Influent" means the wastewaters arriving at the sewage treatment plant for treatment and/or those structures associated with its initial treatment. 
    "Metered water" means the amount of water consumed by the sewer customer in the city, as measured by a city water meter, or other approved metering device. 
    "Metered sewer" means the amount of sewage, including industrial waste, discharged by the industrial customer into the city sanitary sewer or sewerage system, as measured by a city sewer meter, or other city approved metering device. 
    "Natural outlets" mean any outlet into a watercourse, pond, ditch, lake or other body of surface or groundwater. 
    "Normal" or "domestic" means those values taken as standards in the measurement of sewage strength. For purposes of this definition, these limits are defined in Section 13.16.270 of this code. 
    "Person," "establishment" or "owner" means any individual, partnership, co-partnership, firm, company corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state, and local governmental entities. 
    "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of the hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    "Pretreatment" means that physical or chemical treatment given to waste or those processes utilized for this purpose before discharge into the public sewer system. 
    "Properly shredded garbage" means the wastes from the preparation, cooking and dispensing of food that all particles will be carried freely under the flow conditions normally prevailing in public sewers, with no particle greater than one-half inch in any dimension. 
    "Public sewer" means a sewer in which all owners of abutting properties have equal rights, and is controlled by public authority. 
    "Receiving waters" mean those waters into which wastes are discharged. 
    "Residential" or "domestic user" means a premises or person who discharges wastewaters to the city which closely match normal sewage as to its volume and strength, and further for billing purposes, is defined as a dwelling place or place of residence. 
    "Sanitary sewer" means a pipe or conduit for carrying sewage. 
    "Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and stormwaters as may be present. 
    "Sewer service charge" means the charge assessed against the sewer customers by the city that are connected to or have access to, the city sewerage system. 
    "Slug" means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards in Section 13.24.020(A) of this code. 
    "Standard methods" mean those procedures or methods established by the latest edition of the "Standard Methods for the Examination of Water and Wastewater" as prepared, approved and published jointly by the American Public Health Association, the American Water Works Association, a copy of which is on file in the office of the superintendent. 
    "Storm sewer" or "storm drain" means a sewer which carries storm and surface waters and drainage, but excludes sewage industrial wastes, other than unpolluted cooling water. 
    "Superintendent" means the superintendent or manager of the sewerage works of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    "Total suspended solids" means the total suspended matter that either floats on the surface of, or are in suspension in water, sewage or other liquids, and which are removable by laboratory filtering. 
    "Toxic" means constituents of wastes which adversely affect the organisms involved in sewage treatment. 
    "Wastewater treatment facilities" or "sewerage works" mean all facilities for collecting, pumping, treating and disposing of sewage. 
    "Water meter" means those devices, approved by the superintendent of the city water system for the purpose of establishing the quantity of water consumed by a premises or person. 
    "Watercourse" means a channel in which flow of water occurs, either continuously or intermittently. 
    "Will" or "shall" is mandatory; "may" is permissive. 
(Ord. dated 3/17/03, § 4 (part); Ord. dated 10/1/01, §§ 30, 31; Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-77) 
(Ord. dated 10/5/15(1), § 1) 
13.16.020 - Industrial waste surcharges. 
A.  Surcharge Limits. All persons discharging industrial wastes into the public sewers shall be charged and assessed a surcharge, in addition to any sewer service charges, if these wastes have a concentration greater than the following: 
1.  A BOD content of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
2.  A TSS content of two hundred fifty (250) mg/l. 
3.  A COD content of seven hundred fifty (750) mg/l. 
    The amount of the surcharge, which is charged and assessed against all persons discharging industrial wastewater into the public sewers, shall reflect the cost incurred by the city in handling the excess BOD, TSS and COD. This surcharge shall include a proportionate share of charges for maintenances and operation of the water pollution control facilities including depreciation and other incidental expenses. 
B.  Determination of Amounts. The rates for each of the aforementioned constituents shall be determined annually by the superintendent in order that the above factors may correctly represent current treatment costs. A schedule of the surcharge shall be filed with the city clerk by the superintendent. 
C.  Billing Procedure. Industrial wastes surcharges provided for in this section shall be prepared and rendered either as a separate invoice or with the regular water bill. The volume of flow used in billing the industrial waste surcharges shall be based upon metered potable water, metered wastewater, estimated wastewater flow, or estimated or prorated water consumption. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-78) 
13.16.030 - Rates and charges. 
    The charge for sanitary sewer service shall be six dollars ($6.00) per thousand gallons of metered water, except that metered water in the following uses shall not be included in the calculation of sanitary sewer service charges: 
A.  Separately metered taps installed and used solely for irrigation systems; 
B.  Separately metered water used solely for cooling tower service; and 
C.  Separately metered water used in processing systems wherein such water never enters the city sanitary sewer system by floor drains or any other means. 
D.  Separately metered water used in an industrial user's processing systems in excess of an average fifty thousand (50,000) gpd, where such industrial user discharges industrial waste into the city sanitary sewer or sewerage system and elects to separately meter sewer by a city sewer meter, or other city approved metering device. The charge for separately metered sewer under this item D. shall be six dollars ($6.00) per thousand gallons of metered sewer. 
    Prior written approval by the city water and sewer manager of metering devices utilized in the foregoing uses shall be required in order for sewer service customers to qualify for applicable sewer service charge calculations. Costs of installation, calibration and maintenance of metering devices for uses listed in items B., C. and D., above, shall be borne by the customer. Metering devices for uses listed in items B. and C. above shall be calibrated annually. Metering devices for uses listed in item D. above shall be calibrated quarterly. 
(Ord. dated 9/6/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/2/11, § 1; Ord. dated 6/7/10, § 2; Ord. dated 6/18/01; Ord. dated 6/5/00, § 1; Ord. dated 5/1/00, § 2; Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-79) 
(Ord. dated 10/5/15(1), § 2) 
13.16.040 - Residential sewer taps fees-Extensions. 
A.  Sewer Taps. For making residential taps on sewer main and extending the same to line of sewer easement or street right-of-way as applicable, fees for meters four inches or smaller shall apply as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution. Tap fees for meters larger than four inches shall be calculated by the city engineer, based on residential use of three hundred fifty (350) gpd or such actual historic demand data as may be available at the time of such calculation. An oversized tap or meter may not be installed for the purpose of obtaining a more favorable tap fee. Except as provided at item C. below, sewer tap fees shall be payable before connection of any structure to the city sewer system. 
B.  Sewer Extensions. 
1.  All extensions of sewer mains must be with the express approval of the mayor and council. 
2.  Where sewer mains are extended in the right-of-way of an accepted street, the actual cost to the city of such extensions shall be assessed against the real estate abutting on each side of such street and the owners thereof, with each assessment being fairly determined, in proportion to the frontage of the property assessed on the street in which such extension is made. 
3.  Where a developer makes application for the extension of sewer mains to a proposed subdivision or development, the city engineering department shall estimate the cost of extending such service to the property line of the property to be developed; and this estimate shall be presented to the mayor and council. It shall be the policy of the city to extend sewer service to the property line of such property without cost to the developer, subject to the following terms and conditions, to wit: 
a.  Sewer service shall be extended to all lots within the subdivision at the expense of the developer (applicant), and the city shall take the necessary steps to assure that the developer performs this obligation before the city approves the extension of sewer service to the property line; and 
b.  The city reserves the right to refuse to extend such service to the property line of such property when the cost of such extension is determined by the mayor and council to be excessive, or when the city does not have funds available for such extension; and in either of such events, the developer and the city may negotiate such extension on such terms and conditions as the mayor and council may approve. 
4.  When a developer makes application for the extension of sewer mains to a proposed subdivision or development, and the mayor and council as hereinabove provided determine that the cost of such extension would be excessive, or the mayor and council determine that the city does not have the funds available for such extension, and the city and the developer are unable to satisfactorily negotiate the financing of such extension, the mayor and council shall, on request of the developer, certify these facts to the planning commission for its consideration in determining what utilities the developer will be required to provide in such proposed subdivision or development. 
C.  Sewer Extensions to Properties Served by Private Sewerage Disposal Systems. When the owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy connected to a private sewage disposal system makes application for the extension of sewer mains to such property and such extension is expressly approved by the mayor and council, the actual cost to the city of such extension shall be assessed against the applicant. The actual cost to the city of such extension of the the city sewer line to the owner's property line and the applicable sewer tap fees may be paid by the owner to the city in installments together with monthly administrative fees as herinafter set forth. In the event the cost of such extension is two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00) or less, the owner may pay the cost of such extension, together with the applicable sewer tap fees and administrative fees of three dollars ($3.00) per month, in twenty-four (24) equal monthly payments. In the event the cost of such extension is more that two thousand four hundred dollars ($2,400.00), the owner may pay the cost of such extension, together with the applicable sewer tap fees and administrative fees of three dollars ($3.00) per month, in thirty-six (36) equal monthly payments. The owner shall construct a sanitary sewer line from the owner's house to the property line, in accordance with these specifications, and shall bear all costs for the installation of same. 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 10; Ord. dated 6/3/13(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 1/7/13, § 1; Ord. dated 7/19/10, § 2; Ord. dated 2/1/10, § 1; Ord. dated 6/2/08, § 2; Ord. dated 2/6/06, § 3; Ord. dated 6/20/05, §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 7/9/03, § 2; Ord. dated 1/6/03, § 2; Ord. dated 6/5/00, § 2; Ord. dated 5/1/00, § 3; Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-80) 
13.16.041 - Nonresidential sewer tap fees. 
    The fee for connection of nonresidential uses to the city sewer system shall be calculated based on a comparison of the expected sewage effluent of such use with effluent of typical single-family residence. No nonresidential tap fee will be less than that for residential use connections, as provided in Section 13.16.040 of this chapter. 
    For comparison purposes, a residential use is expected to generate three hundred fifty (350) gallons per day of sewage and 0.73 pounds of five-day biochemical oxygen demand per unit. The tap fees for nonresidential use will be calculated by comparing their flow, based on: (1) the average daily water demands provided in Section 6.12(b) of the EPD document, "Minimum Standards for Public Water Systems," a copy of which shall be maintained for public inspection during normal business hours at the city engineering department; or (2) the best available water use records, with the flow expected from a residential use. The tap fee for dischargers of process waste will be calculated by comparing the strength of the waste with the strength of domestic waste. In the event that the waste is expected to include other parameters, such as suspended solids or ammonia, which are significantly higher than domestic waste, a comparison will be made of that parameter and will be used in calculating the connection fee. 
    The tap fee for nonresidential service will be determined by the best information available to the city. Any discharger of process waste into the city sewer system will be responsible for furnishing periodic estimates of the quantity and component analysis of the waste to be discharged. The tap fee for dischargers of process waste will be subject to an adjustment if the city determines that the fee was calculated on the basis of inaccurate data. Dischargers of process waste will be responsible for the cost of the number of tests determined by the city to be sufficient to accurately calculate the average strength of such discharge. 
(Ord. dated 6/2/08, § 3; Ord. dated 6/20/05, § 3) 
13.16.050 - Water cut off when sewer charge not paid. 
    It is determined and declared that it would be impractical and dangerous to the public health for the city to continue to furnish water to a customer and at the same time to decline to dispose of his sewage; therefore, where the sewerage customer is also a water customer, the failure of such customer to pay such fees and charges on or before the twenty-fifth day of each month following their billing on the first of the month shall authorize the city to cut off the water supply of such customer in the same manner that water is cut off for failure to pay water bills. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-81) 
13.16.060 - Deposit for water service to secure payment of sewerage fees. 
    All deposits made as security for the payments of water bills shall in the same manner secure and be liable for payment of the sewerage fees and charges herein provided. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-82) 
13.16.070 - Maintenance of pipes connected to sewer. 
    Each and every customer, wherever residing and however defined herein, is hereby required to maintain and keep clean the sewer pipes leading and connecting from his plumbing system to the city street line or city sewer main whichever is nearer. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-83) 
13.16.080 - Impeding, obstructing sewer flow and deposit of certain matter prohibited. 
    No person shall do any act or thing which may impair or obstruct the flow of any public sewer or clog up any appurtenances thereof, or place therein any substance, solid or liquid other than the waste products for which such sewers are provided. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-84) 
13.16.090 - Explosive or inflammable matter, discharge into sewer prohibited. 
    No explosive or inflammable matters shall be discharged into any sewer. 
    Cleaning establishments, buildings used for housing or repairing automobiles, gasoline and oil-service stations and other buildings or establishments where gasoline, oils, calcium carbide or other explosives or inflammable materials are stored, sold or hauled, shall be maintained so as to prevent the entrance into the sewer of explosive or inflammable material. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-85) 
13.16.100 - Installation and ownership of sewer lines. 
    All sewer lines which are to be made a part of the city sewer system shall be installed by the city or by a person, firm or company approved by the city; and all such lines shall be installed in accordance with specifications supplied by the city or approved by the city; and all such lines, when installed, shall be the property of the city. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-86) 
13.16.110 - Deposits in unsanitary manner on public or private property. 
    It is unlawful for any person to place, deposit or permit to be deposited in an unsanitary manner upon public or private property within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any human or animal excrement, garbage or other objectionable waste. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-87) 
13.16.120 - Discharge of polluted waters to natural outlets or storm sewers prohibited. 
    It is unlawful to discharge to any natural outlet or storm sewer within the city, or in any area under the jurisdiction of the city, any sanitary sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters, unless a permit for said discharge is first obtained form the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-88) 
13.16.130 - Privies, etc., restricted. 
    Except as hereinafter provided, it shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, septic tank, cesspool, or other facility intended or used for the disposal of sewage. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-88.1) 
13.16.140 - Installation of facilities and connection to public sewer after notice. 
    The owner of any house, building or property used for human occupancy, recreation or other purposes situated within the corporate limits of the city and located upon property abutting a street in which there is now located or may in the future be located, a sanitary sewer line, is required at his own expense to install suitable sanitary facilities therein. The owner shall then construct a sanitary sewer line from his house to the property line, in accordance with these specifications, and make application to the city for a connection from the property line to the sewer line in the street within ninety (90) days of the official notice to do so, provided that said sewer line is within two hundred (200) feet of the property line. The owner shall pay all costs of the sanitary sewer facilities on his property line. The owner shall pay all costs of the sanitary sewer facilities on his property as well as the sewer tap-on charge in effect by the city at the time of said connection. 
(Ord. dated 6/2/08, § 4; Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-88.2) 
13.16.150 - Private system connection in compliance with regulations. 
    Where a public sanitary sewer is not available under the provisions of Section 13.16.140 of this chapter, the building sewer shall be connected to a private sewage disposal system complying with the provisions of Sections 13.16.160 through 13.16.180 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-88.3 
13.16.160 - Compliance of private system with state regulations-Minimum area for subsurface absorption facilities-Prohibited discharge from septic tank or cesspool. 
    The type, capacities, location and layout of a private sewage disposal system shall comply with all recommendations of the state of Georgia. No permit shall be issued for any private sewage disposal system employing subsurface soil absorption facilities where the area of the lot is less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet. No septic tank or cesspool shall be permitted to discharge to any public sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-88.4) 
13.16.170 - Abandonment of private system when public sewer available. 
    At such time as a public sewer becomes available to a property served by a private sewage disposal system, as provided in Section 13.16.140 of this chapter, a direct connection shall be made to the public sewer in compliance with this division, and any septic tanks, cesspools and similar private sewage disposal facilities shall be abandoned and filled with suitable material. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-88.5; Ord. dated 6/3/13(1), §§ 1, 2) 
13.16.180 - Maintenance of private system. 
    The owner shall operate and maintain the private sewage disposal facilities in a sanitary manner at all times, at no expense to the city. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-88.6) 
13.16.190 - Permit to uncover or disturb public sewer-Required. 
    No unauthorized person shall uncover, make any connections with or opening into, use, alter or disturb any public sewer or appurtenances thereof without first obtaining a written permit from the city building and zoning office. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-88.7) 
13.16.200 - Separate building sewer for each building-Exception. 
    A separate and independent building sewer shall be provided for every building; except where one building stands at the rear of another on an interior lot and no private sewer is available or can be constructed to the rear building through an adjoining alley, court, yard, or driveway, the building sewer from the front building may be extended to the rear building and the whole considered as one building sewer. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1 (part); prior code § 22-88.9) 
13.16.210 - Approval prerequisite to use of old building sewers with new buildings. 
    Old building sewers may be used in connection with new buildings only when they are found, on examination and test by the superintendent, to meet all requirements of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.10) 
13.16.220 - Artificial lift of sanitary sewage. 
    In all buildings in which any building drain is too low to permit gravity flow to the public sewer, sanitary sewage carried by such drain shall be lifted by approved artificial means and discharged to the building sewer. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.11) 
13.16.230 - Building sewer connection regulations. 
    The superintendent shall promulgate and enforce regulations governing procedures and methods for pretreatment of sewage and connection of lines to the public sewer so as to comply with all state and federal laws and regulations governing the same and as may be otherwise necessary for the effective and efficient administration and enforcement of this article. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.12) 
13.16.240 - Certain new connections to sanitary sewer system prohibited. 
    New connections to the sanitary sewer system from storm sewers, roof drains, or any other source of inflow shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.13) 
13.16.250 - Prohibited discharge of surface and subsurface water into sanitary sewer. 
    No person shall discharge or cause to be discharged any storm water, surface water, groundwater, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, uncontaminated cooling water or unpolluted industrial process waters to any sanitary sewer. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.14) 
13.16.260 - Method of disposal of storm water and polluted drainage. 
    Storm water and all other unpolluted drainage shall be discharged to such sewers as are specifically designated as storm sewers, or to a natural outlet approved by the superintendent. Industrial cooling water or unpolluted process waters may be discharged upon approval of the Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division, to a storm sewer or natural outlet. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.15) 
13.16.270 - Preliminary treatment-When required. 
    The admission into the public sewers of any water or wastes having (a) a five day biochemical oxygen demand greater than two hundred fifty (250) parts per million, or (b) containing more than two hundred fifty (250) parts per million of suspended solids, or (c) a chemical oxygen demand greater than seven hundred fifty (750) parts per million, or (d) having an average daily flow greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) gallons per day, shall be subject to the review and approval of the superintendent. Where necessary in the opinion of the superintendent, the owner shall provide at his expense, such preliminary treatment as may be necessary to (1) reduce the biochemical oxygen demand to two hundred fifty (250) parts per million, the suspended solids to two hundred fifty (250) parts per million, and the chemical oxygen demand to seven hundred and fifty (750) mg/l, or (2) control the quantities and rates of discharge of such water or wastes. Plans, specifications and any other pertinent information relating to proposed preliminary treatment facilities shall be submitted for approval of the superintendent and no construction of such facilities shall be commenced until said approval is obtained in writing. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.16) 
13.16.280 - Power and authority of inspectors. 
    The superintendent and other duly authorized employees of the city bearing proper credentials and identification shall be permitted to enter upon all properties for the purposes of inspection, observation, measurement, sampling and testing, in accordance with the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.17) 
13.16.290 - Penalties. 
    Any person found to be violating any provisions of this chapter shall be served by the city with written notice stating the nature of the violation and providing a reasonable time limit for the satisfactory correction thereof. The offender shall, within the period of time stated in such notice, permanently cease all violations. Continued violation beyond the aforesaid time limit shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.18) 
13.16.300 - Application. 
    Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, all provisions and requirements of this chapter regulating sewer use shall apply to sewer systems of the city, whether same are located within the corporate limits of the city or any adjacent unincorporated area. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/99, § 1(part); prior code § 22-88.19) 
13.16.310 - Required use of municipal sewers and sanitary system. 
A.  To safeguard the health of the citizens of the city, and to promote the sanitary disposal of waste products, all persons shall be required to connect their water closets, commodes, urinals, sinks, toilets and privies to the sewer and sanitary system of said city whenever and wherever such facilities are reasonably available, subject to the definitions, terms and conditions hereinafter set forth. 
B.  For the purposes of this section, such sewer and sanitary facilities shall in all cases be deemed "reasonably available" when any portion of the property upon which such toilet facilities are located abuts a utility easement or street under which there is a sewer line. 
C.  If any property owner shall fail to comply with the provisions hereof within ninety (90) days after having been notified to do so by the city, the city, acting by and through its proper officers and agents, and in the interest of public health and sanitation, shall condemn said property and forbid the occupancy of the same; and in this event, the city shall place on such property in conspicuous places not less than three signs reading: 
    "UNSAFE FOR OCCUPANCY-CONDEMNED BY THE CITY OF COVINGTON." 
D.  If any person occupies property which is condemned as hereinabove provided, or if any person owning such property permits the same to be occupied, such person shall upon conviction thereof be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 for each day or part thereof that such occupancy continues. 
E.  No building permits shall be issued pursuant to Title 15 of this code if the proposed construction, alterations or repairs shall not comply with the provisions hereof. 
F.  The provisions hereof shall be cumulative of the provisions of Title 15 of this code, and only such portions of said Title 15 as may be in direct conflict with the provisions hereof are superseded; and where such a conflict does exist, the provisions hereof shall be controlling and followed. 
(Prior code § 12-4) 
Chapter 13.20 - NATURAL GAS SYSTEM 

13.20.010 - Organization of operation. 
    Operation of the natural gas system is organized under an ordinance authorizing the acquisition of a gas system and the issuance of gas and electric anticipation certificates. 
(Prior code § 22-90) 
13.20.020 - No free service. 
    No free service shall be furnished at any time from the gas system. All service shall be furnished in accordance with rates now or hereafter established, including services furnished to any county, municipal corporation, or other public board or body. 
(Prior code § 22-91) 
13.20.030 - Property or equipment, interfering with or molesting prohibited. 
    It is unlawful for any unauthorized person to interfere with or molest in any way the gas metering stations, regulating stations, mains, plants, or other equipment installed either on the public rights-of-way or on private property. 
(Prior code § 22-92) 
13.20.040 - Department to make or supervise extension of mains, permission prerequisite to unmetered pipe or main. 
    The city gas department will make or supervise all extensions of mains in the public streets and roads both inside and outside the city limits. No person shall make any connection to any unmetered pipe or main containing gas from the city system, unless such person has first obtained a written permit for such work from the superintendent of the gas department. 
(Prior code § 22-93) 
13.20.050 - Rates, fees and charges. 
    The following schedules of rates, fees and charges are applicable to the service furnished by the gas system effective for all billings for natural gas service to the city's customers for consumption after April 1, 2015. 
A.  Initial Service Charge. The gas service line for gas service not greater than one inch shall be extended without cost, provided such service line shall not exceed seventy-five (75) feet in length within the customer's property line. If the service line exceeds the seventy-five-foot allowance aforesaid for a one-inch or less service, a charge of one dollar and twenty-five cents ($1.25) per linear foot will be made for such excess. The service charge for the gas line service extension for gas service in excess of one inch shall be based on the city's actual cost to extend such service across the customer's property less an allowance of ninety-three dollars and seventy-five cents ($93.75). 
B.  Residential and Small Commercial Service Schedule GR-SM. 
1.  Availability. Anywhere on the existing city system, both inside and outside the corporate limits. 
2.  Applicability. Applicable only to residential and small commercial service when supplied through one meter to each individual residence or apartment. 
3.  Rate. The cost of gas plus the following: 
Residential base service charge per month, minimum bill $11.95 Small commercial base charge per month, minimum bill 13.50 City distribution fee, per MCF 3.45  
C.  Medium Commercial Service, Schedule G-MC. 
1.  Availability. Anywhere on the existing city system both inside and outside the corporate limits where sufficient capacity is available. Additional capacity may be made available under the city's line extension and service connection regulations. 
2.  Applicability. Applicable to any commercial customer using more than one hundred thousand (100,000) cubic feet during any calendar month during the twelve (12) months preceding the last billing date, who may elect to receive gas under the terms and conditions of this rate schedule. No gas may be resold or transmitted to other premises. 
3.  Rate. The cost of gas plus the following: 
Base service charge per month, minimum bill $27.50 City distribution fee, per MCF 3.20  
D.  Large Commercial and Industrial Service, Schedule G-CI. 
1.  Availability. Anywhere on the existing city system both inside and outside the corporate limits where sufficient capacity is available. Additional capacity may be made available under the city's line extension and service connection regulations. 
2.  Applicability. Applicable to any commercial or industrial customer using more than seven hundred thousand (700,000) cubic feet during any calendar month during the twelve (12) months preceding the last billing date, who may elect to receive gas under the terms and conditions of this rate schedule. No gas may be resold or transmitted to other premises. 
3.  Rate. The cost of gas plus the following: 
Base service charge per month, minimum bill $55.00 City distribution fee, per MCF 2.95  
E.  Standard Interruptible Service, Schedule G-I. 
1.  Availability. Anywhere on the existing city system both inside and outside the corporate limits where sufficient capacity is available. Additional capacity may be made available under the city's line extension and service connection regulations. 
2.  Applicability. Applicable to any nonresidential customer having an average monthly usage of at least one thousand (1,000) MCF for the previous twelve-month period. In order to qualify for the Schedule G-1 rate a customer must be able to curtail consumption to the level defined in the City of Covington Natural Gas Sales Agreement. Supplement gas supply during curtailment may be have an alternate fuel source installed and operable on site (subject to verification by the city at least annually) or customer's desire to discontinue operation of equipment consuming natural gas. Such curtailment, by alternate fuel source or discontinued operation, must be completed within four hours of notice from the city utility director or designee. The customer must provide the city with a twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days per week, current contact telephone number whereby a customer representative with the ability to curtail the load may be reached by the city. Failure of the customer to meet the foregoing requirements will render the customer liable to the city for resulting losses by the city, including, but not limited to, excess costs and penalties, as well as suspension of the interruptible rate for up to twelve (12) months, during which the large commercial and industrial (Schedule G-C1) rate will apply. 
3.  Rate. The cost of gas plus the following: 
Base charge per month, minimum bill $100.00 City Distribution Fee: First 5,000 MMBtu per month 1.85 Next 20,000 MMBtu per month 0.55 25,001 - 50,000 MMBtu per month 0.40 50,001 - 100,000 MMBtu per month 0.30 Over 100,000 MMBtu per month 0.20  
4.  Contract Terms. Each customer shall execute a service agreement for a period of not less than one year as a condition precedent to receiving service under this rate schedule. 
F.  Large Interruptible Service, Schedule GL-1. 
1.  Availability. Anywhere on the existing city system, both inside and outside the corporate limits where sufficient capacity is available. Additional capacity may be made available under the city's line extension and service connection regulations. 
2.  Applicability. Applicable to any nonresidential customer having an average monthly usage greater than twenty-five thousand (25,000) MCF for the previous twelve-month period. In order to qualify for the Schedule GL-I rate, a customer must be able to curtail consumption to the level defined in the City of Covington Natural Gas Sales Agreement. Supplement gas supply during curtailment may be an alternate fuel source installed and operable on site (subject to verification by the city at least annually) or customer's desire to discontinue operation of equipment consuming natural gas. Such curtailment, by alternate fuel source or discontinued operation, must be completed within four hours of notice from the city utility director or designee. The customer must provide the city with a twenty-four (24) hours per day, seven days per week, current contact telephone number whereby a customer representative with the ability to curtail the load may be reached by the city. Failure of the customer to meet the foregoing requirements will render the customer liable to the city for resulting losses by the city, including, but not limited to, excess costs and penalties, as well as suspension of the interruptible rate for up to twelve (12) months, during which the large commercial and industrial (Schedule G-CI) rate will apply. 
3.  Rate. The cost of gas plus the following: 
    Demand Charges. The customer shall pay demand charges, if any, as defined by the City of Covington Natural Gas Service Agreement, to reserve a firm gas supply. 
Base charge per month, minimum bill $100.00 City Distribution Fee: First 5,000 MMBtu per month 0.55 Next 20,000 MMBtu per month 0.55 25,001-50,000 MMBtu per month 0.40 50,001-100,000 MMBtu per month 0.30 Over 100,000 MMBtu per month 0.20  
4.  Contract Terms. Each customer shall execute a service agreement for a period of not less than one year as a condition precedent to receiving service under this rate schedule. 
G.  Temporary Firm Service, Schedule G-TF. 
1.  Availability. Anywhere on the existing city system, both inside and outside the corporate limits, where use commenced between November 1, 1996 and March 31, 1997, and where sufficient capacity is available and upon not less than ninety (90) days' prior notice of need from the customer to the city. 
2.  Applicability. The customer shall have the right to consume up to five hundred sixty (560) MMBtu per day on a "firm" basis and shall be interrupted only in the case of force majeure; gas requirements beyond five hundred sixty (560) MMBtu per day shall be delivered on a best efforts, or "interruptible" basis. 
3.  Rate. The cost of gas plus the following: 
    Demand Charges. The customer shall pay demand charges, if any, as defined by the City of Covington Natural Gas Service Agreement, to reserve a firm gas supply. 
Base charge per month, minimum bill $100.00 Local City Distribution Fee: First 5,000 MMBtu per month $0.55 for consumption prior to July 1, 2015 
$0.70 for consumption on/after July 1, 2015 Next 20,000 MMBtu per month 0.55 25,001-50,000 MMBtu per month 0.40 50,001-100,000 MMBtu per month 0.40 Over 100,000 MMBtu per month 0.20  
4.  Contract Terms. Each customer shall execute a service agreement for a period of not less than one year as a condition precedent to receiving service under this rate schedule. 
H.  Extension When Costs Prohibitive. The city expressly reserves the right to refuse to extend gas service when: 
1.  The cost of such extension is determined by the mayor and council to be excessive, or 
2.  When the city does not have funds available for such extension; and in either of such events, the applicant for such extension and the city may negotiate the financing of such extension on such terms and conditions as the mayor and council may approve. 
(Ord. dated 2/6/06, § 1; Ord. dated 2/3/04, § 1; Ord. dated 12/2/02, § 1; Ord. dated 5/1/00, § 2; prior code § 22-94) 
(Ord. dated 12/8/08, §§ 1-4; Ord. dated 5/18/09, §§ 1-6; Ord. dated 4/19/10, § 1; Ord. dated 4/19/10, §§ 1-4; Ord. dated 1/3/11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 4/6/15(1), § 1) 
13.20.060 - Cost of gas. 
    "Cost of gas" as used in this Chapter 13.20 shall be defined as the variable first-of-the-month commodity index price, interstate pipeline transportation costs, pipeline fuel costs, and administrative costs required to deliver adequate and reliable natural gas supply to the city's distribution system gate. The provisions of this section shall be effective for all billings for natural gas service to the city's customers for consumption after April 1, 2015. 
(Ord. dated 4/6/15(1), § 2) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated April 6, 2015(1), § 2, amended § 13.20.060 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 13.20.060 pertained to product cost adjustment and derived from the prior code § 22-95. 
Chapter 13.24 - INDUSTRIAL WASTEWATER CONTROL 

13.24.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and Policy. This chapter sets forth uniform requirements for users of the publicly owned treatment works for the city and enables the city to comply with all applicable state and federal laws, including the Clean Water Act (33 United States Code § 1251 et seq.) and the General Pretreatment Regulations (40 Code of Federal Regulations Part 403). 
B.  The objectives of this chapter are: 
1.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will interfere with its operation; 
2.  To prevent the introduction of pollutants into the publicly owned treatment works that will pass through the publicly owned treatment works, inadequately treated, into receiving waters, or otherwise be incompatible with the publicly owned treatment works; 
3.  To protect both publicly owned treatment works personnel who may be affected by wastewater and sludge in the course of their employment and the general public; 
4.  To promote reuse and recycling of industrial wastewater and sludge from the publicly owned treatment works; 
5.  To provide for fees for the equitable distribution of the cost of operation, maintenance, and improvement of the publicly owned treatment works; and 
6.  To enable the city to comply with its National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System permit conditions, sludge use and disposal requirements, and any other federal or state laws to which the publicly owned treatment works is subject. 
C.  Application. This chapter shall apply to all users of the publicly owned treatment works and authorizes the issuance of wastewater discharge permits; provides for monitoring, compliance, and enforcement activities; establishes administrative review procedures; requires user reporting; and provides for the setting of fees for the equitable distribution of costs resulting from the program established herein. 
D.  Administration. Except as otherwise provided herein, the superintendent shall administer, implement, and enforce the provisions of this chapter. Any powers granted to or duties imposed upon the superintendent may be delegated by the superintendent to other city personnel. 
E.  Abbreviations. The following abbreviations, when used in this chapter, shall have the designated meanings: 
1.  "BOD" means biochemical oxygen demand. 
2.  "CFR" means Code of Federal Regulations. 
3.  "COD" means chemical oxygen demand. 
4.  "EPA" means U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. 
5.  "gpd" means gallons per day. 
6.  "mg/l" means milligrams per liter. 
7.  "NPDES" means National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System. 
8.  "POTW" means publicly owned treatment works. 
9.  "RCRA" means Resource Conservation and Recovery Act. 
10.  "SIC" means standard industrial classification. 
11.  "TSS" means total suspended solids. 
12.  "U.S.C." means United States Code. 
F.  Definitions Unless a provision explicitly states otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meanings hereinafter designated. 
    "Act" or "the Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, also known as the Clean Water Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. § 125 1 et seq. 
    "Approval" means the Director of the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
    "Authorized representative of the user" means: 
1.  If the user is a corporation: 
a.  The president, secretary, treasurer, or a vice-president of the corporation in charge of a principal business function, or any other person who performs similar policy or decision-making functions for the corporation; or 
b.  The manager of one or more manufacturing, production, or operation facilities, if authority to sign documents has been assigned or delegated to the manager in accordance with corporate procedures. 
2.  If the user is a partnership or sole proprietorship: a general partner or proprietor, respectively. 
3.  If the user is a federal, state, or local governmental facility: a director or highest official appointed or designated to oversee the operation and performance of the activities of the governmental facility, or his designee. 
4.  The individuals described in paragraphs 1 through 3 of this definition may designate another authorized representative if the authorization is in writing, the authorization specifies the individual or position responsible for the overall operation of the facility from which the discharge originates or having overall responsibility for environmental matters for the company, and the written authorization is submitted to the city. 
    "Biochemical oxygen demand" or "BOD," means the quantity of oxygen utilized in the biochemical oxidation of organic matter under standard laboratory procedures for five days at twenty (20) degrees centigrade, usually expressed as a concentration (e.g., mg/l). 
    "Categorical pretreatment standard" or "categorical standard" means any regulation containing pollutant discharge limits promulgated by EPA in accordance with Sections 307(b) and (c) of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1317) which apply to a specific category of users and which appear in 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471. 
    "City" means the city of Covington or the city council of Covington or any other political subdivision of the state of Georgia subject to the provisions of this chapter by interjurisdictional agreement with the city of Covington. 
    "Environmental Protection Agency" or "EPA" means the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency or, where appropriate, the Regional Water Management Division Director, or other duly authorized official of said agency. 
    "Existing source" means any source of discharge, the construction or operation of which commenced prior to the publication by EPA of proposed categorical pretreatment standards, which will be applicable to such source if the standard is thereafter promulgated in accordance with Section 307 of the act. 
    "Grab sample" means a sample which is taken from a waste stream without regard to the flow in the waste stream and over a period of time not to exceed fifteen (15) minutes. 
    "Indirect discharge" or "discharge" means the introduction of pollutants into the POTW from any nondomestic source regulated under Section 307(b), (c), or (d) of the Act. 
    "Instantaneous maximum allowable discharge limit" means the maximum concentration of a pollutant allowed to be discharged at any time, determined from the analysis of any discrete or composite sample collected, independent of the industrial flow rate and the duration of the sampling event. 
    "Inference" means a discharge, which alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, inhibits or disrupts the POTW, its treatment processes or operations or its sludge processes, use or disposal; and therefore, is a cause of a violation of the city's NPDES permit or of the prevention of sewage sludge use or disposal in compliance with any of the following statutory/regulatory provisions or permits issued thereunder, or any more stringent state or local regulations: Section 405 of the Act; the Solid waste Disposal Act, including Title II commonly referred to as the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); any state regulations contained in any state sludge management plan prepared pursuant to Subtitle D of the Solid Waste Disposal Act; the Clean Air Act; the Toxic Substances Control Act; and the Marine Protection, Research, and Sanctuaries Act. 
    "Medical waste" means isolation wastes, infectious agents, human blood and blood products, pathological wastes, sharps, body parts, contaminated bedding, surgical wastes, potentially contaminated laboratory wastes, and dialysis wastes. 
    "New source" means: 1. Any building, structure, facility, or installation from which there is (or may be) a discharge of pollutants, the construction of which commenced after the publication of proposed pretreatment standards under Section 307(c) of the Act which will be applicable to such source if such standards are thereafter promulgated in accordance with that section, provided that: 
a.  The building, structure, facility, or installation is constructed at a site at which no other source is located; or 
b.  The building, structure, facility, or installation totally replaces the process or production equipment that causes the discharge of pollutants at an existing source; or 
c.  The production or wastewater generating processes of the building, structure, facility, or installation are substantially independent of an existing source at the same site. In determining whether these are substantially independent factors such as the extent to which the new facility is integrated with the existing plant, and the extent to which the new facility is engaged in the same general type of activity as the existing source, should be considered. 
2.  Construction on a site at which an existing source is located results in a modification rather than a new source if the construction does not create a new building, structure, facility, or installation meeting the criteria of paragraph (1)(b) or (c) of this definition but otherwise alters, replaces, or adds to existing process or production equipment. 
3.  Construction of a new source as defined under this paragraph has commenced if the owner or operator has: 
a.  Begun, or caused to begin, as part of a continuous onsite construction program: 
i.  Any placement, assembly, or installation of facilities or equipment; or 
ii.  Significant site preparation work including clearing, excavation, or removal of existing buildings, structures, or facilities which is necessary for the placement, assembly, or installation of new source facilities or equipment. 
b.  Entered into a binding contractual obligation for the purchase of facilities or equipment which are intended to be used in its operation within a reasonable time. Options to purchase or contracts which can be terminated or modified without substantial loss, and contracts for feasibility, engineering, and design studies do not constitute a contractual obligation under this paragraph. 
    "Noncontact cooling water" means water used for cooling which does not come into direct contact with any raw material, intermediate product, waste product, or finished product. 
    "Pass through" means a discharge which exits the POTW into waters of the United States in quantities or concentrations which, alone or in conjunction with a discharge or discharges from other sources, is a cause of a violation of any requirement of the city's NPDES permit, including an increase in the magnitude or duration of a violation. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, copartnership, firm, company, corporation, association, joint stock company, trust, estate, governmental entity, or any other legal entity; or their legal representatives, agents, or assigns. This definition includes all federal, state and local governmental entities. 
    "pH" means the logarithm of the reciprocal of the weight of the hydrogen ions in grams per liter of solution. 
    "Pollutant" means dredged spoil, solid waste, incinerator residue, filter backwash, sewage, garbage, sewage sludge, munitions, medical wastes, chemical wastes, biological materials, radioactive materials, heat, wrecked or discarded equipment, rock, sand, cellar dirt, municipal, agricultural and industrial wastes, and certain characteristics of wastewater (e.g., pH. temperature, TSS, turbidity, color, BOD, COD, toxicity, or odor). 
    "Pretreatment" means the reduction of the amount of pollutants, the elimination of pollutants, or the alteration of the nature of pollutant properties in wastewater prior to, or in lieu of, introducing such pollutants into the POTW. This reduction or alteration wan be obtained by physical, chemical, or biological processes; by prowess changes; or by other means, except by diluting the concentration of the pollutants unless allowed by an applicable pretreatment standard. 
    "Pretreatment coordinator" means the person designated by the city to supervise the operation of the pretreatment program. 
    "Pretreatment requirements" means any substantive or procedural requirement related to pretreatment imposed on a user, other than a pretreatment standard. 
    "Pretreatment standards" or "standards" means prohibited discharge standards, categorical pretreatment standards, and local limits. 
    "Prohibited discharge standards" or "prohibited discharges" means absolute prohibitions against the discharge of certain substances; these prohibitions appear in Section 13.24.020 of this chapter. 
    "Publicly owned treatment works" or "POTW" means a "treatment works," as defined by Section 212 of the Act (33 U.S.C. 1292) which is owned in whole or in part by the city. This definition includes any devices or systems used in the collection, storage, treatment, recycling, and reclamation of sewage or industrial wastes of a liquid nature and any conveyances which convey wastewater to a treatment plant. 
    "Septic tank waste" means any sewage from holding tanks such as vessels, chemical toilets, campers, trailers, and septic tanks. 
    "Sewage" means a combination of the water-carried wastes from residences, business buildings, institutions and industrial establishments, together with such ground, surface and storm waters as may be present. 
    "Significant industrial user" means: 
1.  A user subject to categorical pretreatment standards; or 
2.  A user that: 
a.  Discharges an average of twenty-five thousand (25,000) gpd or more of process wastewater to the POTW (excluding sanitary, noncontact cooling, and boiler blowdown wastewater); 
b.  Contributes a process waste stream which makes up five percent or more of the average dry weather hydraulic or organic capacity of the POTW treatment plant; or 
c.  Is designated as such by the city on the basis that it has a reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or violating any pretreatment standard or requirement. 
3.  Upon a finding that a user meeting the criteria in subsection (2) of this definition has no reasonable potential for adversely affecting the POTW's operation or for violating any pretreatment standard or requirement, the city may at any time, on its own initiative or in response to a petition received from a user, and in accordance with procedures in 40 CFR 403.8(f)(6), determine that such user should not be considered a significant industrial user. 
    "Slug load" or "slug" means any discharge at a flow rate or concentration which could cause a violation of the prohibited discharge standards set forth in Section 13.24.020(A)of this chapter. 
    "Standard Industrial Classification (SIC) Code," means a classification pursuant to the Standard Industrial Classification Manual issued by the United States Office of Management and Budget. 
    "Storm water" means any flow occurring during or following any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation, including snowmelt. 
    "Superintendent" means the superintendent or manager of the sewerage works of the city or his authorized deputy, agent or representative. 
    "Total suspended solids" means the total suspended matter that floats on the surface of, or is suspended in, water, wastewater, or other liquid, and which is removable by laboratory filtering. 
    "Total toxic organics" means the summation of all quantifiable toxic organics with values greater than 0.01 milligrams per liter as listed at 40 CFR 413.02(i). 
    "User" or "industrial user," means source of indirect discharge. 
    "Wastewater" means liquid and water-carried industrial wastes and sewage from residential dwellings, commercial buildings, industrial and manufacturing facilities, and institutions, whether treated or untreated, which are contributed to the POTW. 
    "Wastewater treatment plant" or "treatment plant" means that portion of the POTW which is designed to provide treatment of municipal sewage and industrial waste. 
(Prior code § 22-126) 
13.24.020 - General sewer use requirements. 
A.  Prohibited Discharge Standards. 
1.  General Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW any pollutant or wastewater which causes pass through or interference. These general prohibitions apply to all users of the POTW whether or not they are subject to categorical pretreatment standards or any other national, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements. 
2.  Specific Prohibitions. No user shall introduce or cause to be introduced into the POTW the following pollutants, substances, or wastewater: 
a.  Pollutants which create a fire or explosive hazard in the POTW, including, but not limited to, waste streams with a closed-cup flashpoint of less than one hundred forty (140) degrees F (sixty (60) degrees C) using the test methods specified in 40 CFR 261.21; 
b.  Wastewater having a pH less than 5.0 or more than 9.0, or otherwise causing corrosive structural damage to the POTW or equipment; 
c.  Solid or viscous substances in amounts which will cause obstruction of the flow in the sewer system or POTW resulting in interference; 
d.  Pollutants, including oxygen-demanding pollutants (BOD, etc.), released in a discharge at a flow rate and/or pollutant concentration which, either singly or by interaction with other pollutants, will cause interference with the POTW; 
e.  Wastewater having a temperature greater than one hundred fifty (150) degrees F (sixty-five (65) degrees C), or which will inhibit biological activity in the treatment plant resulting in interference, but in no case wastewater which causes the temperature at the introduction into the treatment plant to exceed one hundred four (104) degrees F (forty (40) degrees C); 
f.  Petroleum oil, non-biodegradable cutting oil, or products of mineral oil origin, in amounts that will cause interference or pass through; 
g.  Pollutants which result in the presence of toxic gases, vapors, or fumes within the POTW in a quantity that may cause acute worker health and safety problems; 
h.  Trucked or hauled pollutants, except at discharge points designated by the superintendent in accordance with Section 13.24.030 (D) of this chapter; 
i.  Noxious or malodorous liquids, gases, solids, or other wastewater which, either singly or by interaction with other wastes, are sufficient to create a public nuisance or a hazard to life, or to prevent entry into the sewers for maintenance or repair; 
j.  Wastewater which imparts color which cannot be removed by the treatment process, such as, but not limited to, dye wastes and vegetable tanning solutions, which consequently imparts color to the treatment plant's effluent, thereby violating the city's NPDES permit; 
k.  Wastewater containing any radioactive wastes or isotopes except in compliance with applicable state or federal regulations; 
l.  Storm water, surface water, ground water, artesian well water, roof runoff, subsurface drainage, swimming pool drainage, condensate, de-ionized water, no contact cooling water, and unpolluted wastewater, unless specifically authorized by the superintendent; 
m.  Sludges, screenings, or other residues from the pretreatment of industrial wastes; 
n.  Medical wastes, except as specifically authorized by the superintendent in a wastewater discharge permit; 
o.  Wastewater causing, alone or in conjunction with other sources, the treatment plant's effluent to fail a toxicity test; 
p.  Detergents, surface-active agents, or other substances which may cause excessive foaming in the POTW; 
q.  Fats, oils, or greases of animal or vegetable origin in concentrations greater 100 mg/l; 
r.  Wastewater causing two readings on an explosion hazard meter at the point of discharge into the POTW, or at any point in the POTW, of more than five percent or any single reading over ten (10) percent of the lower explosive limit of the meter. 
    Pollutants, substances, or wastewater prohibited by this section shall not be processed or stored in such a manner that they could be discharged to the POTW. 
B.  National Categorical Pretreatment Standards. The categorical pretreatment standards found at 40 CFR Chapter I, Subchapter N, Parts 405-471 are incorporated by reference. 
1.  Where a categorical pretreatment standard is expressed only in terms of either the mass or the concentration of a pollutant in wastewater, the superintendent may impose equivalent concentration or mass limits in accordance with 40 CFR 403.6(c). 
2.  When wastewater subject to a categorical pretreatment standard is mixed with wastewater not regulated by the same standard, the superintendent shall impose an alternate limit using the combined waste stream formula in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
3.  A user may obtain a variance from a categorical pretreatment standard if the user can prove, pursuant to the procedural and substantive provisions in 40 CFR 403.13, that factors relating to its discharge are fundamentally different from the factors considered by EPA when developing the categorical pretreatment standard. 
4.  A user may obtain a net gross adjustment to a categorical standard in accordance with 40 CFR 403.15. 
C.  Local Concentration Limits. The following pollutant limits are established to protect against interference, ground water contamination, or sludge contamination. Discharges by users of the collection and treatment system are limited such that the concentrations of specific pollutants measured at the point of discharge into the collection system do not exceed concentrations specified below. 
Pollutant Maximum 
Daily Limit 
(mg/l) Arsenic 0.020 Cadmium 0.012 Chromium (total) 2.380 Copper 0.580 Cyanide 0.140 Lead 0.110 Mercury 0.008 Molybdenum 0.031 Nickel 0.220 Selenium 0.046 Silver 0.590 Zinc 0.430 Total toxic organics 2.130 Sum of copper, nickel, chromium and zinc 3.590  
    All concentrations for metallic substances are for total metal unless indicated otherwise. 
D.  Local Mass Limits The following pollutant limits are established to protect against interference. Discharges by users of the collection and treatment system are limited such that the mass of any specific pollutant measured at the point of discharge into the collection system does not exceed the limits shown in the table below unless the user possesses a valid pretreatment permit from the city. 
Pollutant Monthly 
Average 
(lb/day) Weekly 
Average 
(lb/day) BOD 5 500 750 TSS 500 750 COD 1,500 2,250  
E.  Dilution. No user shall ever increase the use of process water, or in any way attempt to dilute a discharge, as a partial or complete substitute for adequate treatment to achieve compliance with a discharge limitation unless expressly authorized by an applicable pretreatment standard or requirement. The superintendent may impose mass limitations on users who are using dilution to meet applicable pretreatment standards or requirements, or in other cases when the imposition of mass limitations is appropriate. 
F.  City's Right of Revision. The city reserves the right to establish, by code or in wastewater discharge permits, either more stringent standards and requirements or more lenient standards and requirements on discharges to the POTW. 
G.  Special Agreements and Arrangements Authorized. No statement contained in Sections 13.24.010 through 13.24.030 of this chapter shall be construed as preventing any special agreement or arrangement between the city and any industrial concern whereby an industrial waste of unusual strength or character may be accepted by the city for treatment, subject to payment therefor by the industrial concern. 
(Prior code § 22-127) 
13.24.030 - Pretreatment of Wastewater. 
A.  Pretreatment Facilities Users shall provide wastewater treatment as necessary to comply with this code and shall achieve compliance with all categorical pretreatment standards, local limits, and the prohibitions set out in Section 13.24.020(A) of this chapter within the time limitations specified by EPA, the state, or the superintendent, whichever is more stringent. Any facilities necessary for compliance shall be provided, operated, and maintained at the user's expense. Detailed plans describing such facilities and operating procedures shall be submitted to the superintendent for review, and shall be acceptable to the superintendent before such facilities are constructed. The review of such plans and operating procedures shall in no way relieve the user from the responsibility of modifying such facilities as necessary to produce a discharge acceptable to the city under the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Additional Pretreatment Measures. 
1.  Whenever deemed necessary, the superintendent may require users to restrict their discharge during peak flow periods, designate that certain wastewater be discharged only into specific sewers, relocate and/or consolidate points of discharge, separate sewage waste streams from industrial waste streams, and such other conditions as may be necessary to protect the POTW and determine the user's compliance with the requirements of this code. 
2.  The superintendent may require any person discharging into the POTW to install and maintain, on their property and at their expense, a suitable storage and flow control facility to ensure equalization of flow. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued solely for flow equalization. 
3.  When required by the superintendent, the owner of any property served by a building sewer carrying industrial wastes shall install a suitable control manhole in the building sewer to facilitate observation, sampling and measurement. The manhole shall be safely located, and shall be constructed in accordance with plans approved by the superintendent. Permanently installed flow meters and flow recording devices may be required by the superintendent. The manhole shall be installed by the owner at his expense, and the owner at his expense shall maintain the same so as to be safe and accessible at all times. 
4.  Grease, oil, and sand interceptors shall be provided when, in the opinion of the superintendent, they are necessary for the proper handling of wastewater containing excessive amounts of grease and oil, or sand; except that such interceptors shall not be required for residential users. All interception units shall be of type and capacity approved by the superintendent and shall be so located to be easily accessible for cleaning and inspection. Such interceptors shall be inspected, cleaned, and repaired regularly, as needed, by the user at their expense. 
5.  Users with the potential to discharge flammable substances may be required to install and maintain an approved combustible gas detection meter. 
6.  All measurements, test and analyses of the characteristics of waters and wastes to which reference is to 40 CFR 136 shall be determined at the control manhole required by subsection (B)(3) of this section or upon suitable samples taken at such control manhole. In the event that no special manhole has been required, the control manhole shall be considered to be the nearest downstream manhole in the public sewer to the point at which the building sewer is connected. 
C.  Accidental Discharge/Slug Control Plans. At least once every two years, the superintendent shall evaluate whether each significant industrial user needs an accidental discharge/slug control plan. The superintendent may require any user to develop, submit for approval, and implement such a plan. Alternatively, the superintendent may develop such a plan for any user. An accidental discharge/slug control plan shall address, at a minimum, the following: 
1.  Description of discharge practices, including nonroutine batch discharges; 
2.  Description of stored chemicals; 
3.  Procedures for immediately notifying the superintendent of any accidental or slug discharge, as required by Section 13.24.060(F) of this chapter; 
4.  Procedures to prevent adverse impact from any accidental or slug discharge. Such procedures include, but are not limited to, inspection and maintenance of storage areas, handling and transfer of materials, loading and unloading operations, control of plant site runoff, worker training, building of containment structures or equipment, measures for containing toxic organic pollutants, including solvents, and/or measures and equipment for emergency response. 
D.  Hauled Wastewater. 
1.  Septic tank waste may be introduced into the POTW only at locations designated by the superintendent, and at such times as are established by the superintendent. Such waste shall not violate Section 13.24.020 or any other requirements established by the city. The superintendent may require septic tank waste haulers to obtain wastewater discharge permits. 
2.  The superintendent shall require haulers of industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The superintendent may require generators of hauled industrial waste to obtain wastewater discharge permits. The superintendent also may prohibit the disposal of hauled industrial waste. The discharge of hauled industrial waste is subject to all other requirements of this chapter. 
3.  Industrial waste haulers may discharge loads only at locations designated by the superintendent. No load may be discharged without prior consent of the superintendent. The superintendent may collect samples of each hauled load to ensure compliance with applicable standards. The superintendent may require the industrial waste hauler to provide a waste analysis of any load prior to discharge. 
4.  Industrial waste haulers must provide a waste-tracking form for every load. This form shall include, at a minimum, the name and address of the industrial waste hauler, permit number, truck identification, names and addresses of sources of waste, and volume and characteristics of waste. The form shall identify the type of industry, known or suspected waste constituents, and whether any wastes are RCRA hazardous wastes. 
(Prior code § 22-128) 
13.24.040 - Wastewater discharge permit application. 
A.  Wastewater Analysis. When requested by the superintendent, a user must submit information on the nature and characteristics of its wastewater within forty-five (45) days of the request. The superintendent is authorized to prepare a form for this purpose and may periodically require users to update this information. 
B.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Requirement. 
1.  No significant industrial user shall discharge wastewater into the POTW without first obtaining a wastewater discharge permit from the superintendent. 
2.  The superintendent may require other users to obtain wastewater discharge permits as necessary to carry out the purposes of this code. 
3.  Any violation of the terms and conditions of a wastewater discharge permit shall be deemed a violation of this code and subjects the wastewater discharge permittee to the sanctions set out in Sections 13.24.100 through 13.24.120 of this chapter. Obtaining a wastewater discharge permit does not relieve a permittee of its obligation to comply with all federal and state pretreatment standards or requirements or with any other requirements of federal, state, and local law. 
C.  Wastewater Discharge Permitting: New Connections. Any user required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit who proposes to begin or recommence discharging into the POTW must obtain such permit prior to the beginning or recommencing of such discharge. An application for this wastewater discharge permit, in accordance with subsection D of this section must be filed at least ninety (90) days prior to the date upon which any discharge will begin or recommence. 
D.  Wastewater Discharge Permitting: Expiring Permit. Any user who holds a wastewater discharge permit shall provide a new permit application to the city one hundred and eighty (180) days before the permit expiration date. The application shall be on forms provided by the city. In the event of expiration of an industrial user's permit, the terms and conditions of the permit shall remain in force and effect until a new permit is issued. 
E.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Application Contents. All users required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit must submit a permit application. The superintendent may require all users to submit as part of an application the following information: 
1.  All information required by Section 13.24.060(A)(2) of this chapter; 
2.  Description of activities, facilities, and plant processes on the premises, including a list of all raw materials and chemicals used or stored at the facility which are, or could accidentally or intentionally be, discharged to the POTW; 
3.  Number and type of employees, hours of operation, and proposed or actual hours of operation; 
4.  Each product produced by type, amount, process or processes, and rate of production; 
5.  Type and amount of raw materials processed (average and maximum per day); 
6.  Site plans, floor plans, mechanical and plumbing plans, and details to show all sewers, floor drains, and appurtenances by size, location, and elevation, and all points of discharge; 
7.  Time and duration of discharges; and 
8.  Any other information as may be deemed necessary by the superintendent to evaluate the Wastewater discharge permit application. 
    Incomplete or inaccurate applications will not be processed and will be returned to the user for revision. 
F.  Application Signatories and Certification. All wastewater discharge permit applications and user reports must be signed by an authorized representative of the user and contain the following certification statement: 
 "I certify under penalty of law that this document and all attachments were prepared under my direction or supervision in accordance with a system designed to assure that qualified personnel properly gather and evaluate the information submitted. Based on my inquiry of the person or persons who manage the system, or those persons directly responsible for gathering the information, the information submitted is, to the best of my knowledge and belief, true, accurate, and complete. I am aware that there are significant penalties for submitting false information, including the possibility of fine and imprisonment for knowing violations." 
G.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Decisions. The superintendent will evaluate the data furnished by the user and may require additional information. Within sixty (60) days of receipt of a complete wastewater discharge permit application, the superintendent will determine whether or not to issue a wastewater discharge permit. The superintendent may deny any application for a wastewater discharge permit which fails to meet the requirements of this article. Failure of the superintendent to render a decision upon an application for a wastewater discharge permit within sixty (60) days of receipt of same shall be deemed a denial of such permit for all purposes under this chapter. 
(Prior code § 22-129) 
13.24.050 - Wastewater discharge permit issuance process. 
A.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Duration. A wastewater discharge permit shall be issued for a specified time period, not to exceed five years from the effective date of the permit. A wastewater discharge permit may be issued for a period less than five years, at the discretion of the superintendent. Each wastewater discharge permit will indicate a specific date upon which it will expire. 
B.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Contents. A wastewater discharge permit shall include such conditions as are deemed reasonably necessary by the superintendent to prevent pass through or interference, protect the quality of the water body receiving the treatment plant's effluent, protect worker health and safety, facilitate sludge management and disposal, and protect against damage to the POTW. 
1.  Wastewater discharge permits must contain: 
a.  A statement that indicates wastewater discharge permit duration, which in no event shall exceed five years; 
b.  A statement that the wastewater discharge permit is nontransferable without prior notification to the city in accordance with subsection E of this section and provisions for furnishing the new owner or operator with a copy of the existing wastewater discharge permit; 
c.  Effluent limits based on applicable pretreatment standards; 
d.  Self monitoring, sampling, reporting, notification, and record-keeping requirements. These requirements shall include an identification of pollutants to be monitored, sampling location, sampling frequency, and sample type based on federal, state, and local law; and 
e.  A statement of applicable civil and criminal penalties for violation of pretreatment standards and requirements, and any applicable compliance schedule. Such schedule may not extend the time for compliance beyond that required by applicable federal, state, or local law. 
2.  Wastewater discharge permits may contain, but need not be limited to, the following conditions: 
a.  Limits on the average and/or maximum rate of discharge, time of discharge, and/or requirements for flow regulation and equalization; 
b.  Requirements for the installation of pretreatment technology, pollution control, or construction of appropriate containment devices, designed to reduce, eliminate, or prevent the introduction of pollutants into the treatment works; 
c.  Requirements for the development and implementation of spill control plans or other special conditions including management practices necessary to adequately prevent accidental, unanticipated, or nonroutine discharges; 
d.  Development and implementation of waste minimization plans to reduce the amount of pollutants discharged to the POTW; 
e.  The unit charge or schedule of user charges and fees for the management of the wastewater discharged to the POTW; 
f.  Requirements for installation and maintenance of inspection and sampling facilities and equipment; 
g.  A statement that compliance with the wastewater discharge permit does not relieve the permittee of responsibility for compliance with all applicable federal and state pretreatment standards, including those which become effective during the term of the wastewater discharge permit; and 
h.  Other conditions as deemed appropriate by the superintendent to ensure compliance with this code, and state and federal laws, rules, and regulations. 
C.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Appeals. The superintendent shall provide public notice of the issuance of a wastewater discharge permit. Any person, including the user, may petition the superintendent to reconsider the terms of a wastewater discharge permit within thirty (30) days of notice of its issuance. 
1.  Failure to submit a timely petition for review shall be deemed to be a waiver of the administrative appeal. 
2.  In its petition, the appealing party must indicate the wastewater discharge permit provisions objected to, the reasons for this objection, and the alternative condition, if any, it seeks to place in the wastewater discharge permit. 
3.  The effectiveness of the wastewater discharge permit shall not be stayed pending the appeal. 
4.  If the superintendent fails to act within thirty (30) days, a request for reconsideration shall be deemed to be denied. Decisions not to reconsider a wastewater discharge permit, not to issue a wastewater discharge permit, or not to modify a wastewater discharge permit shall be considered final administrative actions for purposes of judicial review. 
5.  Aggrieved parties seeking judicial review of the final administrative wastewater discharge permit decision must do so by filing a complaint with the Newton County Superior Court. 
D.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Modification. The superintendent may modify a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
1.  To incorporate any new or revised federal, state, or local pretreatment standards or requirements; 
2.  To address significant alterations or additions to the user's operation, processes, or wastewater volume or character since the time of wastewater discharge permit issuance; 
3.  A change in the POTW that requires either a temporary or permanent reduction or elimination of the authorized discharge; 
4.  Information indicating that the permitted discharge poses a threat to the city's POTW, city personnel, or the receiving waters; 
5.  Violation of any terms or conditions of the wastewater discharge permit; 
6.  Misrepresentations or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application or in any required reporting; 
7.  Revision of or a grant of variance from categorical pretreatment standards pursuant to 40 CFR 403.13; 
8.  To correct typographical or other errors in the wastewater discharge permit; or 
9.  To reflect a transfer of the facility ownership or operation to a new owner or operator. 
E.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Transfer Wastewater discharge permits may be transferred to a new owner or operator only if the permittee gives at least sixty (60) days advance notice to the superintendent and the superintendent approves the wastewater discharge permit transfer. The notice to the superintendent must include a written certification by the new owner or operator which: 
1.  States that the new owner and/or operator has no immediate intent to change the facility's operations and processes; 
2.  Identifies the specific date on which the transfer is to occur; and 
3.  Acknowledges full responsibility for complying with the existing wastewater discharge permit. 
    Failure to provide advance notice of a transfer renders the wastewater discharge permit void as of the date of facility transfer. Failure of the superintendent to respond to a permittee's request for approval of a transfer within sixty (60) days of receipt of proper notice thereof shall be deemed a denial of such request for all purposes under this section. 
F.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Revocation. The superintendent may revoke a wastewater discharge permit for good cause, including, but not limited to, the following reasons: 
1.  Failure to notify the superintendent of significant changes to the wastewater prior to the changed discharge; 
2.  Failure to provide prior notification to the superintendent of changed conditions pursuant to Section 13.24.060(E) of this chapter; 
3.  Misrepresentation or failure to fully disclose all relevant facts in the wastewater discharge permit application; 
4.  Falsifying self-monitoring reports; 
5.  Tampering with monitoring equipment; 
6.  Refusing to allow the superintendent timely access to the facility premises and records; 
7.  Failure to meet effluent limitations; 
8.  Failure to pay fines; 
9.  Failure to pay sewer charges; 
10.  Failure to meet compliance schedules; 
11.  Failure to complete a wastewater survey or the wastewater discharge permit application; 
12.  Failure to provide advance notice of the transfer of business ownership of a permitted facility; or 
13.  Violation of any pretreatment standard or requirement, or any terms of the wastewater discharge permit or this code. 
    Wastewater discharge permits shall be voidable upon cessation of operations or transfer of business ownership. All wastewater discharge permits issued to a particular user are void upon the issuance of a new wastewater discharge permit to that user. 
G.  Wastewater Discharge Permit Reissuance. A user with an expiring wastewater discharge permit shall apply for wastewater discharge permit reissuance by submitting a complete permit application, in accordance with Section 13.24.040(D) of this chapter, a minimum of one hundred eighty (180) days prior to the expiration of the user's existing wastewater discharge permit. 
H.  Regulation of Waste Received From Other Jurisdictions. 
1.  If another municipality, or user located within another municipality, contributes wastewater to the POTW, the city may enter into an intermunicipal agreement with the contributing municipality. 
2.  Prior to entering into an agreement required by subsection (H)(1) of this section, the superintendent shall request the following information from the contributing municipality: 
a.  A description of the quality and volume of wastewater discharged to the POTW by the contributing municipality; 
b.  An inventory of all users located within the contributing municipality that are discharging to the POTW; and 
c.  Such other information as the superintendent may deem necessary. 
3.  An intermunicipal agreement, as required by subsection (H)(1) of this section, shall contain the following conditions: 
a.  A requirement for the contributing municipality to adopt a sewer use code which is at least as stringent as this article and local limits which are at least as stringent as those set out in Section 13.24.020(C) of this chapter. The requirements shall specify that such code and limits must be revised as necessary to reflect changes made to the city's code or local limits; 
b.  A provision ensuring the superintendent access to the facilities of users located within the contributing municipality's jurisdictional boundaries for the purpose of inspection, sampling, and any other duties deemed necessary by the superintendent; 
c.  A provision specifying remedies available for breach of the terms of the intermunicipal agreement; and 
d.  Such other provisions as the superintendent may deem appropriate. 
(Prior code § 22-130) 
13.24.060 - Reporting requirements. 
A.  Baseline Monitoring Reports. 
1.  Within either one hundred eighty (180) days after the effective date of a categorical pretreatment standard, or the final administrative decision on a category determination under 40 CFR 403.6(a)(4), whichever is later, existing categorical users currently discharging to or scheduled to discharge to the POTW shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (A)(2) of this section. At least ninety (90) days prior to commencement of their discharge, new sources, and sources that become categorical users subsequent to the promulgation of an applicable categorical pretreatment standard, shall submit to the superintendent a report which contains the information listed in subsection (A)(2) of this section. A new source shall report the method of pretreatment it intends to use to meet applicable categorical pretreatment standards. A new source also shall give estimates of its anticipated flow and quantity of pollutants to be discharged. 
2.  Users described above shall submit the information set forth below. 
a.  Identifying Information. The name and address of the facility, including the name of the operator and owner. 
b.  Environmental Permits. A list of any environmental control permits held by or for the facility. 
c.  Description of Operations. A brief description of the nature, average rate of production, and standard industrial classifications of the operation(s) carried out by such user. This description should include a schematic process diagram which indicates points of discharge to the POTW from the regulated processes. 
d.  Flow Measurement. Information showing the measured average daily and maximum daily flow, in gallons per day, to the POTW from regulated process streams and other streams, as necessary, to allow use of the combined waste stream formula set out in 40 CFR 403.6(e). 
e.  Measurement of Pollutants. 
i.  The categorical treatment standards applicable to each regulated process. 
ii.  The results of sampling and analysis identifying the nature and concentration, and/or mass, where required by the standard or by the superintendent, of regulated pollutants in the discharge from each regulated process. Instantaneous, daily maximum, and long-term average concentrations, or mass, where required, shall be reported. The sample shall be representative of daily operations and shall be analyzed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection J of this section. 
iii.  Sampling must be performed in accordance with procedures set out in subsection K of this section. 
f.  Certification. A statement, reviewed by the user's authorized representative and certified by a qualified professional, indicating whether pretreatment standards are being met on a consistent basis, and, if not, whether additional operation and maintenance (O&M) and/or additional pretreatment is required to meet the pretreatment standards and requirements. 
g.  Compliance Schedule. If additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance will be required to meet the pretreatment standards, the shortest schedule by which the user will provide such additional pretreatment and/or operation and maintenance. The completion date in this schedule shall not be later than the compliance date established for the applicable pretreatment standard. A compliance schedule pursuant to this section must meet the requirements set out in subsection B of this section. 
h.  Signature and Certification. All baseline monitoring reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.24.040(E) of this chapter. 
B.  Compliance Schedule Progress Reports. The following conditions shall apply to the compliance schedule required by subsection (A)(2) of this section: 
1.  The schedule shall contain progress increments in the form of dates for the commencement and completion of major events leading to the construction and operation of additional pretreatment required for the user to meet the applicable pretreatment standards (such events include, but are not limited to, hiring an engineer, completing preliminary and final plans, executing contracts for major components, commencing and completing construction, and beginning and conducting routine operation); 
2.  No increment referred to above shall exceed nine months; 
3.  The user shall submit a progress report to the superintendent no later than fourteen (14) days following each date in the schedule and the final date of compliance including, as a minimum, whether or not it complied with the increment of progress, the reason for any delay, and, if appropriate, the steps being taken by the user to return to the established schedule; and 
4.  In no event shall more than nine months elapse between such progress reports to the superintendent. 
C.  Reports on Compliance with Categorical Pretreatment Standard Deadline. 
    Within ninety (90) days following the date for final compliance with applicable categorical pretreatment standards, or in the case of a new source following commencement of the introduction of wastewater into the POTW, any user subject to such pretreatment standards and requirements shall submit to the superintendent a report containing the information described in subsection (A)(2)(d) through (f) of this section. For users subject to equivalent mass or concentration limits established in accordance with the procedures in 40 CFR 403.6(c), this report shall contain a reasonable measure of the user's long-term production rate. For all other users subject to categorical pretreatment standards expressed in terms of allowable pollutant discharge per unit of production (or other measure of operation), this report shall include the user's actual production during the appropriate sampling period. All compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.24.040(E) of this chapter. 
D.  Periodic Compliance Reports. 
1.  All significant industrial users shall, at a frequency determined by the superintendent but in no case less than twice per year (in June and December), submit a report indicating the nature and concentration of pollutants in the discharge which are limited by pretreatment standards and the measured or estimated average and maximum daily flows for the reporting period. All periodic compliance reports must be signed and certified in accordance with Section 13.24.040(E) of this chapter. 
2.  All wastewater samples must be representative of the user's discharge. Wastewater monitoring and flow measurement facilities shall be properly operated, kept clean, and maintained in good working order at all times. The failure of a user to keep its monitoring facility in good working order shall not be grounds for the user to claim that sample results are unrepresentative of its discharge. 
3.  If a user subject to the reporting requirement in this section monitors any pollutant more frequently than required by the superintendent, using the procedures prescribed in subsection K of this section, the results of this monitoring shall be included in the report. 
E.  Reports of Changed Conditions. Each user must notify the superintendent of any planned significant changes to the user's operations or system which might alter the nature, quality, or volume of its wastewater at least sixty (60) days before the change. 
1.  The superintendent may require the user to submit such information as may be deemed necessary to evaluate the changed condition, including the submission of a wastewater discharge permit application under Section 13.24.040(F) of this chapter. 
2.  The superintendent may issue a wastewater discharge permit under Section 13.24.050(E) of this chapter or modify an existing wastewater discharge permit under Section 13.24.050(D) of this chapter in response to changed conditions or anticipated changed conditions. 
3.  For purposes of this requirement, significant changes include, but are not limited to, flow increases of twenty (20) percent or greater, and the discharge of any previously unreported pollutants. 
F.  Reports of Potential Problems. 
1.  In the case of any discharge, including, but not limited to, accidental discharges, discharges of a nonroutine, episodic nature, a noncustomary batch discharge, or a slug load, that may cause potential problems for the POTW, the user shall immediately telephone and notify the superintendent of the incident. This notification shall include the location of the discharge, type of waste, concentration and volume, if known, and corrective actions taken by the user. 
2.  Within five days following such discharge, the user shall, unless waived by the superintendent, submit a detailed written report describing the cause(s) of the discharge and the measures to be taken by the user to prevent similar future occurrences. Such notification shall not relieve the user of any expense, loss, damage, or other liability which may be incurred as a result of damage to the POTW, natural resources, or any other damage to person or property; nor shall such notification relieve the user of any fines, penalties, or other liability which may be imposed pursuant to this code. 
3.  A notice shall be permanently posted on the user's bulletin board or other prominent place advising employees whom to call in the event of a discharge described in subsection (F)(1) of this section. Employers shall ensure that all employees, who may cause such a discharge to occur, are advised of the emergency notification procedure. 
G.  Reports From Unpermitted Users. All users not required to obtain a wastewater discharge permit shall provide appropriate reports to the superintendent as the superintendent may require. 
H.  Notice of Violation-Repeat Sampling and Reporting. If sampling performed by a user indicates a violation, the user must notify the superintendent within twenty-four (24) hours of becoming aware of the violation. The user shall also repeat the sampling and analysis and submit the results of the repeat analysis to the superintendent within thirty (30) days after becoming aware of the violation. 
I.  Notification of the Discharge of Hazardous Waste. 
1.  Any user who commences the discharge of hazardous waste shall notify the POTW, the EPA Regional Waste Management Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities, in writing, of any discharge into the POTW of a substance which, if otherwise disposed of, would be a hazardous waste under 40 CFR Part 261. Such notification must include the name of the hazardous waste as set forth in 40 CFR Part 261, the EPA hazardous waste number, and the type of discharge (continuous, batch, or other). lf the user discharges more than one hundred (100) kilograms of such waste per calendar month to the POTW, the notification also shall contain the following information to the extent such information is known and readily available to the user: an identification of the hazardous constituents contained in the wastes, an estimation of the mass and concentration of such constituents in the waste stream discharged during that calendar month, and an estimation of the mass of constituents in the waste stream expected to be discharged during the following twelve (12) months. All notifications must take place no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after the discharge commences. Any notification under this paragraph need be submitted only once for each hazardous waste discharged. However, notifications of changed conditions must be submitted under subsection E of this section. The notification requirement in this section does not apply to pollutants already reported by users subject to categorical pretreatment standards under the self-monitoring requirements of this section. 
2.  Dischargers are exempt from the requirements of subsection (I)(1) of this section during a calendar month in which they discharge no more than fifteen (15) kilograms of hazardous wastes, unless the wastes are acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e). Discharge of more than fifteen (15) kilograms of nonacute hazardous wastes in a calendar month, or of any quantity of acute hazardous wastes as specified in 40 CFR 261.30(d) and 261.33(e), requires a one-time notification. Subsequent months during which the user discharges more than such quantities of any hazardous waste do not require additional notification. 
3.  In the case of any new regulations under Section 3001 of RCRA identifying additional characteristics of hazardous waste of listing any additional substance as a hazardous waste, the user must notify the superintendent, the EPA Regional Waste Management Waste Division Director, and state hazardous waste authorities of the discharge of such substance within ninety (90) days of the effective date of such regulations. 
4.  In the case of any notification made under this section, the user shall certify that it has a program in place to reduce the volume and toxicity of hazardous wastes generated to the degree it has determined to be economically practical. 
5.  This provision does not create a right to discharge any substance not otherwise permitted to be discharged by this code, a permit issued thereunder, or any applicable federal or state law. 
J.  Analytical Requirements. All pollutant analyses, including sampling techniques, to be submitted as part of a wastewater discharge permit application or report shall be performed in accordance with the techniques prescribed in 40 CFR Part 136, unless otherwise specified in an applicable categorical pretreatment standard. If 40 CFR Part 136 does not contain sampling or analytical techniques for the pollutant in question, sampling and analyses must be performed in accordance with procedures approved by EPA. 
K.  Sample Collection. 
1.  Except as indicated in subsection (K)(2) of this section, the user must collect wastewater samples using flow proportional composite collection techniques. In the event flow proportional sampling is infeasible, the superintendent may authorize the use of time proportional sampling or a minimum of four grab samples where the user demonstrates that this will provide a representative sample of the effluent being discharged. In addition, grab samples may be required to show compliance with instantaneous discharge limits. 
2.  Samples for oil and grease, temperature, pH, cyanide, phenols, hexavalent chromium, sulfides, and volatile organic compounds must be obtained using grab collection techniques. 
L.  Timing. Written reports will be deemed to have been submitted on the date postmarked. For reports which are not mailed, postage prepaid, into a mail facility serviced by the United States Postal Service, the date of receipt of the report shall govern. 
M.  Record Keeping. Users subject to the reporting requirements of this code shall retain, and make available for inspection and copying, all records of information obtained pursuant to any monitoring activities required by this code and any additional records of information obtained pursuant to monitoring activities undertaken by the user independent of such requirements. Records shall include the date, exact place, method, and time of sampling, and the name of the person(s) taking the samples; the dates analyses were performed; who performed the analyses; the analytical techniques or methods used; and the results of such analyses. These records shall remain available for a period of at least three years. This period shall be automatically extended for the duration of any litigation concerning the user or the city, or where the user has been specifically notified of a longer retention period by the superintendent. 
(Prior code § 22-131) 
13.24.070 - Compliance monitoring. 
A.  Right of Entry: Inspection and Sampling. The superintendent shall have the right to enter the premises of any user to determine whether the user is complying with all requirements of this article and any wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder. Users shall allow the superintendent ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, records examination and copying, and the performance of any additional duties. 
1.  Where a user has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the user shall make necessary arrangements with its security guards so that, upon presentation of suitable identification, the superintendent will be permitted to enter without delay for the purposes of performing specific responsibilities. 
2.  The superintendent shall have the right to set up on the user's property, or require installation of, such devices as are necessary to conduct sampling and/or metering of the user's operations. 
3.  The superintendent may require the user to install monitoring equipment as necessary. The facility's sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the user at its own expense. All devices used to measure wastewater flow and quality shall be calibrated according to the manufacturer's recommendations to ensure their accuracy. 
4.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the user at the written or verbal request of the superintendent and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be born by the user. 
5.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the superintendent access to the user's premises shall be a violation of this chapter. 
B.  Search Warrants. If the superintendent has been refused access to a building, structure, or property, or any part thereof, and is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of this chapter or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program of the city designed to verify compliance with this article or any permit or order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety and welfare of the community, then the superintendent may seek issuance of a search warrant from the Newton County Superior Court. 
(Prior code § 22-132) 
13.24.080 - Confidential information. 
    Information and data on a user obtained from reports, surveys, wastewater discharge permit applications, wastewater discharge permits, and monitoring programs, and from the superintendent's inspection and sampling activities, shall be available to the public without restriction, unless the user specifically requests, and is able to demonstrate to the satisfaction of the superintendent, that the release of such information would divulge information, processes, or methods of production entitled to protection as trade secrets under applicable state or federal law. Any such request must be asserted at the time of submission of the information or data. When requested and demonstrated by the user furnishing a report that such information should be held confidential, the portions of a report which might disclose trade secrets or secret processes shall not be made available for inspection by the public, but shall be made available immediately upon request to governmental agencies for uses related to the NPDES program or pretreatment program, and in enforcement proceedings involving the person furnishing the report. wastewater constituents and characteristics and other effluent data as defined by 40 CFR 2.302 will not be recognized as confidential information and will be available to the public without restriction. 
(Prior code § 22-133) 
13.24.090 - Publication of users in significant noncompliance. 
    The superintendent shall publish annually, in the largest daily newspaper published in the municipality where the POTW is located, a list of the users which, during the previous twelve (12) months, were in significant noncompliance with applicable pretreatment standards and requirements. The term significant noncompliance shall mean: 
A.  Chronic violations of wastewater discharge limits, defined here as those in which sixty-six (66) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken during a six-month period exceed the daily maximum limit or average limit for the same pollutant parameter by any amount; 
B.  Technical review criteria (TRC) violations, defined here as those in which thirty-three (33) percent or more of wastewater measurements taken for each pollutant parameter during a six-month period equals or exceeds the product of the daily maximum limit or the average limit multiplied by the applicable criteria (1.4 for BOD, TSS, fats, oils and grease, and 1.2 for all other pollutants except pH); 
C.  Any other discharge violation that the superintendent believes has caused, alone or in combination with other discharges, interference or pass through, including endangering the health of POTW personnel or the general public; 
D.  Any discharge of pollutants that has caused imminent endangerment to the public or to the environment, or has resulted in the superintendent's exercise of its emergency authority to halt or prevent such a discharge; 
E.  Failure to meet, within ninety (90) days of the scheduled date, a compliance schedule milestone contained in a wastewater discharge permit or enforcement order for starting construction, completing construction, or attaining final compliance; 
F.  Failure to provide within thirty (30) days after the due date, any required reports, including baseline monitoring reports, reports on compliance with categorical pretreatment standard deadlines, periodic self-monitoring reports, and reports on compliance with compliance schedules; 
G.  Failure to accurately report noncompliance; or 
H.  Any other violation(s) which the superintendent determines will adversely affect the operation or implementation of the local pretreatment program. 
(Prior code § 22-134) 
13.24.100 - Administrative enforcement remedies. 
A.  Notification of Violation. When the pretreatment coordinator finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the pretreatment coordinator may serve upon that user a written notice of violation. Within ten (10) days of the receipt of this notice, an explanation of the violation and a plan for the satisfactory correction and prevention thereof, to include specific required actions, shall be submitted by the user to the pretreatment coordinator. Submission of this plan in no way relieves the user of liability for any violations occurring before or after receipt of the notice of violation. Nothing in this section shall limit the authority of the superintendent to take any action, including emergency actions or any other enforcement action, without a notice of violation first being issued. 
B.  Consent Orders. The superintendent may enter into consent orders, assurances of voluntary compliance, or other similar documents establishing an agreement with any user responsible for noncompliance. Such documents will include specific action to be taken by the user to correct the noncompliance within a time period specified by the document. 
C.  Show Cause Hearing. The superintendent may order a user which has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, to appear before the superintendent and show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. Notice shall be served on the user specifying the time and place for the meeting, the proposed enforcement action, the reasons for such action, and a request that the user show cause why the proposed enforcement action should not be taken. The notice of the meeting shall be served on the user personally or by registered or certified mail (return receipt requested) at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing. Such notice may be served on any authorized representative of the user. A show cause hearing shall not be a bar against, or prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
D.  Compliance Orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may issue an order to the user responsible for the discharge directing that the user come into compliance within a specified time. If the user does not come into compliance within the time provided, sewer service may be discontinued unless adequate treatment facilities, devices, or other related appurtenances are installed and properly operated. Compliance orders also may contain other requirements to address the noncompliance, including additional self-monitoring and management practices designed to minimize the amount of pollutants discharged to the sewer. A compliance order may not extend the deadline for compliance established for a pretreatment standard or requirement, nor does a compliance order relieve the user of liability for any violation, including any continuing violation. Issuance of a compliance order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
E.  Cease and Desist Orders. When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, or that the user's past violations are likely to recur, the superintendent may issue an order to the user directing it to cease and desist all such violations and directing the user to: 
1.  Immediately comply with all requirements; and 
2.  Take such appropriate remedial or preventive action as may be needed to properly address a continuing or threatened violation, including halting operations and/or terminating the discharge. 
    Issuance of a cease and desist order shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
F.  Administrative Fines. 
1.  When the superintendent finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the superintendent may fine such user in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00). Such fines shall be assessed on a per violation, per day basis. In the case of monthly or other long term average discharge limits, fines shall be assessed for each day during the period of violation. 
2.  Unpaid charges, fines, and penalties shall, after thirty (30) calendar days, be assessed an additional penalty of five percent of the unpaid balance, and interest shall accrue thereafter at a rate of one percent per month. The city shall have a lien against the user's property for unpaid charges, fines, and penalties levied hereunder. 
3.  Any user aggrieved by the superintendent's imposition of such fine shall have the right to appeal said imposition to the city manager of the city. Such appeals shall be in writing and served on the city manager along with written notice thereof served on the superintendent within thirty (30) days of receipt by the user of notification of the fine. On appeal the city manager shall review de novo all records or other information pertaining to the imposition of such fine and, upon the request of the superintendent or the aggrieved user or upon his own motion, shall convene a hearing for the purpose of taking testimony relating to the facts and circumstances pertinent to the imposition of such fine. The city manager shall be empowered to modify or rescind such fine, and shall provide written notice of his decision to all parties to such appeal within forty-five (45) days from his receipt thereof. 
4.  Any user aggrieved by the city manager's decision upon such appeal shall have the right to appeal the same to the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia. Any such appeal shall be filed within thirty (30) days of the city manager's decision, and upon failure to timely file the same the city manager's decision shall be final. The procedure for such appeals shall be as provided for other administrative appeals as set forth in Section 50-13-19, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
5.  Issuance of an administrative fine shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
G.  Emergency Suspensions The city manager may immediately suspend a user's discharge, after informal notice to the user, whenever such suspension is necessary to stop an actual or threatened discharge which reasonably appears to present or cause an imminent or substantial endangerment to the health or welfare of persons. The city manager may also immediately suspend a user's discharge, after notice and opportunity to respond, that threatens to interfere with the operation of the POTW, or which presents, or may present, an endangerment to the environment. 
1.  Any user notified of a suspension of its discharge shall immediately stop or eliminate its contribution. In the event of a user's failure to immediately comply voluntarily with the suspension order, the city manager may take such steps as deemed necessary, including immediate severance of the sewer connection, to prevent or minimize damage to the POTW, its receiving stream, or endangerment to any individuals. The city manager may allow the user to recommence its discharge when the user has demonstrated to the satisfaction of the city manager that the period of endangerment has passed, unless the termination proceedings in subsection H of this section are initiated against the user. 
2.  A user that is responsible, in whole or in part, for any discharge presenting imminent endangerment shall submit a detailed written statement, describing the causes of the harmful contribution and the measures taken to prevent any future occurrence, to the superintendent prior to the date of any show cause or termination hearing under subsections C or G of this section. 
    Nothing in this section shall be interpreted as requiring a hearing prior to any emergency suspension under this section. 
H.  Termination of Discharge. In addition to the provisions in Section 13.24.050(F) of this chapter, any user who violates the following conditions is subject to discharge termination: 
1.  Violation of wastewater discharge permit conditions; 
2.  Failure to accurately report the wastewater constituents and characteristics of its discharge; 
3.  Failure to report significant changes in operations or wastewater volume, constituents, and characteristics prior to discharge; 
4.  Refusal of reasonable access to the user's premises for the purpose of inspection, monitoring, or sampling; or 
5.  Violation of the pretreatment standards in Section 13.24.020 of this chapter. 
    Such user will be notified of the proposed termination of its discharge and be offered an opportunity to show cause under subsection C of this section why the proposed action should not be taken. Exercise of this option by the city manager shall not be a bar to, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against the user. 
(Prior code § 22-135) 
13.24.110 - Judicial enforcement remedies. 
    Injunctive Relief. When the city manager finds that a user has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, the city manager may petition the Newton County Superior Court, through the city's attorney, for the issuance of a temporary or permanent injunction, as appropriate, which restrains or compels the specific performance of the wastewater discharge permit, order, or other requirement imposed by this code on activities of the user. The city manager may also seek such other action as is appropriate for legal and/or equitable relief, including a requirement for the user to conduct environmental remediation. A petition for injunctive relief shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
B.  Civil Penalties. 
1.  A user who has violated, or continues to violate, any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall be liable to the city for a maximum civil penalty of $1,000.00 per violation, per day. In the case of a monthly or other long-term average discharge limit, penalties shall accrue for each day during the period of the violation. 
2.  The superintendent may recover reasonable attorneys' fees, court costs, and other expenses associated with enforcement activities, including sampling and monitoring expenses, and the cost of any actual damages incurred by the city. 
3.  In determining the amount of civil liability, the court shall take into account all relevant circumstances, including, but not limited to, the extent of harm caused by the violation, the magnitude and duration of the violation, any economic benefit gained through the user's violation, corrective actions by the user, the compliance history of the user, and any other factor as justice requires. 
4.  Filing a suit for civil penalties shall not be a bar against, or a prerequisite for, taking any other action against a user. 
C.  Criminal Prosecution. 
1.  A user who willfully or negligently violates any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
2.  A user who willfully or negligently introduces any substance into the POTW which causes personal injury or property damage shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. This penalty shall be in addition to any other cause of action for personal injury or property damage available under state or federal law. 
3.  A user who knowingly makes any false statements, representations, or certifications in any application, record, report, plan, or other documentation filed, or required to be maintained, pursuant to this code, wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or who falsifies, tampers with, or knowingly renders inaccurate any monitoring device or method required under this code shall, upon conviction, be subject to punishment as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
D.  Remedies Nonexclusive. The remedies provided for in this code are not exclusive. The superintendent may take any, all, or any combination of these actions against a noncompliant user. Enforcement of pretreatment violations will generally be in accordance with the city's enforcement response plan. However, the superintendent may take other action against any user when the circumstances warrant. Further, the superintendent is empowered to take more than one enforcement action against any noncompliant user. 
(Prior code § 22-136) 
13.24.120 - Supplemental enforcement action. 
A.  Water Supply Severance. Whenever a user has violated or continues to violate any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement, water service to the user may be severed. Service will only recommence, at the user's expense, after it has satisfactorily demonstrated its ability to comply. 
B.  Public Nuisances. A violation of any provision of this code, a wastewater discharge permit, or order issued hereunder, or any other pretreatment standard or requirement is hereby declared a public nuisance and shall be corrected or abated as directed by the superintendent. Any person creating a public nuisance shall be subject to the provisions of Chapter 8.12 of this code governing such nuisances, including reimbursing the city for any costs incurred in removing, abating, or remedying said nuisance. 
(Prior code § 22-137) 
13.24.130 - Bypass. 
A.  For the purposes of this section: 
1.  "Bypass" means the intentional diversion of waste streams from any portion of a user's treatment facility. 
2.  "Severe property damage" means substantial physical damage to property, damage to the treatment facilities which causes them to become inoperable, or substantial and permanent loss of natural resources which can reasonably be expected to occur in the absence of a bypass. Severe property damage does not mean economic loss caused by delays in production. 
B.  A user may allow any bypass to occur which does not cause pretreatment standards or requirements to be violated, but only if it also is for essential maintenance to assure efficient operation. These bypasses are not subject to the provision of subsections C and D of this section. 
C.  1.  If a user knows in advance of the need for a bypass, it shall submit prior notice to the superintendent, at least ten (10) days before the date of the bypass, if possible. 
2.  A user shall submit oral notice to the superintendent of an unanticipated bypass that exceeds applicable pretreatment standards within twenty-four (24) hours from the time it becomes aware of the bypass. A written submission shall also be provided within five days of the time the user becomes aware of the bypass. The written submission shall contain a description of the bypass and its cause; the duration of the bypass, including exact dates and times, and, if the bypass has not been corrected, the anticipated time it is expected to continue; and steps taken or planned to reduce, eliminate, and prevent reoccurrence of the bypass. The Superintendent may waive the written report on a case-by-case basis if the oral report has been received within twenty-four (24) hours. 
D.  1.  Bypass is prohibited, and the superintendent may take an enforcement action against a user for a bypass, unless 
a.  Bypass was unavoidable to prevent loss of life, personal injury, or severe property damage; 
b.  There were no feasible alternatives to the bypass, such as the use of auxiliary treatment facilities, retention of untreated wastes, or maintenance during normal periods of equipment downtime. This condition is not satisfied if adequate back-up equipment should have been installed in the exercise of reasonable engineering judgment to prevent a bypass which occurred during normal periods of equipment downtime or preventive maintenance; and 
c.  The user submitted notices as required under subsection C of this section. 
2.  The superintendent may approve an anticipated bypass, after considering its adverse effects, if the superintendent determines that it will meet the three conditions listed in subsection (D)(1) of this section. 
(Prior code § 22-138) 
13.24.140 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  Pretreatment Charges and Fees. The city may adopt reasonable fees for reimbursement of costs of setting up and operating the city's pretreatment program which may include: 
1.  Fees for wastewater discharge permit applications including the cost of processing such applications; 
2.  Fees for monitoring, inspection, and surveillance procedures including the cost of collection and analyzing a user's discharge, and reviewing monitoring reports submitted by users; 
3.  Fees for reviewing and responding to accidental discharge procedures and construction; 
4.  Fees for filing appeals; and 
5.  Other fees as the city may deem necessary to carry out the requirements contained in this section. These fees relate solely to the matters covered by this code and are separate from all other fees, fines, and penalties chargeable by the city. 
B.  Conflict and Precedence. This chapter industrial wastewater discharge permits, and federal pretreatment standards are complementary, and what is called for by one is as binding as if called for by all. In the event there are conflicts in the three documents, the documents shall take precedence in the following order: 
1.  Industrial wastewater discharge permit; 
2.  Federal pretreatment standards; 
3.  This chapter. 
C.  Severability. If any provision of this chapter is invalidated by any court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining provisions shall not be effected and shall continue in full force and effect. 
D.  The superintendent shall have the power and authority to promulgate such rules and regulations as shall be necessary for the effective and efficient administration and enforcement of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 22-139) 
Chapter 13.28 - CROSS-CONNECTION CONTROL PROGRAM 

13.28.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and Policy. This chapter sets forth the manner in which the city of Covington (hereafter called "city") will establish in accordance with state and federal law requirements to help prevent the entry of contaminants or pollutants into any area of the city's water distribution system through cross-connections as defined in this chapter. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to any system or mechanism supplied by the city's water distribution system including sprinkler and fire protection systems, residential systems, and, in particular, piped water for human consumption or incorporated into products or processes for human consumption. 
(Prior code § 22-201) 
13.28.020 - Definitions. 
    Unless the context specifically indicates otherwise, the following terms and phrases, as used in this chapter, shall have the meaning hereinafter designated: 
    "Consulting engineer" means the person or firm of civil and/or professional engineers designated from time to time by the city as the city's consulting engineers for its utility systems including its water system. As of the adoption of this article, the consulting engineers are the firm of Welker & Associates, Inc., P.O. Box 937, Marietta, Georgia 30061. 
    "Contaminant" means any physical, chemical, biological or radiological substance or matter in water that if introduced into the potable water supply would create a health hazard. 
    "Cross-connection" means any physical arrangement whereby the city water supply and public water system is or may be connected directly or indirectly with a nonpotable water supply or unapproved water supply system, sewer, drain, conduit, pool, storage reservoir, plumbing fixture or other device which contains or may contain contaminated water, liquid, gases, sewerage or other wastes of unknown or unsafe quality, which may be capable of imparting contamination to the public water supply as the result of backflow, bypass arrangements, jumper connections, removable sections, swivel or changeover devices and other temporary, permanent or potential connections through which or because of which backflow or back siphonage could or would occur. 
    "EPD" means the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
    "Federal Act" means the Safe Drinking Act, P.L. 93-523. 
    "Federal regulations" means any and all regulations adopted pursuant to the Federal Act. 
    "Georgia Act" means the Georgia Safe Drinking Water Act of 1977 (Part 5 of Article 3, Chapter 5, Title 12 O.C.G.A.) and all amendments thereto. 
    "Georgia regulations" mean regulations duly promulgated by EPD pursuant to the Georgia Act. 
    "Person" or "persons" means any individual, corporation, company, association, partnership, county, municipality, state agency or other entity. 
    "Pollutant" means a nontoxic substance that if introduced into the public water system would be objectionable, but would not create a health hazard. 
    "Public water system" means the water distribution system owned and operated by the city of Covington and all interconnections therewith, whether within or outside the municipal limits of the city of Covington. 
(Prior code § 22-202) 
13.28.030 - Application. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to all persons and facilities that are connected directly or indirectly to the public water system, whether the same are physically located within the municipal limits of the city or otherwise. 
(Prior code § 22-203) 
13.28.040 - Further statement of policy. 
    It shall be the policy of the governing authority of the city to operate its public water system in compliance with the Federal Act, federal regulations, the Georgia Act and the Georgia regulations so as to comply with all provisions thereof and to otherwise ensure the integrity of the public water system and protection from pollution and contamination by cross-connections owned, maintained or operated by any person connected to the public water system. This policy shall be carried out by isolating potential sources of contaminants or pollutants at various points in the public water system and customer connections thereto including on customers' premises and/or protecting the public water system at the point of delivery to the customers' premises. 
(Prior code § 22-204) 
13.28.050 - Prohibited acts and penalties. 
A.  It is illegal for any person to introduce any substance into the public water system or to have a cross-connection with the public water system that has the potential for introducing a contaminant into same, except for those substances or connections required by the city for treatment of water. As used in this chapter, "cross-connections with a potential for introducing a contaminant to the public water system" shall be those cross-connections that have been determined in accordance with the provisions of this chapter to create a potential hazard to the public water system or that do, in fact, result in the introduction of a contaminant to the public water system. 
B.  Any person who violates the provisions of this article shall, upon conviction thereof by the recorder, be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. Further, without limiting the foregoing, after such notice as may be appropriate under the circumstances (considering the opportunity for reasonable notice to the customer owning or using a water supply in violation of this chapter versus the danger of the health and welfare of all other persons connected to the public water system), any cross-connection maintained in violation of this article shall be disconnected from the public water system at the direction of the public works superintendent, mayor of the city, city manager or authorized representative of EPD. Once a disconnection is made in accordance with this chapter, same shall not be reconnected to the public water system until the offending person's water systems and all interconnections or potential interconnections thereto have been fully inspected and found to be in compliance with this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder. 
(Prior code § 22-205) 
13.28.060 - Implementation of cross-connection control program. 
    The mayor and council adopt, as though fully set out herein, as its rules and regulations for the implementation of this chapter the "City of Covington, Georgia, Cross-Connection Control Program, June, 1985," prepared by Welker & Associates, Inc., Engineers, Marietta, Georgia, a copy of which is on file with the city clerk of the city of Covington, Georgia, has been identified to the mayor and council, and copies of which will be available for public inspection. The consulting engineers, the city utility department and the city building inspection department shall take such steps as may be necessary and appropriate to implement such program in substantial conformity with the implementation schedule contained therein. They shall also take reasonable steps to implement the public awareness programs so that all persons who are customers or otherwise connected to the public water system shall become aware of the potential hazard of cross-connections and resulting contamination to the public water system. 
    The governing authority recognizes that manpower and resources will not permit an immediate implementation of the cross-connection control program and thereby recognizes the priority given to all public water system customers who have the potential for high-risk contamination of the system and thus directs that substantial efforts be made to locate and eliminate high-risk and high-hazard cross-connections. 
(Prior code § 22-206) 
13.28.070 - Implementation of rules and regulations. 
    The consulting engineer, the superintendent of the city utility department, and the city building official under the supervision of the consulting engineer shall have the authority to promulgate reasonable rules and regulations to carry out and enforce this chapter and the cross-connection control program implemented hereby. All rules and regulations so adopted shall be in writing, shall be filed in the office of the city clerk, posted on the bulletin board at City Hall, and a copy thereof provided to the mayor and council for its review prior to final implementation thereof. Proposed rules and regulations shall be approved and implemented upon the mayor and council's adoption of a resolution identifying such rules and regulations and expressly authorizing their implementation pursuant to this chapter. 
(Prior code § 22-207) 
13.28.080 - Appeals. 
    Any person who is aggrieved by a determination of any person including, but not limited to, the consulting engineer's determination that they are not maintaining or have maintained a cross-connection in violation of this chapter and the cross-connection control program and/or the regulations promulgated thereunder shall have the following rights of appeal: 
A.  On an emergency appeal basis on written application to the city manager where the determination of the person from whom the appeal is taken requires the disconnection of the appellant from the public water system prior to the time that a normal appeal under subsection B of this section may be heard; 
B.  Before the cross-connection control board by filing a written appeal with the city building official not later than one day prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting of the board, at which meeting such appeal will be heard; 
C.  All appeals under this section shall be for the purpose of deciding the propriety of decisions of the persons whose act required the appellant to install a cross-connection prevention device under this chapter and regulations promulgated thereunder, or a disconnection of the appellant from the public water system. Appeals of citations for violations of this chapter and the regulations shall be heard by the municipal recorder and the recorder's decision shall be appealable only as otherwise provided by this code, the city charter and state law concerning appeals of recorder's court decisions as to municipal code violations. 
(Ord. dated 3/17/05 § 1; prior code § 22-208) 
13.28.090 - Cross-connection control board. 
A.  There is created a cross-connection control board, whose duties are to hear and resolve appeals taken pursuant to Section 13.28.080 of this chapter, to advise and assist city officials in the promulgation of rules and regulations pursuant to Section 13.28.070 of this chapter, and to devise and implement a public awareness program for backflow prevention. 
B.  The board shall consist of five members, appointed by the mayor and council of the city, and shall include: 
1.  A representative of the city water treatment facility; 
2.  A representative of the city inspection department; 
3.  A representative of the water and sewer department; 
4.  A representative from local industry; and 
5.  An adult citizen residing in the city. 
C.  The board shall elect a chairman from among its members annually and shall hold regular quarterly meetings and such additional meetings at the call of the chairman as may be necessary or desirable in the discharge of its duties. 
(Ord. dated 3/17/05 § 2) 
Chapter 13.32 - WATER CONSERVATION AND USE REGULATIONS 

13.32.010 - General provisions. 
A.  Purpose and Policy. This chapter sets forth the manner in which the city of Covington (hereinafter called "city") has established a general water conservation plan and water usage emergency regulations to assist in the proper and orderly distribution of the available potable water supplies to the city's water customers including its wholesale customers who purchase such water for distribution. The mayor and council recognize that both raw and treated water resources are limited valuable natural resources that should be conserved at all times so as to better ensure adequate water supplies for all citizens and residents of the city of Covington and Newton County, Georgia, and the state of Georgia. Conditions and situations may arise whereby it is possible, probable or certain that the city does not or will not have sufficient water resources to meet the demands of consumers connected to the city's water system, and accordingly this article is intended to provide a means by which consumption of the water resources may be reduced, curtailed or completely eliminated if appropriate due to such conditions. 
B.  Applicability. The provisions of this chapter are applicable to all persons or other legal entities who are connected to and receive treated water from the city's water distribution system, whether same is for human consumption, providing sprinkling and fire protection, used or useful in commercial or manufacturing processes, and whether at the retail or wholesale rate structure. These provisions apply to such consumers either inside or outside the municipal limits of the city and expressly include the city's wholesale purchasers who purchase water for redistribution, namely the town of Oxford and the Newton County Water and Sewerage Authority. 
(Prior code § 22-220) 
13.32.020 - Establishment of use priorities. 
A.  Any condition which causes the normal supply of water and pressure to be reduced excessively within the city's water distribution system requires that priority use of water be implemented. These conditions include any one or more of the following, as well as any other condition which actually causes a reduction in the available water supply and/or water pressure: 
1.  High water demand; 
2.  Drought and excessive heat conditions; 
3.  Supply interruptions; 
4.  Power failure; 
5.  Water main breakage or failures; and 
6.  State-imposed emergency conditions. 
B.  A general ranking of water uses in decreasing order of importance in the event of an emergency condition will be as follows: 
1.  Household use; 
2.  Public necessity as may be established from time to time by written declaration of: 
a.  The mayor and council; or 
b.  The city's water conservation board; 
3.  The watering and maintenance of livestock; 
4.  Industrial and commercial use; 
5.  Construction; 
6.  Irrigation including watering of lawns, shrubs and gardens; 
7.  Nonessential firefighting; 
8.  Filling and usage in swimming pools; 
9.  Carwashing; 
10.  Street cleaning, line flushing, hydrant testing and similar uses. 
C.  The city, by the adoption of this article, does hereby establish an emergency conservation plan as outlined in this chapter which will place restrictions on lower priority water usage during periods when water use reduction is necessary. 
(Prior code § 22-221) 
13.32.030 - States of water system operational status. 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter and implementation of the city's water conservation plan and emergency use regulations, there shall be five states of operational status identified as: 
1.  Normal operational status; 
2.  Minor water emergency; 
3.  Moderate water emergency; 
4.  Severe water emergency; and 
5.  Critical water emergency. 
B.  The actual state of operational status of the city's water system shall always be deemed to be the normal operational status until it is determined by either the water conservation board or the mayor and council of the city that such conditions exist that dictate a reduction in water consumption and they declare one of the four emergency stages of operational status of the system in accordance with the provisions of the next section of the code. 
(Prior code § 22-222) 
13.32.040 - Determination of states of operational status. 
    As provided in Section 13.32.030, the city's water system shall be deemed to be in normal operational status unless and until a majority of the city's water conservation board or the city council at an official meeting thereof declares by written declaration a different operational status. The city's water conservation council may at any time declare one of the four water emergency states for implementation of the other provisions of this chapter and any rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to this chapter when a majority of the three members of the water conservation board determines that such conditions exist that warrant the declaration of a water emergency status. Upon such written declaration by the water conservation board, same shall remain in full force and effect until rescinded by it or until revoked by the city council in a duly called and held meeting of the mayor and council. 
(Prior code § 22-223) 
13.32.050 - Minor water emergency status. 
    When a minor water emergency status has been declared within the city, the city shall implement the following priority conservation methods in an effort to achieve a minimum ten (10) percent reduction in water consumption. Public service announcements will be made on local radio stations, the cable television information channel, and in local newspapers requesting that customers curtail the use of any unnecessary water. The primary efforts of a minor water emergency condition will be aimed at limiting the practice of watering lawns, gardens, washing of cars and other practices that are not essential during emergency conditions. All fire departments and other governmental agencies will be asked to curtail water main flushing, dust control and other nonessential use of water. Such requests will be made by the city manager, the mayor, the members of the city council, the public works superintendent, the water works superintendent, and other municipal employees. Compliance with water consumption reduction under minor water emergency conditions shall be voluntary. 
(Prior code § 22-224) 
13.32.060 - Moderate water emergency status. 
    A moderate water emergency status exists when there is a need to achieve an eleven (11) to twenty (20) percent reduction in water consumption. When a moderate emergency status is declared, in addition to the steps normally taken in a minor water emergency status, the following additional steps shall be taken: The immediate intensity or degree of announcements on local radio stations, cable television information channel and the newspaper media will be increased along with news releases by the city manager and mayor explaining the degree of severity of the problem; representatives of the governing body including the city manager and the mayor will make a stronger appeal for voluntary reduction of water usage; and city crews and public safety officials will be asked to actually field monitor water usage. If customers are observed using water for nonessential purposes, they will be contacted on-sight and asked to curtail water usage. After two requests are made, if the customer fails to comply, the customer's water service will be cut off at the meter and a reconnection fee will be charged to return the customer to service. 
(Prior code § 22-225) 
13.32.070 - Severe water emergency status. 
    A severe water emergency status shall be declared when there is a need to reduce water consumption from twenty-one (21) to thirty (30) percent. Upon the declaration of a severe water emergency status, the mayor and the city manager will continue water conservation measures followed in the minor and moderate water emergency states. In addition, water system customers using more than one thousand (1,000) gallons per day will be directly notified of the water shortage and asked to provide assistance in alleviating the problem. As may be stated in the declaration, a more severe ban on water usage will be required and prohibition of all public water usage not required for health and safety will be enacted. No outside water usage will be permitted except that absolutely essential for public health and safety. No water-cooled air conditioners will be allowed to run without recirculation and businesses such as car washes and laundromats will be asked to curtail operations for limited periods. High water using industries will be asked to curtail operations if they operate more than one shift. Any person or entity ignoring water use warnings during a severe water emergency shall have their water service immediately disconnected after failure to heed the first warning for water conservation. Any service so disconnected shall not be reconnected until a reconnection fee of one and one-half percent of the normal reconnection fee is paid by the customer. 
(Prior code § 22-226) 
13.32.080 - Critical water emergency status. 
    A critical water emergency status shall be declared whenever there is a need to curtail water consumption by more than thirty (30) percent. When a critical water emergency status has been declared, the measures implemented for a severe water emergency status will be continued along with additional measures concerning information and curtailment as may be appropriate. Prohibitions shall be declared by the mayor and council or the water conservation council on the use of any water for outside activities not essential or required for health and safety. Any business that uses in excess of one thousand (1,000) gallons per day may be required to curtail operations for limited periods until the critical water emergency has subsided. Residential water customers may be asked to wash clothes and use water for bathing every other day based on an alphabetical system as may be determined by the water conservation council. Personnel of the city including the city police department will be asked to monitor unnecessary use of water. Anyone found violating the curtailments implemented under the critical water emergency status shall have their water service terminated at the meter and same shall not be reconnected until a reconnection fee of two hundred (200) percent of the standard water service reconnection fee has been paid. Persons accused of violating critical water emergency curtailments shall be issued a citation to recorder's court for violation of municipal ordinance, namely violation of the city's water conservation ordinance and regulations. Upon the city recorder's finding of a knowing violation of this chapter by a person so cited, he or she shall be fined by the recorder for municipal ordinance violation in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 22-227) 
13.32.090 - Subsequent offenders of water conservation ordinance and regulations. 
    Any person or other legal entity whose water service is disconnected for violation of the provisions of this chapter and who either reconnects their water service without paying the appropriate reconnection fee or again violates the water curtailments in effect within thirty (30) days from reconnection shall be deemed to be a repeat offender and shall have their water meter removed and same shall not be reinstalled until the customer in question pays both a water tap fee and water service reconnection fee. Where appropriate, criminal charges shall be instituted against the person or entity responsible for the illegal reconnection for theft of services. 
(Prior code § 22-228) 
13.32.100 - Creation of water conservation board and powers. 
A.  There is created and established the city of Covington water conservation board consisting of three members who shall be mayor, the city manager, and the public works superintendent. In the event of a vacancy in the mayor's office, the mayor pro tem shall serve as a member of said board and in the event of any other vacancy on said board, the mayor (or mayor pro tem) shall appoint a member of the city council to serve until a city manager or public works superintendent is duly appointed. It shall be the responsibility of the water conservation board to monitor from time to time the status of the city's water supply and water distribution system. They shall report from time to time to the mayor and council their findings and recommendations concerning water conservation policies and the prospects of water emergencies. 
B.  Action by the water conservation board may be conducted from time to time with or without official meeting of all the board members as long as the action taken pursuant to this chapter is done by a majority of members of the board. All action in the way of declarations of emergency status and implementation of curtailments, procedures and regulations shall be in writing and shall promptly be filed with the city clerk and a copy posted on the bulletin board at City Hall. The board shall consult with the state environmental protection division water resources section concerning possible water emergencies as well as the city's consulting engineers concerning same and the making of recommendations to the mayor and council and the declaration of possible emergency situations. 
C.  The water conservation board is expressly authorized to adopt reasonable rules and regulations to carry out the effect and intent of this chapter so as to ensure that the city's available water resources are fairly allocated to its customers and used in accordance with the priorities established under Section 13.32.020 of this chapter. Any action by the water conservation board including rules and regulations promulgated by it shall be effective immediately upon their implementation in writing signed by two members of the board, filed with the city clerk and posted on the bulletin board at City Hall. The board and/or the city clerk shall ensure public dissemination of emergency declarations and the promulgation of rules and regulations adopted by the board. 
D.  Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, upon the adoption of any declaration, rules or regulations by the water conservation board, same shall remain in full force and effect until revoked, repealed or amended by the board or until revoked, repealed or amended by the mayor and council of the city in action at a duly called council meeting. 
(Prior code § 22-229) 
13.32.110 - Water reconnection fees. 
    Any customer of the city's water distribution system whose water service is disconnected at the meter due to a violation of the provisions of this article shall be assessed a water reconnection fee equal to not less than one hundred ten (110) percent of the projected administrative expense incurred by the city in disconnecting and reconnecting such water service. The actual amount of the fee shall be set by declaration of the mayor and council or by the water conservation board from time to time and until changed by written declaration by the mayor and council or the water conservation board, the basic water reconnection fee shall be two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
(Prior code § 22-230) 
13.32.120 - Violations of this chapter. 
    In addition to any and all other rights that the city may exercise due to water system customer violations of the provisions of this chapter and the regulations and rules promulgated pursuant hereto, any person violating the provisions of this chapter and the rules and regulations promulgated hereunder shall be guilty of the violation of a municipal ordinance and may be cited for such violation and tried and fined in recorder's court in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 22-231) 
13.32.130 - Application to wholesale customers. 
    The Newton County water and sewage authority. the town of Oxford and any subsequent wholesale customer purchasing water from the city shall be provided with a copy of this chapter and rules and regulations promulgated pursuant hereto. Each such customer shall be required to implement similar ordinances, rules and regulations to ensure that its respective customers exercise water conservation measures and adhere to the policies and procedures specified herein during various states of water emergency. Each such wholesale customer is expected to curtail its use of water purchased from the city by the same percentage sought to be curtailed by the city for its own retail customers. Upon the failure of any wholesale customer to so effectuate a curtailment via reduction of distribution of water to its retail customers, the city shall, to the degree necessary, discontinue on such temporary basis during each day at the various meter points connecting such wholesale customers' systems and lines to the city's distribution system as will result in percentage curtailment desired to be achieved by the city. Such unilateral action by the city shall be done as a last resort after determination by the mayor and council or the water conservation board that a wholesale customer is failing to take such action as is necessary to curtail water consumption by its customers. It is the intention of the mayor and council that the city's wholesale customers shall share prorating in the reduction of water consumption with the city's retail customers. The city manager and other city employees are authorized to take such action as is necessary to ensure such curtailments in the event of the declaration of a water emergency. 
(Prior code § 22-232) 
13.32.140 - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
A.  Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of four p.m. and ten a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
1.  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; the commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or the commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
2.  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
3.  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable Newton Board of Health regulations; 
4.  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the Environmental Protection Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
5.  Watering personal food gardens; 
6.  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of thirty (30) days immediately following the date of installation; 
7.  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
8.  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
9.  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
10.  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
11.  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
12.  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
13.  Hydroseeding. 
B.  Enforcement. 
1.  No person shall use or allow the use of water in violation of the restrictions on outdoor water use contained in this section. 
2.  The judge of Covington Municipal Court shall be the enforcement authority for this section. The city manager may also authorize other officers or departments as may be deemed necessary to assist in enforcement. 
3.  Criminal and alternative penalties. Any violation of this section may also be enforced by a citation or accusation returnable to the municipal court or by any other legal means as set forth in this code. 
(Ord. dated 1/3/11, § 1) 
Chapter 13.36 - BLASTING AND EXCAVATIONS 

13.36.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to prevent injury to persons and property and interruptions of utility and cable television service resulting from damage to gas pipes and other underground utility facilities caused by blasting or excavation operations by providing a method whereby the location of underground gas pipes and other utility facilities will be made known to persons planning to engage in blasting or excavation operations so that such persons may observe proper precautions with respect to such under ground gas and other utility facilities. 
(Prior code § 22-209) 
13.36.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the term: 
    "Blasting" means any operation by which the level of grade of land is changed or by which earth, rock, buildings, structures, or other masses or material are rent, torn, demolished, moved, or removed by the detonation of dynamite or any other explosive agent. 
    "Business day" means Monday through Friday, excluding the following holidays: New Year's Day, Martin Luther King, Jr. Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Veteran's Day, Thanksgiving Day, Friday following Thanksgiving Day, Christmas Eve, and Christmas Day. Any such holiday that falls on a Saturday shall be observed on the preceding Friday. Any such holiday that falls on a Sunday shall be observed on the following Monday. 
    "Business hours" means the time from seven a.m. to four-thirty p.m. local time on business days. 
    "Corporation" means any corporation, municipal corporation, county, joint-stock company, partnership, association, business trust, cooperative, organized group of persons, whether incorporated or not, or receiver(s) or trustee(s) of any of the foregoing. 
    "Distribution of gas" means the distribution or furnishing of gas to the ultimate consumer through the use of underground pipes or other facilities and includes, but is not limited to, the distribution of gas pursuant to a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the public service commission. 
    "Excavating" means any operation by which the level or grade of land is changed and includes, without limitation, grading, trenching, digging, ditching, augering, scraping and pile driving. Such term, however, does not include public road maintenance activities within the rights-of-way of a public road on the state highway system, the county road system, or the city street system. 
    "Gas" means any flammable gaseous matter and includes, but is not limited to, natural gas, manufactured gas, liquefied petroleum gas, and any material composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons or mixtures of the same: methane, propane, propylene, butane, or butylene. The term "gas" shall also include liquid petroleum products. 
    "Mechanized excavating equipment" means all equipment which is powered by any motor, engine, or hydraulic or pneumatic device and which is used for excavating, including, without limitation, bulldozers, backhoes, power shovels, scrapers, draglines, damshells, augers, drills and pile drivers. 
    "Person" means an individual, partnership, association or corporation. Such term, however, does not include and no provision of this article shall apply to any excavating done by a railroad when excavating is made entirely on the land which the railroad owns or on which the railroad operates or, in the event of an emergency, on adjacent land. Nor does such term include or apply to the Georgia Department of Transportation or its officers or employees when excavating, blasting, or operating mechanized excavating equipment anywhere within public road rights-of-way. 
    "Railroad" means all corporations, companies, or individuals owning or operating any railroad line or railroad company in this state. 
    "Service area" means a contiguous area or territory which encompasses the underground distribution system or network of gas pipes or other underground utility facilities by means of which a utility provides utility service. 
    "Transmission of gas" means the transmission or transportation of gas through the use of underground pipes or other facilities and includes, but is not limited to, the transportation or transmission of gas in interstate commerce pursuant to a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission and the transmission or transportation of gas in interstate commerce pursuant to a certificate of public convenience and necessity issued by the public service commission. 
    "Utilities protection center" or "center" means the corporation or other organization formed by utilities to provide a joint telephone number notification service for the purpose of receiving advance notification from persons planning to blast or excavate and distributing such notifications to its affected utility members. 
    "Utility" means any person operating or maintaining gas pipes or other underground utility facilities. 
    "Utility facility" means underground mains, pipes, conduits, cables, ducts, wires, fiber optic or photonic lines, or other structures operated or maintained by utilities in connection with the storage, conveyance, distribution, or transmission of gas, electric energy, telephone or telegraphic signals, or cable television or video communications. 
(Prior code § 22-210) 
13.36.030 - One-call notification centers. 
A.  All utilities operating or maintaining underground utility facilities within the city shall participate as members in and cooperate with the utilities protection center. No duplicate center shall be established. The activities of the center shall be funded by the participating utilities. 
B.  The utilities protection center shall maintain a list showing the counties within which its participating utilities maintain gas pipes and other underground utility facilities. The center shall also maintain a list of the name, address and telephone number of the office, department, or other source from or through which information respecting the location of gas pipes and other underground utility facilities of its participating utilities may be obtained during business hours on business days. 
(Prior code § 22-211) 
13.36.040 - Prerequisites to blasting or excavating. 
A.  No person shall commence, perform or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized excavating equipment on any tract or parcel of land in the city unless and until the person planning the blasting or excavating, at least seventy-two (72) hours prior to commencement of the work, excluding hours during days other than business days, has given actual notice to the utilities protection center, which notice shall: 
1.  Describe the tract or parcel of land upon which the blasting or excavation is to take place with sufficient particularity to enable the utility to ascertain the precise tract or parcel of land involved; 
2.  State the name, address, and telephone number of the person who will engage in the blasting or excavating and state whether such person desires to be notified in the event there are no utility facilities present on the tract or parcel specified; 
3.  Describe the type of blasting or excavating to be engaged in by the person; and 
4.  Designate the date upon which the blasting or excavating will commence. 
B.  Whenever any blasting or excavating with mechanized excavating equipment is undertaken on a project on the public road system under contract with the department of transportation, the notice required under subsection A of this section shall be deemed to have been given for all utility facilities other than gas which are shown on the project plans and for which a notice of contract award and notice of preconstruction conference have been mailed to the utility by the Georgia Department of Transportation. Nothing contained in this subsection shall be construed to relieve any person under contract with the Georgia Department of Transportation of the duties set forth in Section 13.36.060 of this chapter as to all underground utility facilities. 
C.  In the event the blasting or excavation work which is the subject of the notice given pursuant to subsection A will not be completed within seventeen (17) days following the date of such notice, then no later than fourteen (14) days following such date of notice an additional notice must be given in accordance with subsection A. 
D.  If, subsequent to giving the notice required by subsection A, a person planning excavating determines that such work will require blasting, then such person shall promptly so notify the utilities protection center. 
(Prior code § 22-212) 
13.36.050 - Duty of utility notified of proposed blasting or excavating. 
A.  Within seventy-two (72) hours, excluding hours during days other than business days, following receipt by the utilities protection center of actual notice filed in accordance with Section 13.36.040 of this chapter, each utility shall stake or otherwise mark the surface of the tract or parcel of land to indicate the location of gas pipes or other underground utility facilities. Such markings shall be in accordance with the following color code: 
1.  Safety red shall be used to mark electric power distribution and transmission facilities; 
2.  High visibility safety yellow shall be used to mark gas and oil distribution and transmission facilities; 
3.  Safety alert orange shall be used to mark telephone, telegraph, cable television, video, and other telecommunications facilities; 
4.  Safety precaution blue shall be used to mark water systems facilities; and 
5.  Safety green shall be used to mark sewer systems facilities. 
B.  If the person planning or excavating has stated pursuant to Section 13.36.040(A)(2) of this chapter that he desires to be notified in the event there are no utility facilities present on the tract or parcel specified, then each utility shall attempt to so notify such person by telephoning such person at the number pursuant to such code section. 
(Prior code § 22-213) 
13.36.060 - Treatment of gas pipes and other underground utility facilities by blasters and excavators. 
    No person engaged in blasting or excavating with mechanized excavating equipment shall strike, damage, injure, loosen, or remove lateral support from or around any gas pipe or other underground utility facility which has been staked or marked in accordance with this chapter, provided, however that nothing in this chapter shall be construed or applied to limit or reduce the duty of a person engaged in blasting or excavating in the vicinity of gas pipes or other underground utility facilities, irrespective of whether the same have been staked or marked as provided in this chapter. 
(Prior code § 22-214) 
13.36.070 - Degree of accuracy required in pipe or under ground utility facility location-Inaccurate information, liability of blaster or excavator-Liability of gas company for lack of accurate information, etc. 
A.  For the purposes of this chapter, information concerning the location of gas pipes and other underground utility facilities which is given by a utility to any person must be accurate to within twenty-four (24) inches measured horizontally from the outer edge of either side of such facilities. If any gas pipe or other underground utility facility becomes damaged due to the furnishing of inaccurate information as to its location by the utility, the liabilities imposed by this chapter shall not apply. 
B.  Upon documented evidence that the person seeking information as to the location of gas pipes or other underground utility facilities has incurred losses or expenses due to inaccurate information, lack of information, or unreasonable delays in sup-plying information by the utility, the utility shall be liable to that person for his losses. 
(Prior code § 22-215) 
13.36.080 - Effect of chapter upon rights, powers, etc., of utilities. 
    This chapter does not affect and is not intended to affect any right, title, power, or interest which any utility may have with relation to any facility or any easement, right-of-way, license, permit, or other interest in or with respect to the land on which the facility is located. 
(Prior code § 22-216) 
13.36.090 - Effect of chapter upon rights, powers, etc., governing entities concerning facilities located on public rights-of-way. 
    This chapter does not affect and is not intended to affect any rights, powers, interest or liability of the state of Georgia or the Georgia Department of Transportation with respect to the state highway system, county road system or any municipal street system, or of a county with respect to the county road system or a municipality with respect to a city street system, with relation to any gas pipe or other underground utility facility which is or may be installed within the limits of any public road or street right-of-way, whether the installation is by written or verbal permit, easement, or any form of agreement whatsoever. 
(Prior code § 22-217) 
13.36.100 - Applicability of chapter in emergencies. 
    If any emergency arises which presents an immediate and substantial danger to life, health, or property or which requires the establishment or restoration of gas, electric, communication, rail or other essential public services, it shall be lawful for the person who undertakes to prevent such damage to life, health, or property or who is responsible for the establishment or restoration of such gas, electric, communication, rail, or other essential public services to engage in blasting or excavating with mechanized excavating equipment for such purpose without complying with Section 13.36.040 of this chapter; provided that, before commencing the same or as soon thereafter as is reasonably practicable, the person shall give notice thereof to any utility which the person, in the exercise of reasonable judgment, believes may have gas pipes or other underground utility facilities within such proximity as to be affected by the blasting or excavating with mechanized excavating equipment. 
(Prior code § 22-218) 
13.36.110 - Penalties for violation of chapter. 
A.  Any person who violates the requirements of section 13.36.040 of this chapter shall, upon conviction of such violation, be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
B.  Any person who violates the requirements of Section 13.36.040 of this chapter and whose subsequent excavating or blasting damages gas pipes or other underground utility facilities shall be strictly liable for: 
1.  Any cost incurred by the utility in repairing or replacing its damaged facilities; and 
2.  Any injury or damage to persons or property resulting from such damage to the underground gas pipe or other utility facilities. 
C.  Any such person shall also indemnify the affected utility against all claims, if any, for personal injury, property damage, or service interruptions resulting from damaging the underground gas pipes or other utility facilities. 
D.  Subsections A and C of this section shall not apply to any person who shall commence, perform or engage in blasting or in excavating with mechanized equipment on any tract or parcel of land in the city if the utility to which the notice was given respecting such blasting or excavating with mechanized equipment, as prescribed in Section 13.36.040 of this chapter has failed to comply with Section 13.36.050 of this chapter or has failed to become a member of the utilities protection center as required by Section 13.36.030 of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 22-219) 
Chapter 13.40 - STORMWATER SYSTEM 

13.40.010 - Findings of fact. 
    The mayor and council of the city find that it is in the best interest of the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city to fund improvements for maintaining and improving water quality and to mitigate and prevent flooding from stormwater runoff and that allocation of the cost of stormwater management among properties and entities in proportion to the long-term demands they impose on the city's stormwater management system is the most practical and equitable approach to such funding. Accordingly, a utility for stormwater management accounted for in the city budget as a separate enterprise dedicated solely to stormwater management provides the most appropriate means of funding stormwater management services in the city. 
(Ord. dated 10/5/04 (part)) 
13.40.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section unless the context specifically indicates otherwise. 
    "Channel protection" shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
    "Credit" means a conditional reduction in the amount of stormwater utility fee to an individual property based upon the terms and conditions of this chapter. 
    "Customer" means all persons, properties, and entities served by the city's acquisition, management, maintenance, extension, and improvement of the public stormwater management systems and facilities and regulation of public and private stormwater systems, facilities, and activities related thereto, and persons, properties, and entities which will ultimately be served or benefited as a result of the stormwater management program. 
    "Developed land" means all property not deemed as undisturbed land. 
    "Disturbed pervious land" means all property that has been cleared of its natural vegetation. Disturbed pervious land includes but is not limited to grassed lawns, landscaped areas, pastures, crop fields, golf courses, and bare soil. 
    "Equivalent residential unit (ERU)" means the unit of measure which provides the basis for comparing the runoff generated by one parcel with that generated by another. An ERU shall be the median impervious coverage of a statistical sampling of single detached dwelling lots in the city, which has been determined to be two thousand six hundred (2,600) square feet of impervious area. 
    "Extreme flood protection" shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
    "Impervious surfaces" means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings. 
    "Infiltration" means capture and temporary storage of stormwater runoff before allowing it to infiltrate into the soil over a period of time less than or equal to seventy-two (72) hours. 
    "Multiple dwelling lot" means a developed lot whereon more than one attached or detached residential dwelling units are located. 
    "Other developed land" means, but shall not be limited to, commercial and office buildings, industrial and manufacturing buildings, storage buildings and storage areas covered with impervious surfaces, parking lots, parks, recreation properties, public and private schools and universities, research stations, hospitals and convalescent centers, airports, and agricultural uses covered by impervious surfaces. 
    "Overbank flood protection" shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
    "Retention" means procedures and schemes whereby stormwater is held for considerable periods causing water to continue in the hydrological cycle via infiltration, percolation, evapotranspiration, and not via direct discharge to watercourses. 
    "Single dwelling lot" means a developed lot containing one dwelling structure with its principal use being a residential dwelling. 
    "Stormwater management system" means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
    "Stormwater utility fees" means the fees applicable to a parcel of developed land, which charge shall be used to fund the city's cost of providing stormwater management services. 
    "Undisturbed land" means land in its unaltered natural state and which has no pavement, asphalt, or compacted gravel surfaces or structures which create an impervious surface that would prevent infiltration of stormwater or cause stormwater to collect, concentrate, or flow in a manner materially different than that which would occur if the land was in an unaltered natural state. 
    "Water quality volume" shall have the same meaning as the term is defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
    "Wetlands" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support, a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. dated 10/5/04 (part)) 
13.40.030 - Establishment of stormwater utility. 
    There is hereby established a stormwater utility within the public works department of the city for the purpose of operation, maintenance and improvement of public stormwater systems and facilities. 
(Ord. dated 10/5/04 (part)) 
13.40.040 - Establishment of enterprise fund. 
A.  A stormwater enterprise fund shall be established in the city's budget and accounting system for the purpose of dedicating and protecting all funding applicable to the stormwater utility, including without limitation such rates, fees, charges and licenses as may be established by the city council. 
B.  Except as provided in subsection C of this section, all revenues and receipts of the stormwater utility shall be credited to the stormwater enterprise fund and all expenses of said utility shall be paid from the stormwater enterprise fund, except that revenues from other sources may be applied to stormwater operations, maintenance and capital improvements as deemed appropriate by the city council. 
C.  All or any portion of revenue from operation of the stormwater utility may be pledged to the payment of principal or premium, if any, and interest on any revenue bonds or other obligations duly authorized by resolution of the city council. 
(Ord. dated 10/5/04 (part)) 
13.40.050 - Establishment of stormwater utility fee. 
    A stormwater utility fee as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be collected in order to recover the city's cost of providing stormwater services and to fairly and reasonably apportion such costs among properties within the corporate limits of the city. 
(Ord. dated 10/5/04 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 2/16/09, § 1; Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 11) 
13.40.060 - Exemptions. 
    The following are exempt from imposition of stormwater utility fees: 
A.  Rights-of-way of public streets, alleys, highways, roads and utilities; 
B.  Railroad rights-of-way (tracks). However, railroad stations, maintenance buildings, or other developed land used for railroad purposes shall not be exempt from stormwater utility fees. 
(Ord. dated 10/5/04 (part)) 
13.40.070 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. dated February 16, 2009, repealed § 13.40.070, which pertained to adjustments to the stormwater utility fee and derived from Ord. dated Oct. 5, 2004 (part). 
13.40.080 - Credits. 
    Property owners of developed land may receive a stormwater utility fee credit for on-site systems or facilities, based on the technical requirements, design and performance standards contained in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual and the city of Covington Stormwater Utility Credit and Adjustment Policy Manual. Stormwater utility fee credits may total up to eighty-five (85) percent of the utility fee applicable to a property, and shall be granted in the following increments: 
A.  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet water quality volume in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
B.  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities properly sized and functioning to meet the channel protection in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
C.  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the overbank flood protection in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
D.  Ten (10) percent credit for on-site systems or facilities sized and functioning to meet the extreme flood protection in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
E.  Five percent credit for compliance with an existing NPDES permit for industrial activity; or 
F.  Low Impact Parcel Credit of twenty-five (25) percent for parcels larger than 0.58 acre with an impervious area of less than 14.4 percent of the total area of the parcel. 
G.  Fifteen (15) percent credit for stormwater runoff in the form of sheet flow or other non-channelized flow from public property onto private property. 
H.  One hundred (100) percent credit for one hundred (100) percent retention of the one hundred (100) year storm. 
    Public and private school systems with two hundred (200) or more students are eligible for an additional ten (10) percent credit for teaching an approved environmental science curriculum in grades Kindergarten (K) through twelve (12). 
(Ord. dated 6/2/08 § 5; Ord. dated 10/5/04 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 2/16/09, §§ 3-5) 
13.40.090 - Appeals. 
    Any property owner aggrieved by a decision of the public works department upon an application for an adjustment or credit against a stormwater utility fee as provided in Sections 13.40.070 or 13.40.080 of this chapter may appeal such decision to the board of appeals and adjustments of the city in the manner provided in Sections 16.12.040 and 16.12.050 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 4/7/08 § 4 (part); Ord. dated 10/5/04 (part)) 
13.40.100 - Stormwater utility bills, payment, delinquency and collection. 
    Bills for stormwater utility services shall be mailed to owners of property of record as of January 1st of each year at such intervals as deemed most practicable by the public works department, shall be due and payable within thirty (30) days after such mailing and shall be delinquent if unpaid after said thirty (30) day period. The city shall have a lien, effective as of January 1st of each year, against the property for which stormwater utility services are provided in the amount billed for such services. Said liens may be perfected by filing a notice of same in the General Execution Docket of Newton County, Georgia, and may be collected, along with penalties and interest, in the same manner a provided for the collection of ad valorem taxes in Title 48, O.C.G.A. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/07) 
13.40.110 - Stormwater utility inspections; enforcement. 
A.  Every owner of property, any part of which lies within the corporate limits of the city, shall provide, maintain and operate on-site systems and facilities sufficient to collect, detain, control, convey and discharge stormwater in a manner consistent with the ordinances and regulations of the city and applicable state and federal laws and regulations. Failure to meet this obligation shall constitute a nuisance which may be abated under the procedure provided in Section 8.12.030, et seq. of this code. 
B.  The city, through its designated officers and employees, shall have the right to enter upon private property, upon reasonable notice to the owner thereof, for the purpose of inspecting the property and conducting surveys and engineering tests thereon in order to ensure compliance with this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 10/5/04 (part)) 
Chapter 13.44 - CABLE FRANCHISES AND REGULATIONS 

13.44.010 - Definitions and word usage. 
    For the purposes of this chapter, the following terms, phrases, words, and abbreviations shall have the meanings given herein, unless otherwise expressly stated or unless defined within a franchise agreement. When not inconsistent with the context, words used in the present tense include the future tense; words in the plural number include the singular number, and words in the singular number include the plural number; and the masculine gender includes the feminine gender. The words "shall" and "will" are mandatory, and "may" is permissive. Words not defined shall be given their meaning according to common usage within the cable television business. Unless otherwise expressly stated, words not defined herein shall be given the meaning set forth in Title 47 of the United States Code, 47 U.S.C. Sections 521 et seq., as amended, and, if not defined therein, their meaning according to common usage within the cable television business. Words not defined that have no meaning within the cable television business shall be given their common and ordinary meaning. 
    "Access channel" means any channel on a cable system set aside by a franchise for noncommercial public, educational, or governmental ("PEG") use. 
    "Basic service" means any service tier that includes the retransmission of local television broadcast signals as well as the public, educational and government channels required under a franchise. 
    "Cable Act" means the Cable Communications Policy Act of 1984, 47 U.S.C. Sections 521 et seq., as amended by the Cable Television Consumer Protection and Competition Act of 1992, Pub. L. No 102-385 (1992); by the Telecommunications Act of 1996, Pub. L. No. 104 - 104 (1996); and as further amended from time to time. 
    "Cable service" means: (1) the one-way transmission to subscribers of video programming or other programming services; and (2) subscriber interaction, if any, which is required for the selection or use of such video programming or other programming service. 
    "Cable system or system" means a facility consisting of a set of closed transmission paths and associated signal generation, reception, and control equipment that is designed to provide cable service which includes video programming and/or producing, receiving, amplifying, storing, processing, switching, or distributing audio, video, digital or other forms of electronic signals sold or distributed to subscribers, but such term does not include: (1) a facility that serves only to retransmit the television signals of one or more television broadcast stations; (2) a facility that serves subscribers, without using any public rights-of-way; (3) a facility of a common carrier which is subject, in whole or in part, to the provisions of Title II of the Communications Act of 1934, as amended, except that such facility shall be considered a cable system to the extent such facility is used in the transmission of video programming directly to subscribers, unless the extent of such use is solely to provide interactive on-demand services; (4) an open video system that complies with Section 653 of the Cable Act, the rules and regulations of the FCC, and local law; or (5) any facilities of any electric utility used solely for operating its electric utility systems. 
    "City" means the city of Covington, Georgia, and the area within its corporate limits, as the same may from time to time be delineated. 
    "Council" means the governing body of the city of Covington, Georgia, or any successor to the legislative powers of the present council. 
    "Emergency" means a sudden, unforeseen event potentially causing significant property damage, destruction, or loss of life. 
    "Existing franchisee" means a person who is operating a cable system pursuant to a valid franchise granted by the city as of the effective date of this chapter. 
    "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission, its designee, or any successor governmental entity thereto. 
    "Franchise" means a nonexclusive authorization granted in accordance with this chapter to construct, operate, and maintain a cable system along the public rights-of-way and provide cable service within all or a specified area of the city. 
    "Franchise agreement" means a contract entered into in accordance with the provisions of this chapter between the city and a franchisee that sets forth the terms and conditions under which a franchise will be exercised. 
    "Franchise area" means the area of the city that a franchisee is authorized to serve by its franchise agreement. 
    "Franchisee" means a natural person, partnership, domestic or foreign corporation, association, joint venture, or organization of any kind that has been granted a cable franchise by the city. 
    "Gross revenues" means any and all revenues, as determined in accordance with generally accepted accounting principles ("GAAP"), of any kind arising from, attributable, or in any way, directly or indirectly, derived by the franchisee or its affiliates, or by any other entity that is a cable operator of the system from the operation of the franchisee's cable system to provide cable services to subscribers within the corporate limits of the city. Gross revenues includes, as illustrations and not limited to, monthly fees charged to subscribers for any basic, optional, premium, per-channel, per-program service, on-demand service, service provided over the cable system, or other cable service, including without limitation, installation, disconnection, reconnection, and change-in-service fees, leased access channel fees, late fees, administrative fees and advertising revenue, the fair market value of consideration received by the franchisee for use of the cable system to provide cable service and accounted for as revenue under GAAP, revenues from program guides, revenues from the sale or carriage of other related cable services, and revenues from home shopping and other revenue sharing arrangements. Gross revenue shall not include bad debt; provided that any such bad debt written off but subsequently collected shall be included in gross revenues in the period collected, credits, refunds and deposits paid to subscribers, FCC user fees, any taxes on services rendered by the franchisee that are imposed directly on any subscriber by the state of Georgia, the city, or any other governmental entity and which are collected by the franchisee on behalf of such governmental entity; however, a franchise fee is not such a tax. 
    "Overlapping franchisee" means a person who is awarded a franchise after the effective date of this chapter to operate a cable system in an area of the city that is served by an existing franchisee. 
    "Person" means an individual, partnership, association, joint stock company, developer, organization, corporation, or any lawful successor thereto or transferee thereof, but such term does not include the city. 
    "Public rights-of-way" means the public streets, avenues, highways, boulevards, concourses, driveways, bridges, tunnels, parks, parkways, waterways, alleys, and all other public rights-of-way and easements, and public grounds within the corporate limits of the city and under its jurisdictional control. 
    "Section" means any section, subsection or provision of this chapter. 
    "Service" means any cable service, including any basic service or any other cable service, whether originated by the franchisee or any other person, which is offered to any person in conjunction with, or distributed over, the cable system. 
    "Subscriber" means any individual, partnership, association, limited liability company, trust, corporation, governmental entity, or any other lawful entity that lawfully receives cable service over the cable system with the franchisee's express authorization. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.020 - Grant of franchise. 
A.  Grant of Franchise. The city may grant one or more cable television franchises, and each such franchise shall be awarded in accordance with and subject to the provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Franchise Required. No person may construct or operate a cable system in the city without a franchise granted by the city. No person may be granted a franchise without having entered into a franchise agreement with the city pursuant to this chapter. 
C.  Council Action Required. All franchises, and all renewals thereof shall be granted only by resolution of the council. No such resolution shall be adopted before the application therefor has been filed with the council through the city clerk. 
D.  Length of Franchise. A franchise shall initially be granted for a period as set forth in a franchise agreement. A franchisee may apply for renewal pursuant to federal law. 
E.  Franchisee Subject to Other Laws, Police Power. A franchisee's rights are subject to the police powers of the city to adopt and enforce ordinances necessary to ensure the health and safety of the public. A franchisee shall comply with all generally applicable laws and ordinances lawfully enacted by the city pursuant to that power. 
F.  Operation of a Cable System Without a Franchise. Any person who occupies public rights-of-way for the purpose of operating or constructing a cable system and who does not hold a valid franchise from the city shall be subject to all provisions of this chapter, including, but not limited to, its provisions regarding construction and technical standards, and franchise fees. In its discretion, the city at any time may: (1) require such person to enter into a franchise agreement within thirty (30) days of receipt of a written notice by the city that a franchise agreement is required; (2) require such person to remove its property and restore the area to a condition satisfactory to the city within such time period; (3) remove the property itself and restore the area to a satisfactory condition and charge such person the costs therefor; and/or (4) take any other action it is entitled to take under applicable law. In no event shall a franchise be created unless it is issued by action of the city and subject to a written franchise agreement. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.030 - Construction provisions. 
A.  Construction Schedule for New Systems. The following requirements apply to the initial construction of a cable system. The construction requirements for any upgrade or rebuild of an existing system shall be contained in a franchise agreement. 
1.  Timetable for Construction. A franchisee shall complete construction of its cable system within twenty-four (24) months of the effective date of a franchise or as otherwise provided in its franchise agreement. 
2.  Distribution System Location. At least sixty (60) days in advance of the scheduled commencement of construction of a cable system, the franchisee shall submit a detailed distribution system location plan to the city. The system location should be on maps of industry standard scale. 
3.  Construction Plan. 
a.  The franchisee shall follow the system location plan, construction schedule, and the construction practices manual submitted except insofar as those plans or practices, if carried out, would not meet the requirements of the franchise agreement, this chapter, or applicable law. 
b.  The franchisee shall maintain a public file showing its plan and timetable for construction of the cable system, together with information showing its progress on that plan and timetable. 
c.  The franchisee shall provide updated strand system location maps to the city within ninety (90) days of the completion of construction of any planned phase or construction node. The maps should be developed on the basis of post-construction inspection by the franchisee and construction personnel to assess compliance with system design. 
d.  Failure on the part of a franchisee to commence and diligently pursue each of the requirements set forth in its franchise agreement, in this chapter, or to comply with the system location and construction plan submitted to and approved by the city, shall be grounds for termination of its franchise; provided, however, that the council in its discretion may extend the time for the completion of construction and installation for such additional periods, as it considers appropriate, in the event a franchisee, acting in good faith, experiences delays in adhering to the construction schedule by reason of circumstances beyond its reasonable control. 
4.  Performance Bond. 
a.  Prior to initial construction of a cable system, a franchisee shall provide the city a performance bond in an amount equal to one hundred (100) percent of the total cost of the work. 
b.  In the event a franchisee subject to such a performance bond fails to complete the cable system construction, upgrade or rebuild in a safe, timely, and competent manner in accord with the provisions of a franchise agreement and this chapter, there shall be recoverable, jointly and severally from the principal and surety of the bond, any damages or loss suffered to the city as a result, including the full amount of any compensation, indemnification, or cost of removal or abandonment of any property of the franchisee, or the cost of completing the cable system construction, plus a reasonable allowance for attorneys' fees, up to the full amount of the bond. 
c.  Upon completion of the cable system construction and payment of all construction obligations of the cable system to the satisfaction of the city, the city shall eliminate the bond. A renewal franchise agreement may provide that, prior to any rebuild or upgrade of an existing system, a franchisee shall establish in the city's favor a performance bond in an amount equal to ten (10) percent of the cost of work, not to exceed one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
d.  The performance bond shall contain an endorsement that prohibits the cancellation of the bond until sixty (60) days' notice of such cancellation or intent not to renew is sent to the city by certified mail. 
B.  Construction Procedures. 
1.  A franchisee shall construct, operate and maintain the cable system subject to the supervision of all of the authorities of the city who have jurisdiction in such matters, and in strict compliance with all laws, ordinances, departmental rules, orders, and regulations affecting the system. 
2.  The cable system, and all parts thereof, shall be subject to the right of periodic inspection by the city. 
3.  No construction or other activity on or related to a cable system, including any activity within a public right-of-way, shall be commenced by a franchisee until all required permits and approvals have been obtained from the city and other relevant authorities. 
C.  Construction Standards. 
1.  The construction, operation, maintenance, and repair of a cable system shall be in accordance with all applicable sections of the Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970, as amended, the National Electrical Safety Code, the National Electric Code, Obstruction Marking and Lighting, AC 70/7460 i.e., Federal Aviation Administration; Construction, Marking and Lighting of Antenna Structures, Federal Communications Commission Rules Part 17; all applicable utility construction requirements of the state; and other applicable federal, state, or local laws and regulations that may apply to the operation, construction, maintenance, or repair of a cable system, including, without limitation, local zoning and construction codes, and laws and accepted industry practices. 
2.  All wires, cable lines, and other transmission lines, equipment, and structures shall be installed and located so as to cause no material interference with the rights and convenience of other property owners. 
3.  A franchisee shall at all times employ ordinary care and shall install and maintain in use commonly accepted methods and devices preventing failures and accidents that are likely to cause damage, injury, or nuisance to the public or to employees of franchisee. 
4.  A franchisee shall not place facilities, equipment, or fixtures where they will interfere with any gas, electric, telephone, water, sewer, or other utility facilities, or facilities of another cable system, or obstruct the various utilities or other franchisees serving the residents of the city or their use of any public rights-of-way. 
5.  Any and all public rights-of-way, public property, or private property that is disturbed or damaged during the construction, repair, replacement, relocation, operation, maintenance, or construction of a cable system shall be promptly repaired by the franchisee, and restored to a condition reasonably comparable to its condition prior to the disturbance or damage. 
6.  In all areas of the city where all cables, wires or other like facilities of all public utilities are placed underground, a franchisee shall likewise place its cables, wires, or other facilities underground, except as otherwise permitted by the city by prior written order, and shall fully comply with the requirements of the Georgia Utility Facility Protection Act (O.C.G.A. Section 25-91-1, et seq.) 
D.  Conditions of Access. 
1.  No person who owns or controls any residential multiple dwelling unit, trailer park, condominium or apartment complex, or subdivision shall interfere with a franchisee's right to use the easements of any subdivision for the construction, installation, maintenance and repair of a cable system, or enter into any arrangement with a third party to do so. 
2.  A franchisee shall remain the sole owner of all cable and equipment used in providing cable services to any tenant or lawful resident of any residential multiple dwelling unit, trailer park, condominium or apartment complex, or subdivision. Subject to applicable federal regulations at the conclusion of service, a franchisee shall have the right to remove all cable and equipment, and a franchisee shall not be denied access to the premises to effectuate such removal. 
E.  Area Served. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall build its cable system so that it is able to provide cable service to all residential dwellings located within its franchise area in accordance with the line extension requirements in subsection F below. 
F.  Line Extension Requirements. 
1.  Density Requirements. Unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall extend its trunk and distribution system to serve subscribers requesting cable service after the date hereof at no charge where the density of potential subscribers to be passed by such extension is equal to or greater than twenty (20) potential subscribers per mile measured from the nearest point of the franchisee's nearest trunk amplifier. 
2.  Cost Sharing. 
a.  In the event that the requirements set forth in subsection (F)(1) of this section are not met, a franchisee must, upon the request of a potential subscriber or subscribers, extend its cable system based upon the following cost-sharing formula. The franchisee shall contribute an amount equal to the construction costs per quarter mile multiplied by the length of the extension in quarter miles, multiplied by a fraction where the numerator equals the number of actual potential subscribers per quarter mile at the time of the request and whose denominator equals four. Persons requesting service will be required to bear the remainder of the total construction costs on a pro rata basis. 
b.  As used in subsection (F)(2) of this section, "construction costs" are defined as the actual turnkey cost to construct the entire extension, including electronics, pole make-ready charges, and labor, but not the cost of the house drop. This provision applies to subdivisions and businesses as well as residences. Any amount contributed by a person requesting extension must be returned on the following basis: At the end of each calendar year, the franchisee must calculate the amount any contributing person would have paid had the extension been made at that time and pay back the difference between the amount actually collected from that person and the amount which would then be owed. 
c.  Installation of Service Drops. Except as federal regulations may otherwise allow, the franchisee shall not assess any additional cost beyond its standard installation charge for service drops of one hundred twenty-five (125) aerial feet (or seventy-five (75) underground feet) or less, unless the franchisee demonstrates to the city's satisfaction that extraordinary circumstances justify a higher charge. Where a drop exceeds one hundred twenty-five (125) aerial (or seventy-five (75) underground) feet in length, a franchisee may charge the subscriber for the difference between franchisee's actual costs associated with installing a one hundred twenty-five (125) foot aerial (or seventy-five (75) foot underground) drop, and the franchisee's actual cost of installing the longer drop, provided that drop length shall be the shorter of: (1) the actual length of installed drop, or (2) shortest distance to the point where the franchisee would be required to extend its distribution system. 
3.  Location of Drops. Except as federal regulations may otherwise allow, in any area where a franchisee would be entitled to install a drop above-ground, the franchisee will provide the homeowner the option to have the drop installed underground, but may charge the homeowner the difference between the actual cost of the above-ground installation and the actual cost of the underground installation. 
4.  Time for Extension. A franchisee must extend service to any person who requests it: (1) within seven working days of the request, where service can be provided by activating or installing a drop; (2) within thirty (30) days of the request in any area otherwise meeting the requirements of subsection (F)(1) of this section, or where an extension of one-half mile or less is required; or (3) within six months where an extension of one-half mile or more is required. 
G.  Inspections During Construction. The city may conduct inspections of construction areas and subscriber installations. The franchisee shall be notified of any violations found during the course of inspections. The franchisee must bring violations into compliance within thirty (30) days of the date notice of violation is given, and must submit a report to the city describing the steps taken to bring itself into compliance. Inspection does not relieve the franchisee of its obligation to build in compliance with all provisions of the franchise. 
H.  Use of Public Property. 
1.  Should the grades or lines of the public rights-of-way that a franchisee is authorized to use and occupy be changed at any time during the term of the franchise, the franchisee shall, if necessary, at its own cost and expense, relocate or change its cable system so as to conform with the new grades or lines. Notwithstanding the foregoing, if public funds are available, franchisee will be reimbursed in the same manner as other utilities. 
2.  Any alteration to the water mains, sewerage or drainage system or to any city, state or other public structures in the public rights-of-way required on account of the presence of the cable system in the public rights-of-way shall be made at the sole cost and expense of the franchisee. During any work of constructing, operating or maintaining of the cable system, the franchisee shall also, at its own cost and expense, protect any and all existing structures belonging to the city or any other person. All work performed by the franchisee pursuant to this section shall be done in the manner prescribed by the city or other officials having jurisdiction therein. 
I.  Publicizing Proposed Construction Work. A franchisee shall publicize proposed construction work at least one week prior to commencement of that work by causing written notice of such construction work to be delivered to the city and by notifying those persons most likely to be affected by the work in any manner reasonably calculated to provide adequate notice. In addition, before entering onto any person's property, a franchisee shall use its best efforts to contact the property owner or (in the case of residential property) the resident at least three days in advance. 
J.  System Maintenance. 
1.  Interruptions to be Minimized. A franchisee shall schedule maintenance so that activities likely to result in an interruption of cable service are performed during periods of minimum subscriber use of the system. 
2.  Lines Kept in Good Repair. All lines, equipment and connections in, over, under and upon the streets and public ways and private property in the city, wherever situated or located, shall at all times be kept and maintained in a safe and suitable condition, and in good order and repair. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.040 - System facilities, equipment, and services. 
A.  Service to Municipal Buildings. Unless provided otherwise in a franchise agreement, a franchisee shall install, at no charge, one cable service outlet at all city buildings within the franchise area that are located within one hundred twenty-five (125) feet of franchisee's distribution service tap, and shall charge only its time and material costs for any additional service outlets to such facilities as shall be requested by the city. The franchisee shall provide full basic service to all outlets in such buildings free of charge, provided, however, that franchisee shall not be required to provide converters or any other equipment free of charge. 
B.  Emergency Alert System. A franchisee shall comply with the applicable FCC regulations concerning the emergency alert system (EAS). 
C.  Public, Educational and Governmental Access Channels. A franchisee shall provide channels, facilities, and/or support for public, educational, and/or governmental use as provided in its franchise agreement. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.050 - Customer service. 
    A franchisee shall at all times satisfy any customer service requirements applied to cable operators by state or federal law or regulation, specifically including 47 C.F.R. Section 76.309, or by this chapter. Similarly, nothing in this section in any way relieves the franchisee of its obligation to comply with applicable consumer protection laws. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.060 - Rate regulation. 
    The city shall have the right to regulate rates as permitted by applicable state and federal law. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.070 - Franchise fee. 
A.  Payment to City. A franchisee shall pay to the city an annual franchise fee in an amount, established in a franchise agreement, not to exceed five (5) percent of its gross revenues. Franchise fees may be passed through to subscribers as a line item on subscriber invoices and otherwise. 
B.  Payment Period. Payments due the city under this provision shall be submitted quarterly to the city or as otherwise provided in a franchise agreement. The franchisee shall file a complete and accurate verified statement of all gross revenues derived from the provision of cable service during the period for which such payment is made no later than sixty (60) days following the end of each quarter. 
C.  Audit. The city shall have the right to audit a franchisee's fiscal and financial records, and to recompute any amounts that are payable under this section by the franchisee for a period of three years after receipt thereof, after which payments shall be final. Any additional amounts due to the city as a result of the audit shall be paid within sixty (60) days following written notice to the franchisee by the city of the underpayment, which notice shall include a copy of the audit. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.080 - Insurance-Indemnification. 
A.  Indemnity. 
1.  Scope of Indemnity. To the extent permitted by law, and except as to matters arising out of the city's negligence, franchisee shall indemnify, hold harmless, and defend the city against any and all claims, causes of action, proceedings, and judgments for damages arising out of the construction, repair, maintenance and operation of the cable system. 
2.  Duty to Give Notice and Tender Defense. The city must give the franchisee timely written notice within twenty (20) business days of the making of any claim or of the commencement of any action, suit or other proceeding covered by the indemnity of this section. In the event such claim arises, the city or any other indemnified party shall tender the defense thereof to the franchisee and the franchisee shall have the right to defend, settle or compromise any claims arising hereunder and the city shall cooperate fully therein. 
B.  Insurance. 
1.  The franchisee shall maintain throughout the duration of the term of the franchise, liability insurance covering the franchisee, and naming the city, its officers, agents and employees, whether elected or appointed, as additional insureds, against any and all claims, injury or damage to persons or property, both real and personal, caused by the construction erection, operation or maintenance of any aspect of the cable system, in amounts not less than the following, and with such deductibles as are ordinary and reasonable in keeping with industry standards, unless otherwise provided in a franchise agreement: 
a.  Comprehensive General Liability. Combined single limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00); and 
b.  Comprehensive Automobile Liability. Combined single limit of not less than one million dollars ($1,000,000.00). 
2.  Franchisee shall provide thirty (30) days advance notice to the city in the event of material alteration, or cancellation of any such coverage. 
3.  Proof of insurance, such as an ACORD certificate or similar proof of the insurance required hereunder, shall be furnished upon request to the city. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.090 - Transfers and assignments. 
    City Approval Required. A franchise may not be assigned, and there may be no transfer of control of the franchisee, without the express prior permission of the city, except as otherwise provided under federal law or as provided in a franchise agreement. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.100 - Discrimination prohibited. 
A.  Discriminatory Practices Prohibited. A franchisee shall not deny access or levy different rates and charges on any group of potential residential cable subscribers because of the income of the residents of the local area in which such group resides. 
B.  Subscriber Privacy. A franchisee shall at all times protect the privacy of all subscribers pursuant to the provisions of Section 631 of the Cable Act, 47 U.S.C. Section 551. A franchisee shall not condition subscriber service on the subscriber's grant of permission to disclose information which, pursuant to federal or state law, cannot be disclosed without the subscriber's explicit consent. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
13.44.110 - Miscellaneous provisions. 
A.  Compliance with Laws. Each franchisee shall comply in all material respects with all federal and state laws, as well any generally applicable ordinances, resolutions, rules and regulations adopted or established by the city during the entire term of its franchise. 
B.  Incorporation by Reference. Any franchise granted pursuant to this chapter shall include a provision that shall incorporate by reference this chapter. To the extent that there is a conflict between this chapter and the specific terms of any franchise agreement, this chapter shall control. 
C.  Force Majeure. A franchisee shall not be deemed in default with provisions of its franchise where performance was rendered impossible by war or riots, civil disturbances, floods, or other natural catastrophes beyond the franchisee's reasonable control, and a franchise shall not be revoked or a franchisee penalized for such noncompliance, provided that the franchisee takes immediate and diligent steps to bring itself back into compliance and to comply as soon as possible under the circumstances with its franchise without unduly endangering the health, safety, and integrity of the franchisee's employees or property, or the health, safety, and integrity of the public, public rights-of-way, public property, or private property. 
D.  Equalization of Civic Contributions. In the event the city grants a franchise to an overlapping franchisee to provide cable service in the franchise area, the overlapping franchisee shall be required to provide all municipal benefits provided by an existing franchisee. For purposes of this section, municipal benefits shall include, but are not limited to, access channels and facilities, institutional networks, maintenance, equipment, personnel, programming, cash supports, and all other costs related to the provision of such benefits. The requirements imposed on any overlapping franchisee shall not be more favorable or less burdensome than those applied to an existing franchisee. If the franchise granted to the overlapping franchisee contains provisions imposing lesser obligations than the obligations imposed on an existing franchisee, the existing franchisee may petition the city for a modification of its franchise agreement. The existing franchisee shall be entitled, with respect to such lesser obligations, to modifications of its franchise so as to insure fair and equal treatment and to provide all parties equal protection under the law. 
E.  Severability. If any term, condition, or provision of this chapter shall, to any extent, be held to be invalid or unenforceable, the remainder hereof shall be valid in all other respects and continue to be effective. Except as specifically addressed in this chapter, if any material provision or requirement of this chapter is declared unenforceable with respect to a particular franchisee by any court, agency, commission, or other authority of competent jurisdiction, or not enforced against a particular franchisee, then that provision shall not be enforced against any other franchisee. 
F.  Notice. Every direction, notice or order to be served upon the franchisee shall be sent to its local office, or as designated in a franchise agreement. Every notice to be served upon the city shall be delivered, with registered letter by registry receipt, to the city clerk. The delivery or mailing of such notice, direction or order shall be equivalent to direct personal notice, direction or order, and shall be deemed to have been given at the time of delivery. 
(Ord. dated 8/20/07 (part)) 
Title 14 - DEVELOPMENT REGULATIONS 
Chapter 14.04 - SUBDIVISIONS GENERALLY 

14.04.010 - Short title. 
A.  This title shall be known as the "Covington development regulations." 
B.  These development regulations shall govern the use of all land and all development and redevelopment thereof within the incorporated areas of Covington, Georgia. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.04.020 - Purpose. 
    These rules and regulations are intended to serve the following purposes, among others: 
A.  To protect and promote the health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents; 
B.  To encourage economically sound and stable land development; 
C.  To assure the provision of required streets, utilities, and other facilities and services to new land developments in conformance with public improvement plans of the city; 
D.  To assure the adequate provisions of safe and convenient traffic access and circulation, both vehicular and pedestrian, in new land developments; 
E.  To assure the provision of needed public open spaces and building sites in new land developments through the dedication or reservation of land for recreational, and other public purposes; 
F.  To assure equitable handling of all subdivision plats by providing uniform procedures and standards for observation both by the subdivider and the planning commission. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.04.030 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions are intended to be complementary to Section 16.08.010 of this title and shall be applicable to the subdivision regulations set forth in this chapter. As applied to such regulations, in the event of a conflict between a definition in this section and a definition in Section 16.08.010, the definition in this section shall prevail. 
    Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in these regulations have their customary dictionary definition. Words in the present tense include the future; words in the singular include the plural number, and words in the plural include the singular; the word "building" includes the word "structure"; the word "shall" is mandatory and not directory. The word "may" is permissive. Certain words in these regulations are defined for the purpose hereof, as follows: 
    "Alley" or "service drive" means a minor, permanent, public serviceway which is used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
    "Basement" means that portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade and has at least six and one-half feet vertical interior clearance from floor or grade to ceiling or underside of structure. 
    "Berm" means an earthen mound designed to screen undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes. 
    "Block" means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public streets, other than alleys or other major physical barriers. 
    Buffer, State Waters. "State waters buffer" means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat, as referenced in O.C.G.A. Section 12-2-8. 
    Buffer, Transitional. "Transitional buffer" means that portion of a lot set aside for open space and visual screening purposes, pursuant to applicable provision of this chapter, so separate different use districts, or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district or a different use district. See Chapter 16.40. 
    "Buildable area" means the area of a lot remaining after the minimum front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the zoning district has been met. 
    "Building setback line" means a line across a lot establishing the minimum yard to be provided between the building and the street property line. 
    Centerline of Street. See "Street, Centerline of." 
    "City" means the city of Covington, Georgia. 
    "Clearing" means the removal of trees and brush from the land but not including removing roots and stumps or the ordinary mowing of grass. 
    "Comprehensive plan" means any part or element of the overall plan for development adopted by the mayor and council as provided by O.C.G.A. Section 50-8-1 and DCA Regulations Chapter 110-3-2, Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning, including the future land use map and all other maps, exhibits, and appendices. 
    "Condominium" means a building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling units, offices, or floor areas are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
    "Conservation easement" means a recorded agreement between a land owner and government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
    "Construction activity" means activities including, but not limited to, activities subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits, such as clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, and demolition. These include construction projects resulting in land disturbance, erecting new structures and buildings, as well as redevelopment, remodeling or modification of an existing building or structure. 
    Construction, Existing. "Existing construction" means any structure for which "the start of construction" commenced before the effective date of these regulations. 
    Construction, New. "New construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced on or after the effective date of the zoning ordinance; other structures that are built on previously undeveloped land and are not additions or alterations. 
    Construction, Start of. "Start of construction" means the point of time commemorating the breaking of ground for the construction of a development or structure. 
    "Crosswalk" means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten (10) feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor propelled vehicles are excluded. 
    "Cul-de-sac" means a local street or road with one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    "Curb cut" means the opening along the curb line or edge of pavement of a public street at which point a driveway begins for vehicular ingress and egress from a parcel. 
    "Detention" means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling the peak discharge. 
    "Detention facility" means a permanent basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates in accordance with the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual. 
    "Developer" means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations and/or storage equipment or materials. 
    "Driveway" means a vehicular access, or curb cut that is in private ownership, except for that portion lying within the public right-of-way, and provides access primarily to one property. 
    "Dumpster" means a portable container used for temporary storage of garbage, trash, or other refuse or receptacle material that has a capacity of one cubic yard or more. 
    "Easement" means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Easement, Access. "Access easement" means an easement created for the purpose of providing vehicular or pedestrian access to or across a property. 
    Easement, Drainage. "Drainage easement" means land required for the installation of stormwater sewers or drainage ditches and/or required for the preservation or maintenance of a natural stream or watercourse or other drainage facility. 
    Easement, Utility. "Utility easement" means a grant by a property owner for the use of real property for the specified purpose of constructing and maintaining utilities; including, but not limited to sanitary sewers, water mains, electric lines, telephone lines, cable lines, storm sewer or storm drainage ways and gas lines. 
    "Existing construction" means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the zoning ordinance. 
    "Final plat" means a finished drawing of a subdivision showing completely and accurately all legal and engineering information and certification necessary for recording. 
    "Finished grade" means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on: (a) the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan, or (b) the regulatory floodplain as defined by the National Flood Insurance Program (FEMA). The more restrictive (wider) of either (a) or (b) shall be used. 
    Frontage, Road. "Road frontage" means the distance on which a parcel of land adjoins a public street or street right-of-way, including proposed streets within a subdivision of land approved by the city of Covington. 
    "Grade" means a reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or between the building and a point six feet from the building, whichever is closer. 
    Grade, Percentage of. "Percentage of grade" means the rise or fall of a slope in feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance. 
    "Grading" means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut and filled condition. 
    "Grasscrete" or "grasspave" means a paving systems primarily used for parking that utilize porous elements which facilitate the drainage of stormwater runoff. 
    Greenway, Stream. "Stream greenway" means an area along the course of any state waters to be maintained in an undisturbed and natural condition for both recreation and conservation that may contain limited minor land disturbances, such as trails and picnic areas. 
    "Ground elevation" means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting, filling or grading. 
    "Groundwater recharge area" means any portion of the earth's surface where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
    "Grubbing" means removing roots and stumps from land that has been cleared, but not grading. 
    "Health department" means the Newton County health department and the commissioner of health of Newton County, Georgia, or his authorized representative. 
    "Impervious" means a material that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by. 
    "Impervious cover or surface" means areas which significantly prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, concrete and asphalt surfaces, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awning, and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. Impervious surface also includes unpaved graded aggregate base (GAB) or crusher run. 
    "Impoundment" means the water or liquid substance that is or will be stored by a dam - commonly referred to as the reservoir. 
    "Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
    "Infiltration" means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
    "Land development" means any land disturbing activity, including but not limited to clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving and any other installation of impervious surface. Land development excludes agricultural uses. 
    "Land development activity or activities" means those actions or activities that comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    "Land development project" means a single or phased discrete land development undertaking. 
    "Land disturbance" means any land or vegetation changes, including, but not limited to, clearing, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, that do not involve construction, paving or any other installation of impervious surface, but not including agriculture. 
    "Land disturbance activity or activities" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land disturbance. 
    Land Disturbance Permit. See "Permit, Land Disturbance." 
    "Landscape strip" means a land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
    "Lot" means a portion, plot, or parcel of land separated from other portions, plots, or parcels by a graphic description as on a subdivision plat of record or survey map and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
    "Lot area" means the total area within the boundaries of a lot. 
    Lot, Conforming. "Conforming lot" means a lot that meets all requirements of the zoning ordinance and is not a nonconforming lot. 
    "Lot coverage" means the percentage of the total area of a lot that is occupied by buildings. 
    Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, Double Frontage. "Double frontage lot" means a lot other than a corner lot abutting two streets. 
    Lot, Flag. "Flag lot" or "panhandle lot" means a prohibited lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where access to the lot from a public road is achieved by a narrow strip of land. 
    Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot with a single street frontage. 
    "Lot of record" means a lot, the plat for which has been lawfully recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County, or a lot, the deed of which has been lawfully recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County. 
    "Master plan" means a comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, recommendations, guides for implementation, and other descriptive matter, or physical development of the city or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions, or additions thereto recommended by the planning commission, indicating the general location for major streets, parks or other public utilities, zoning districts, or other similar information. 
    "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" means vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain (as corrected in 1929). 
    "National pollutant discharge elimination system (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit" means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable to an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    "Natural ground surface" means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    "Natural vegatative buffer" or "buffer area" means a river corridor containing the flora native to that area. The natural floras for specific areas are described in Georgia Geologic Survey Bulletin 114, "The Natural Environment of Georgia." Habitats for endangered and threatened species may require human management of the river corridor in order to maintain those species. 
    "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988" means a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within a floodplain. 
    "On-site sewage management system" means a sewage management system other than a public or community sewage treatment system serving one or more buildings, mobile homes, recreational vehicles, residences, or other facilities designed or used for human occupancy or congregation. 
    "Open space" means areas that are primarily undeveloped and reserved to provide separation, resource protection, scenic enjoyment, recreation, or amenity to abutting developed property. 
    "Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or other person, firm or corporation, in control of the site. 
    "Owners of record" means the owner(s) of property as specified on the deed to the lot of record. 
    Percentage of Grade. See "Grade, Percentage of." 
    "Permit" means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity, land development activity, building construction, or other activity regulated by the city of Covington that requires an official authorization as provided in the zoning ordinance. 
    Permit, Building. "Building permit" means a permit issued by the planning and zoning department to the owner that is required for undertaking any construction, alteration, addition or repair of a structure. 
    Permit, Land Disturbance. "Land disturbance permit" means the permit by the planning and zoning department to the owner that is required for undertaking any land-disturbing or land development activity under the provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
    "Permittee" means any entity that has submitted a notice of intent. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, company, agency, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, organization, society, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    Plan, Concept. "Concept plan" means written and graphic documents submitted to the director for review that document the intent of a developer in a conceptual form, indicating the types, general arrangement and density of uses, extent and pattern of subdivision, and the relationship of the intended uses to surrounding tracts. 
    Plat, Preliminary. "Preliminary plat" means a drawing which shows the proposed layout of a subdivision in sufficient detail, although not completely computed, to indicate unquestionably its workability, but is not in final form for recording. An approved community unit plan may be considered a preliminary plat if it is processed under the terms of these regulations concurrent with its processing under the terms of the zoning ordinance. 
    "Primary permittee" means the owner or the operator or both of a tract of land for a construction project. 
    Private Road. See "Road, Private." 
    Private Street. See "Street, Private." 
    "Public improvement" means any street, park, water line, sanitary drainage system or similar improvement installed to serve abutting or nearby private or public property constructed by either a private entity or a public agency and ultimately owned and maintained by a public entity. 
    "Public street" means right-of-way dedicated to or owned by a public government agency for the purpose of providing principal access to abutting property. 
    "Public utility" means any publicly, privately, or cooperatively owned line, facility or system for producing, collecting, transmitting or distributing communications, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil products, water, steam, waste, stormwater not connected with highway drainage, and other similar services and commodities, including publicly owned fire and police and traffic signals and lighting systems, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. 
    "Quadrangle map" means the most recently published USGS 7.5 minute topographic map prepared at a scale of one is to twenty-four thousand (1:24,000). 
    Retaining Wall. See "Wall, Retaining." 
    Retention Facility, Stormwater. "Stormwater retention facility" means a pond, pool, or basin used for the permanent storage of stormwater runoff. 
    "Right-of-way" means a strip of land dedicated to, designated, reserved, or purchased by the city of Covington for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation. 
    "Right-of-way line" means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
    "Riparian" means belonging or related to the bank of a river, stream, lake, pond or impoundment. 
    "River bank" means the rising ground, bordering a river, which serves to confine the water to the natural channel during the normal course of flow. 
    Road, Private. "Private road" means any privately owned and maintained access way serving two or more parcels of land that is intended to provide access for motorized vehicles, including safety and emergency equipment and that is not dedicated to the city or maintained by the city. 
    Road, Public. "Public road" means any right-of-way set aside for public travel as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 32-1-3(24). 
    "Sanitary sewer" or "sewer" means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, stormwaters and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    "Screening" means a method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation, including a transitional buffer or other means; a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides year-round maximum capacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet. 
    "Secondary permittee" means an individual builder, utility contractor that conducts a construction activity within a common development. 
    "Septic tank" means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
    "Setback" means with respect to a stream, river, lake, or impoundment, the area extending beyond any riparian buffer applicable to the stream, river, lake, or impoundment in which certain structures, including buildings, septic tanks and septic tank drainfields, are prohibited. 
    "Setback" means the shortest distance between an adjacent street curb line, property line or lot line and the nearest wall of the building or structure on a lot as prescribed in the zoning ordinance. 
    Sewage. See "Wastewater." 
    "Sewage treatment system" means a system that provides primary treatment and disposal, including absorption field components, devices and appurtenances intended to be used for disposal of sewage by soil absorption, but does not include a conventional or chamber septic tank system. 
    "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or stormwater. 
    Start of Construction. See "Construction, Start of." 
    "Stream bank" means the sloping land that contains the stream channel and the normal flows of the stream. 
    "Street" means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley or other way. 
    "Street categories" means the following definitions intended to distinguish between different categories of streets: 
1.  "Freeways" are high-capacity streets from which access to abutting property is prohibited, and which are intersected at specific locations by major and collector streets. 
2.  "Major thoroughfares" are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. The term shall include all street designations shown on the major thoroughfare plan for the city. 
3.  "Arterial and collector streets" are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the system of major streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
a.  "Arterial streets" are intended generally, but not exclusively, to provide service through industrial, commercial, and high density multiple-family complexes. 
b.  "Collector streets" are intended generally, but not exclusively, to provide service through residential areas, including low density multiple-family complexes. 
c.  "Minor streets," including loop streets and cul-de-sacs, are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties, and for streets within a NR3 or NM district. 
d.  "Subdivision streets" are generally intended to provide service to the abutting properties and to provide access to collector streets. Street, dead end: A street that must be exited at the same point as is entered but not a cul-de-sac. 
e.  "Downtown streets" are those streets bounded on the North by Central of Georgia Railroad, South by Conyers Street, East by Elm Street and West by Emory Street. 
    Street, Centerline of. "Centerline of street" means a line that is halfway between the right-of-way lines of a street. 
    "Street curb" means the edge of street or a line of concrete or asphalt that forms part of the gutter at the edge of a street. 
    "Street fronting" means any building, sidewalk or landscaping element that is directly facing and adjacent to any public street and not facing the interior rear or side lot line adjacent to a neighboring property. 
    Street, Half. "Half street" means a street or road adjacent to a subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property owner. 
    "Street jog" means the incidence where two streets or two portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. 
    Street, Private. "Private street" means any privately owned and maintained access way serving two or more lots or parcels that is intended to provide access for motorized vehicles, including safety and emergency equipment, that is not dedicated to the city or maintained by the city. 
    Street, Public. See "Road, Public." 
    Street, Stub. "Stub street" means an extension of the right-of-way of a street in a subdivision extending to the property boundary of the tract being developed and intended to provide continuity of the street pattern between subdivisions or between the individual phases of the same subdivision. 
    "Structure" means any fixed object that is constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground, including, but not limited to, towers, fences, posts, walls and walled or roofed buildings, but not including tents, flags, balloons, or vehicles. 
    Structure, Accessory. "Accessory structure" means a structure detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. Where a structure is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a wall, such structure shall be considered part of the main building. 
    Structure, Occupied. "Occupied structure" means a building with one or more rooms intended for use by humans for dwelling, commerce, industry, or public services, and including buildings intended for the installation, storage, or use of equipment, merchandise, or machinery related to such use, subject to regulations and permitting procedures of the zoning ordinance. 
    "Subdivider" means any person, firm, corporation or duly authorized agent or other legal entity who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined in this chapter. 
    "Wall" means any structure forming a physical barrier or enclosure which is so constructed that fifty (50) percent or more of the gross vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. 
    Wall, Foundation. "Foundation wall" means a wall constructed on footings or piers and designed to bear the load of a building or major structure. 
    Wall, Retaining. "Retaining wall" means a structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations to protect structures and/or to prevent erosion, and not used as a foundation. 
    "Wastewater" means the spent water of a community. From the standpoint of source, it may be a combination of the liquid and water carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions, together with any groundwater, surface water and stormwater that may be present. 
    "Wastewater facilities" means the structures, equipment and processes required to collect, carry away and treat domestic and nondomestic wastewater and to dispose of the effluent. 
    "Watershed" means the land area that drains into a particular stream, river, lake, or impoundment. 
    "Well" means an excavation or opening into the ground by which groundwater is sought or obtained. 
    "Wetlands" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and, similar areas. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.04.040 - Administration. 
A.  These rules and regulations shall be administered by the planning commission. 
B.  The planning commission may from time to time issue instructions and operating procedures to be followed in the administration of these regulations to the end that the public may be informed and that approval of plats may be expedited. 
C.  The planning commission shall be the official platting authority. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.04.050 - Violation and penalty. 
    Any person, firm, or corporation violating any of the provisions of these regulations shall be deemed guilty of an offense and upon conviction thereof shall be punished as provided in the General Enabling Act of 1957, as amended. Each day's continuance of a violation shall be considered a separate offense. The owner of any lands or parts thereof, where anything in violation of these regulations shall be placed or shall exist, and any person who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, shall be guilty of a separate offense. 
    In any case in which any land is or is proposed to be used in violation of these regulations or amendments thereto adopted by city council, the legal counsel of the city or any owner of real estate within the district in which such land is situated, may in addition to other remedies provided by law, institute injunction, abatement, or any appropriate action or actions, proceeding, or proceedings to prevent, enjoin or abate unlawful use. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.04.060 - Amendments. 
    These regulations may be amended from time to time by the city council, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendations. The planning commission shall have thirty (30) days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the thirty (30) day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposal. 
    Before enacting an amendment to this article, the planning commission, acting for the city, shall hold a public hearing thereon, at least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 14.08 - PLATTING PROCEDURE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance dated Sept. 21, 2015(2), § 1, repealed Ch. 14.08 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 14.08 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 14.08, §§ 14.08.010-14.08.240, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ordinance dated June 30, 2008(part); Ordinance dated April 20, 2015(1), § 12; Ordinance dated July 6, 2009, §§ 1, 2; and Ordinance dated March 1, 2010, § 1. 

Article 1 - Planning Jurisdiction Enforcement 

14.08.010 - Permitting authority. 
A.  No person shall proceed with any disturbance of the land, including clearing, grubbing, or grading activities on a proposed structure, development or subdivision before obtaining a land disturbance permit from the city of Covington Engineering Department, with the following exception: timber harvesting, provided that there is no subdivision of land and no structure is to be constructed. 
B.  No building or development permit of any kind shall be issued for any lot or lot of record not created by subdivision in accordance with the provisions of the city of Covington Development Regulations. 
C.  Nonconforming lots shall be exempt from subsection B. of this code section, provided that new development of said lots shall be in accordance with the City of Covington Code of Ordinances, except as to deficient lot dimensions on said lots and that said lots shall not be further divided in any manner except in accordance with Title 16 of the city code. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.020 - Platting authority. 
    No plat of a land subdivision shall be filed or recorded in the office of the Clerk of Newton Superior Court unless it receives final plat approval from the planning commission pursuant to the requirements of the city code, except as otherwise authorized in O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). The filing or recording of a plat of a subdivision not exempted by O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d) without the approval of the planning commission is a violation of Section 14.04.050 and is punishable as provided by Chapter 1.12 of the city code. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.030 - Prohibitions. 
    No lot or plat shall be created by subdivision except in accordance with the provisions of this Title 14. No lot shall be created based solely on a metes and bounds legal description. All lots shall be conforming lots, except where otherwise specifically authorized in the city code. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.040 - Opening and improving public streets. 
    City of Covington shall not accept, lay out, open, improve, grade, pave, or light any street or lay any utility lines in any street unless the street corresponds to the location approved in the preliminary plat or site development plan prepared consistent with this chapter and meets other requirements of the city code. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.050 - Access to streets. 
    No building permit shall be issued for and no building or other structure shall be erected on any lot within the city unless such lot has access to a street which shall have been accepted or opened as a public street or otherwise shall have received the legal status of a public street, or which corresponds in its location and lines with a street shown on a plat approved by the planning commission or a plat adopted by the planning commission; provided, however, that private streets and other private accessways may be approved under the provisions of this Chapter 14.08 in community unit plans, group development plans, condominium projects, apartment projects, townhouses, commercial developments, shopping centers, or other developments. All single-family residence lots must abut a public street. No building permit shall be issued in connection with any lot or parcel or building site created by subdivision in violation of this Chapter 14.08. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.060 - Preapplication review. 
    Whenever the subdivision of a tract of land is proposed, the subdivider is urged to consult early and informally with the planning commission. The subdivider may submit sketch plans and data showing existing conditions within the site and in its vicinity and the proposed development layout of the subdivision. The purpose of the preapplication review is to facilitate the subsequent preparation of plans, and no fees are charged for this review. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
Article 2 - Preliminary Plat Procedure 

14.08.070 - Subdivisions not requiring preliminary plat. 
A.  Applicability. For the purpose of this chapter, each of the types of activities described below shall be considered subdivisions, but are exempt from the procedures and required site improvement provisions of this chapter and may be approved by the planning director. 
1.  The combination, recombination, or reconfiguration of two or more buildable lots of record, where the total number of lots is not increased. 
2.  The division of land into four or fewer lots where no new streets or other public improvements, or access easements are planned or required. 
3.  The conveyance of land to a public entity. 
B.  Standards. The following standards apply to subdivisions meeting the standards of subsection A., above: 
1.  The subdivision or lot meets all requirements of the city code, and the applicant demonstrates that approval of the subdivision or lot will not create nonconformity to the requirements of the city code on any other portion of the original property from which the lot was subdivided. 
2.  All new lots front on an existing public street with a minimum frontage of seventy-five (75) feet. 
3.  No extension of utilities or construction of public streets are required or provided. 
4.  The lots shall comply with the requirements of all utility providers as appropriate. If existing utilities are being modified, the utility provider shall certify approval of service prior to approval of the final plat by the planning director. 
5.  All slope and utility easements and additional street right-of-way, as determined by the city engineer shall be provided at no cost to the city. 
C.  Procedures. Subdivisions not requiring a plat shall be platted in accordance with the final plat standards of the city code, and shall be submitted with an application and appropriate nonrefundable fees to the planning director for review and approval. Upon approval, the planning director shall authorize and the planning commission shall approve the recording of the final plat with the Clerk of Newton Superior Court and grant the issuance of building permits pursuant to the city code. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.080 - Application for approval. 
    Following the preapplication review of a proposed subdivision and the payment of application fees in amounts established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution, the subdivider shall submit to the planning commission chairman at least fifteen (15) days prior to the next regular meeting of the planning commission, the following: 
A.  A letter requesting review and approval of a preliminary plat conveying the subdivider's intentions as to proposed layout and type of development, and giving the name and address of a person to whom the notice of the hearing by the planning commission on the preliminary plat shall be sent. 
B.  Five blue or black line prints of the preliminary plat as specified in Article 3 of this chapter, along with other related documents to be utilized as follows: 
1.  Planning commission; 
2.  County health department; 
3.  Mayor and council; 
4.  City engineer; 
5.  Fire marshal; and 
6.  The fifth copy shall be returned to the subdivider or his agent with a notation of the action taken by the planning commission. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.090 - Official date of submittal. 
    The time submission of the preliminary plat shall be considered to be the date of the regular monthly meeting of the planning commission at least fifteen (15) days prior to which the application for plat approval, complete and accompanied by the required fee and all data, has been filed with the planning commission. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.100 - Hearing. 
    A hearing before the planning commission shall be held, notice of which shall be sent to the subdivider by mail, at least five days prior to the hearing. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.110 - Preliminary plat approval. 
A.  An application for preliminary plat approval shall be studied by the planning director and the city engineer for compliance with this chapter, and with other relevant governmental and public utility company regulations. The planning director and the city engineer shall indicate on the plat, or by a written memorandum attached thereto, comments and any suggested changes that are necessary to meet the intent of the provisions of this chapter or to serve the best interests of the city. Not more than thirty (30) days after the submission of an application for preliminary plat approval, the planning director shall: 
1.  Issue a certificate of preliminary plat approval; or 
2.  Issue a certificate of conditional preliminary plat approval, subject to any necessary modifications the nature of which shall be indicated on the preliminary plat or attached to it in writing; or 
3.  Disapprove the preliminary plat or any portion thereof, in which case the planning director shall so notify the subdivider in writing, stating the reasons therefor. If the planning director and the city engineer disapprove of the preliminary plat the application fee shall be retained by the city. 
B.  Action of planning director and the city engineer shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat. One copy shall be returned to the applicant, and the other made a part of the public record. 
C.  Failure of the planning director and the city engineer to take action on the preliminary plat within thirty (30) days from the date of submission of the application shall be deemed approval of the plat, and a certificate of preliminary plat approval shall be issued to the subdivider at his request, provided the subdivider does not agree upon an extension of time, if requested in writing by the planning commission, to further study the preliminary plat. 
D.  Approval of all preliminary plats shall be governed by the following qualifications: 
1.  Approval of a preliminary plat is only tentative pending submission of the final plat. 
2.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall be effective and binding for a period not to exceed one year from the date of such approval, and thereafter shall expire and be null and void and of no legal effect, except to the extent that work on the subdivision has progressed, unless a request for an extension of time has been submitted to and is subsequently approved by the planning director and the city engineer. 
3.  No improvements, including clearing or grading shall be undertaken until final engineering plans based on runoff calculations and necessary profiles for the subdivision (or unit division thereof) have been submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
E.  If the preliminary plat application is disapproved, the applicant shall resubmit the preliminary plat and completed application form correcting all deficiencies, along with appropriate fees. Failure to resubmit within one hundred eighty (180) days from applicant's receipt of notice of such disapproval shall require the applicant to submit a new preliminary plat. 
F.  Effect of preliminary plat approval. 
1.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout of the subdivision to be used as a guide to the preparation of the final plat. 
2.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall entitle the applicant to prepare and submit construction plans for site development and improvement as provided in this Title 14 and to meet all other provisions of the city code. 
3.  Approval of the preliminary plat shall expire if a land disturbance permit for any required improvements has not been issued or a final plat has not been submitted for recording within twelve (12) months of the date of approval of the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.120 - Improvements authorized. 
    Approval of preliminary plat and the final engineering plans is authorization to proceed with installation of any improvements required in Chapter 14.12, subject to the approval of agencies having proper authority. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1; Ord. dated 2/6/17(1), § 1) 
Article 3 - Preliminary Plat Specifications 

14.08.130 - Sheet size. 
    The preliminary plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn at a scale of not less than one hundred (100) feet to one inch. No scale shall be used that destroys the effective enforcement of this article. Sheet size shall not exceed forty-eight (48) inches by thirty-six (36) inches; provided, however, a scale of two hundred (200) feet to one inch may be used to avoid sheets in excess of forty-eight (48) inches by thirty-six (36) inches. In no case shall sheet size be less than eight and one-half inches by eleven (11) inches. The planning commission may approve other scales and sheet sizes as deemed appropriate. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.140 - Subdivision name. 
    The proposed name of the subdivision and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or street in Newton County. If shown to the contrary, the planning commission may refuse to accept such subdivision and street names. The subdivision may use letter designations in place of street names on the preliminary plat. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.150 - Information. 
A.  The preliminary plat shall contain the following: 
1.  Proposed name of subdivision. 
2.  Name and address of the owner of record. 
3.  Name, address, and telephone number of the subdivider. 
4.  Date of survey, north point and graphic scale, source of data, date of plat drawing, and space for revision dates. 
5.  Preliminary certificates and statements as specified in this Chapter 14.08. 
6.  Location, acres, number of lots. 
7.  A sketch locating the subdivision in relation to the surrounding area with regard to well-known landmarks such as major thoroughfares, railroads and others. Sketches may be drawn to scale in free-hand and at a scale sufficient to show clearly the information required, but not less than one inch to two thousand (2,000) feet. U.S. Geological Survey maps may be used as a reference guide for the location sketch. 
8.  Name of former subdivision if any of the preliminary plat has been previously subdivided. 
9.  Exact boundary lines of the tract indicated by a heavy line, giving length and bearings. The boundary lines shall include the entire tract to be subdivided eventually and data as required herein shall apply to the entire tract. 
10.  Contour lines based on sea level data. These shall be drawn at intervals of not more than five feet. Contour lines shall be based on field surveys or photogrammetric methods from aerial photographs. The basis for the topographic contour shown shall be specified. 
11.  Natural features within the proposed subdivision, including drainage channels, bodies of water, wooded areas, and other significant features. On all water courses leaving the tract the direction of flow shall be indicated, and for all water courses entering the tract the direction and acreage of the drainage area above the point of entry shall be noted. Floodplains shall be outlined. 
12.  Cultural features within the proposed subdivision, including right-of-way and pavement widths and names of existing and platted streets, bridges, culverts, utility lines such as gas, electric, water and sewer lines, and structures, all easements, buildings, city and county boundary lines, land lot lines, zoning districts and lines, and other significant information. 
13.  Proposed layout including lot lines with rough dimensions, lot numbers, block letters, street and alley lines with letters, street and alley lines with letter designations for proposed street names, right-of-way widths, sites reserved through covenants, easements, dedication or otherwise for public uses, for nonpublic or community uses exclusive of single-family dwellings, for nonresidential uses, and for multifamily dwellings. 
14.  Proposed unit division or stage development, if any, as proposed by the subdivider. 
15.  Location and results of percolation tests for lots which will not be served by a public or community sanitary sewage system, as required by the Newton County Health Department. 
16.  Location, site plan, and other information as may be required by the Newton County Health Department for all community sewage disposal plants. 
B.  The preliminary plat shall be accompanied by the following information when same is not shown on, or evident from, the preliminary plat: 
1.  A written summary of the proposal giving information as to the overall development plan, types of structures, number of housing units and types of business and industry so that the effects of the development can be determined by the planning commission; 
2.  Existing and proposed covenants and restrictions; 
3.  Source of water supply; 
4.  Provisions for sewage disposal, drainage, and flood control (as specified in Chapter 14.12); and 
5.  Letters or certificates of approval or disapproval from city, county, or state agencies, as well as from the utility companies as applicable. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.160 - Street improvement data. 
    An application for street improvements, for a subdivision (or for a unit division thereof) shall be supported by the following, submitted to the city engineer: 
A.  Plat, drawn to the preliminary plat specifications as prescribed in Section 14.08.120 of this chapter, showing the following information: 
1.  Location and size of all proposed drainage structures, including catch basins, grates, headwalls, and any extensions thereof; 
2.  Acreage of drainage area and constant used in determining size of structures by use of a formula approved by the city engineer; 
3.  Location of land subject to flooding, indicated by flood crest contour as provided by the city, county, or other sources; and 
4.  Location of all proposed sewer lines, and of any easements required therefor, together with sufficient dimensions to locate same on ground. 
B.  Engineering data as listed below: 
1.  Profiles of proposed streets, showing center line elevations and elevations along right-of-way lines on either side of street and indicating any exposed; drawn on standard plan and profile sheet with plan section showing street layout, width, curvature, and drainage required; 
2.  Where sanitary or storm sewers are to be installed, the grate, size of pipe, and location of manholes shall be indicated on the road profile; 
3.  Profiles covering roadways that are extensions of existing roadways including: elevations at fifty (50) foot intervals for a minimum distance of three hundred (300) feet back of beginning point and forward of ending point, or such additional distance as may be required by the city engineer; and 
4.  Elevations coordinated and tied into U.S. Coast and Geological Survey bench marks, where feasible. 
    Above submittals shall be drawn to a scale no less than as follows: 
a.  Horizontal scale of one inch to one hundred (100) feet; 
b.  Vertical scale of one inch to ten (10) feet. 
C.  Where a proposed road abuts the plat boundary, a properly executed slope easement shall be submitted. Slope easements shall also be submitted under such other conditions as may be required by the city engineer. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.170 - Certificate for preliminary approval. 
    Certificates for approval of the preliminary plat by the planning commission shall be inscribed on the plat as follows: 
  
 "Pursuant to the Land Subdivision Regulations of Covington, Georgia, all the requirements of Preliminary Approval having been fulfilled, this Preliminary Plat was given Preliminary Approval by the City of Covington Planning Commission on ___________ 20___. 
 This Preliminary Approval does not constitute approval of a Final Plat. This Certificate of Preliminary Approval shall expire and be null and void on (one year from preliminary approval): 
  
___________" 
Date 
___________ 
Date 
___________ 
Secretary Covington 
Planning Commission 
 "I hereby certify that this proposed Preliminary Plat correctly represents data compiled or verified through a survey completed by me on ___________ of 20___, of property shown and described hereon. 
  
By:___________ 
Registered C.E. 
No._______ 
or 
___________ 
Registered Georgia 
Land Surveyor's 
No._______ 
Date________" 
  
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
Article 4 - Final Plat Procedure 

14.08.180 - Application for approval. 
    After the preliminary plat of a proposed land subdivision has been given tentative approval by the planning director and the city engineer the subdivider may, within one year from tentative approval, submit to the planning director and the city engineer: 
A.  A letter requesting review and approval of a final plat. 
B.  Six copies of the final plat, the original, and other related documents, as specified in this Article 4, the original of which shall be drawn in ink on cloth or durable tracing material to be utilized as follows: 
1.  Mayor and council; 
2.  Zoning enforcement officer; 
3.  City engineer; 
4.  Post office; 
5.  Tax assessor; 
6.  Planning commission (the original and one copy; the original to be filed in the office of the clerk of the superior court.) 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.190 - Official date of submittal. 
    The time of submission of the final plat shall be considered to be the date the submitted plat is deemed complete, is accompanied by all data and documents and has been filed with the planning director. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.200 - Final plat approval. 
A.  Whenever a final plat has been submitted to the planning director and is in conformance with an approved preliminary plat and the provisions of Article 5 of this chapter, the planning director and the city engineer shall consider and take action on the plat. 
B.  Within thirty (30) days after submittal of the application, the planning director and the city engineer shall express approval or disapproval and shall state in writing the reasons for any disapproval. 
C.  Final approval by the planning director and the city engineer shall not be shown on the final plat until all requirements of this chapter have been met: 
1.  All improvements and installations to the subdivision required for its approval under the terms of these rules and regulations have been completed in accordance with the appropriate specifications; 
2.  A maintenance bond, cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit has been provided by the subdivider or developer in an amount not less than ten (10) percent of the cost of the infrastructure improvements required by city approved engineering plans shall have been filed by the subdivider in the office of the city clerk which shall: 
a.  Be payable to, and for the indemnification of the city; 
b.  Be issued by a company licensed to do business in the state of Georgia; 
c.  Provide for the maintenance of installations and improvements required by these rules and regulations in the subdivision for a period of three years following the date of final acceptance of the streets by the city council; and 
d.  Be approved by the city engineer and the city attorney; and 
3.  If the final plat contains any infrastructure improvements which the city engineer has expressly agreed in writing may be completed subsequent to approval of the final plat, a performance bond, cash deposit or irrevocable letter of credit in the amount of the cost of such delayed infrastructure improvements has been provided by the subdivider in the office of the city clerk which shall: 
a.  Be conditioned upon the faithful performance by the subdivider or developer of all work required to complete all improvements and installations for the subdivision, or unit division thereof, as expressly allowed by the city engineer to be completed subsequent to final plat approval for such subdivision in compliance with the provisions of this chapter within a specified time but not less than five years from the date of such security; 
b.  Be payable to, and for the indemnification of the city; 
c.  Be with surety by a company licensed to do business in the state of Georgia; 
d.  Be approved by the city engineer and the city attorney. 
D.  Once approved by the planning director and the city engineer, the final plat and other supplementary material required shall be transmitted to the city council for final action. Approval by the city council shall appear on the original tracing. 
E.  Upon final approval by the city council, the approved final plat with all endorsements shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County by the chairman of the planning commission. 
F.  Upon recording of the approved final plat, the original tracing or other permanent material, a reproducible print of the final plat at the original scale, with all certificates endorsed, shall be provided by the subdivider and shall be returned to the city for its files. 
G.  Upon completion of the installation of the improvements required by these rules and regulations, the subdivider shall present to the city engineer one complete set of the construction plans and drawings showing the subdivision and its improvements. This set of plans and drawings shall include: 
1.  "As built" plans of all streets and alleys showing the planned and actual location of all utility lines. 
2.  "As built" center line profiles of all streets. 
3.  Profiles and invert elevations of all storm and sanitary sewer lines as such improvements shall have actually been installed by the subdivider. 
4.  A letter submitted by a registered professional engineer and/or registered surveyor certifying that all sewers, storm drains, curbing and paving, have been placed according to grade stakes set by him or his representatives to conform with construction plans submitted to and approved by the city engineer. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1; Ord. dated 2/6/17(1), § 1) 
14.08.210 - Approval constitutes street acceptance. 
    Approval of the final plat by the city council shall be deemed an acceptance of the dedication of the streets and other public land as shown upon said plat on behalf of the public. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.220 - Procedures for revising final plats. 
    When it becomes necessary or desirable to revise a recorded final plat, the developer shall prepare a letter to the planning director documenting the reason for and extent of the revision including reproducible drawing(s) that contain the subject revision along with payment of the applicable final plat review fee. The revised plat shall contain a new signature block, be dated with the current date, be drawn at an appropriate scale and contain notation(s) indicating the nature and location of the revision(s). The subdivision name, date and plat book and page number of the original plat recording shall be noted on the new plat; and the new plat drawings shall be designated as "revised final plat." 
    All revisions shall be bound by the protective covenants, if any, recorded on the original final plat, and a statement to that effect shall be noted on the revised final plat. 
    If necessary, corresponding revisions to construction drawings, as-built drawings, engineering data and reports also shall be prepared, labeled appropriately, submitted, reviewed and certified by the planning director, and filed in the engineering department along with payment of the appropriate review fee. 
    The planning director shall forward the revised final plat and any related documentation to the appropriate city departments or agencies that would be involved in reviewing the accuracy of the revision. Upon receipt of approval from such other departments or agencies, the planning director shall certify the revised final plat and submit it to the city council for final action. 
    The developer shall cause the approved revised final plat to be recorded by the clerk of superior court of Newton County, and the required number of recorded copies of the recorded plat shall be remitted back to the planning department. 
    Any revised plat that does not receive approval shall be returned to the developer with written notification stating the reasons for denial. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
Article 5 - Final Plat Specifications 

14.08.230 - Draftsmanship, scale, sheet size. 
    The final plat shall be clearly and legibly drawn in black ink on suitable permanent reproducible material. The scale of the final plat shall be one hundred (100) feet to one inch. Sheet size shall not exceed thirty-four (34) inches by thirty-four (34) inches. If complete plat cannot be shown on one sheet of this size, said plat shall be shown on several sheets with an index map indicated on each sheet. In no case shall sheet size be less than eight and one-half inches by eleven (11) inches, provided, however, that space is thereby available for statements, approvals, and certificates as required in Section 14.08.250. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.240 - Conformance to design characteristics. 
    The final plat shall conform to the design and characteristics and standards of the preliminary plat and it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which the subdivider proposes to record and develop at any one time, provided that such portion conforms to the staging established in preliminary plat procedure and to the requirements of these regulations. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1) 
14.08.250 - Information. 
    The final plat shall contain the following information: 
A.  Name of subdivision and street names. 
B.  Name and address of owner of record. 
C.  Name and address of subdivider. 
D.  Date of plat drawing, graphic scale, north point, notation as to the reference of bearings to magnetic, true north, or grid north, and an indication of whether bearings shown are calculated from, angles turned or taken from compass readings. 
E.  Location of tract, acres, number of lots. 
F.  Name of former subdivision if any or all of the final plat had been previously subdivided. 
G.  Location sketch as provided for in Section 14.08.140(A)(7). 
H.  Courses and distances to the nearest existing street intersections or bench marks or other recognized permanent monuments. Not less than three shall be accurately described on the plat. 
I.  Exact boundary lines of the tract, to be indicated by the heavy line, giving distances to the nearest one-tenth foot and angles to the nearest minute, which shall be balanced and closed with an error of closure not to exceed one to five thousand (5,000). The error of closure shall be stated. Tract boundaries shall be determined by accurate survey in the field. Surveys shall be coordinated and tied into U.S. Geological Survey maps where same are available. 
J.  Municipal, county, or land lot lines accurately tied to the lines of the subdivision by distance and angles when such lines traverse the subdivision. 
K.  Exact locations, width, and names of all streets and alleys within and immediately adjoining the plat and the exact location and widths of all crosswalks. 
L.  Street centerlines showing angles of deflection, angles of intersection, radii, length of tangents and arcs, and degree of curvature with basis of curve data. 
M.  Lot lines with dimensions to the nearest one-tenth foot, necessary internal angles, arcs and chords, and tangents or radii of rounded corners. 
N.  Building setback lines with dimensions. 
O.  When lots are located on a curve or when side lot lines are at angles other than ninety (90) degrees, the lot width at the building line shall be shown. 
P.  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
Q.  Location, dimensions, and purpose of all drainage structures and of any easements, including slope easements, if required, and public service utility right-of-way lines, and any areas to be reserved, donated, or dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purposes and limitations; and of any areas to be reserved by deed covenant for common uses of all property owners. 
R.  A statement of the private covenants, if they are brief enough to be put directly on the plat; otherwise, a statement as follows: 
"This plat is subject to the covenants set forth in the separate document(s) attached hereto dated ___________, which hereby become(s) a part of the plat," recorded on ___________ (date) and signed by the owner. 
S.  Accurate location, material, and description of monuments and markers. Monuments to be placed after final street improvement shall be designated as future. 
T.  Certificates and statements specified in Section 14.08.260 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1; Ord. dated 2/15/16(1), § 1) 
14.08.260 - Final plat certifications. 
    Each final plat submitted to the planning commission for approval shall carry the following certificates printed or stamped thereon substantially as follows: 
A. 
 It is certified that this plat is true and correct and was prepared from actual survey of the property made by me or under my supervision; that all monuments shown hereon actually exist or are marked as "Future;" that their location, size, type, and material are correctly shown; and that all engineering requirements of Title 14 of this Code have been fully met. 
By___________ 
Registered C.E. No._______ 
___________ 
Registered Georgia Land 
Surveyor's No._______ 
Date___________ 
B. 
OWNER'S ACKNOWLEDGMENT: 
(STATE OF GEORGIA) 
(COUNTY OF NEWTON) 
 The owner of the land shown on this plat and whose name is subscribed thereto, in person or through duly authorized agents, hereby acknowledges that this plat was made from an actual survey and dedicates to the use of the public forever, all streets, sidewalks, parks, drains, easements and public grounds thereon shown, which comprise a total of ___ acres, for the purposes therein expressed. 
Subdivider___________ 
Owner___________ 
C.  Place for statement of slope easement. 
D.  Place for statement of drainage easement. 
E.  Place for statement of covenant. 
F.  Place for approval of health department, if required. 
G. 
 This plat has been approved for recording by the City of Covington, Georgia and has first been technically examined by the planning commission and city engineer and approved in accordance with the procedures, rules and regulations set forth in this Chapter 14.08. 
Date_______ 20___ 
___________ 
City Clerk 
Date_______20___ 
___________ 
Secretary, Planning Commission 
Date_______20___ 
___________ 
City Engineer 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(2), § 1; Ord. dated 2/15/16(1), § 2) 
Chapter 14.12 - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 

14.12.010 - Installation required. 
    Every subdivider at his own expense shall be required to install or to have installed by the appropriate public utility the following improvements. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.12.020 - Street grading. 
A.  All street rights-of-way shall be cleared and graded to the entire width plus one foot on each side and graded to within two inches of finish grade elevation to provide sufficient area for underground utilities. 
B.  When property adjacent to the street is not owned by the subdivider, he shall obtain the necessary easements for sloping banks before submitting preliminary plat, as required in Chapter 14.16. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.12.030 - Street paving. 
A.  Major street paving widths shall be in conformance with standards set forth in Chapter 14.16. 
B.  Street pavements shall be installed according to the specifications contained in the city of Covington Utilities Specification Handbook, as more particularly identified and adopted under Section 15.04.010, to which reference is made for the purpose of incorporating same herein. At any place in this chapter where a reference is made to the utilities handbook, it shall mean the aforesaid city of Covington Utilities Specification Handbook as then in effect in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.04.010. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.12.040 - Curbs and gutters. 
A.  Curbs and gutters shall be installed on all streets, except where noted herein. Installation shall be according to the specifications contained in the utilities handbook, copies of which are on file at the city's utility department and the city's building and zoning office. 
B.  Curbs and gutters shall be installed on one or both sides of sidewalks, as applicable, where sidewalks are required. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.12.050 - Sidewalks. 
A.  The subdivider shall furnish all sidewalks to provide for pedestrian movement. 
B.  Sidewalks shall have a minimum width as stated for the Sidewalk Clear Zone found in Section 16.28.050 and shall be provided under the following conditions: 
1.  Sidewalks shall be required in subdivisions on both sides of any subdivision street to provide for pedestrian movement. 
2.  The planning commission may require wider sidewalks within a distance of up to one mile on streets leading to or going through commercial areas, school sites, places of public assembly, and other congested areas. 
3.  All sidewalks shall have a minimum thickness of four inches, and shall be constructed of three thousand (3,000) P.S.I. Class A concrete. Sidewalks shall hold the same elevation as the adjacent curb when possible. Construction of sidewalks must be approved by the city engineering department. 
C.  Upon the determination by the city engineer that required sidewalks might be damaged by future construction, the subdivider shall place in escrow with the city clerk, sufficient funds to cover the cost of constructing sidewalks at some future date. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(2), § 1; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 2/15/16(1), § 2) 
14.12.060 - Water supply. 
A.  When in the written opinion of the city engineer, a public water supply is available within one thousand (1,000) feet of the subdivision at its nearest point, the subdivider shall install or have installed water mains as specified by the city engineer. The installation of said mains and connections to each lot shall be installed prior to the paving of the street. 
B.  When in the written opinion of the city engineer an adequate public water supply is not available within a reasonable distance, each lot in a subdivision shall be furnished with public, individual or community water supply system approved by the health department, the city engineer and the local fire marshal. 
C.  The water supply shall be installed according to the specifications contained in the Utilities Handbook, copies of which are on file at the city utility department and at the city building and zoning office. All water connections shall be in complete compliance with Section 16.20.350. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.12.070 - Sanitary sewage disposal. 
A.  When in the written opinion of the health department and city engineer, sewers are accessible within reasonable access of the subdivision, the subdivider shall provide sanitary sewer services to each lot within the bounds of the subdivision. The city engineer shall determine the size of sewer lines. All street sewers serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider. The subdivider shall be responsible for the cost of all taps, lift pump stations, manholes and extensions of city facilities. 
B.  When in the written opinion of the health department and the city engineer, a public sanitary sewer is not accessible, an alternate method of sewage disposal for each lot or a community sewage disposal system may be used when in compliance with the standards of the health department and city engineering department. 
C.  When the operation of a temporary sanitary sewer system requires land to be set aside for a disposal plant, the property owner shall give the city title to the property for as long as the plant is in operation. Said title may carry a reversionary clause returning the property to the owner when the site is no longer necessary for the operation of the plant. 
D.  In a drainage basin which at time of plat application is scheduled for a public sewage system, all subdivisions shall be provided with a temporary community sewage disposal system, as approved by the health department. Such system shall include permanent sewerage outfall lines plus a temporary treatment plant to be installed by the subdivider. 
E.  Whenever the installation of a sanitary sewer is required as provided by these rules and regulations, no new street shall be paved without such sewer being first installed. 
F.  All sanitary sewerage systems shall be installed according to the specifications contained in the Utilities Handbook, copies of which are on file at the city utility department and the city building and zoning office. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.12.080 - Storm drainage. 
A.  Every subdivision shall be served by storm drainage facilities, including drains, sewers, catch basins, culverts, and other facilities. 
B.  All drainage facilities shall be so designed as to serve the entire drainage area in which these facilities are located. All street drains serving lots in the subdivision shall be installed by the subdivider. 
C.  All surface water drainage shall be transported to existing storm sewers or to drainage facilities approved by the city engineer. 
D.  Whenever drainage ditches are used, such ditches shall retain natural design characteristics and be so designed that they do not present a hazard to life and safety. 
E.  All drainage features shall be in accordance with standards and specifications of the city engineering department and no extension shall be made from the street drainage through the abutting property without approval of the city engineer. 
F.  When the construction of a proposed public road makes it necessary to cross a storm drain, the developer shall provide and install the required size and length of pipe acceptable to the city engineer. 
1.  In cases where the developer or owner chooses not to develop the land through which the drain runs, then the trench may be left open, however, in such cases the plat must be so marked and an easement shown thereon, indicating that no building or driveway shall be built over or within forty (40) feet of the open drain. 
2.  Where the developer chooses to leave the drain open and same is crossed by a driveway, the size of pipe shall be determined by the city engineer, and no building permit will be approved unless the installation meets the requirements of the city engineer. 
3.  Notwithstanding the above controls, the building inspector may refuse to issue a building permit on any lot or lots where the land is subject to floods or where, in the opinion of the building inspector, the topographic features of the property are such that a building could not be properly maintained on the lot. 
G.  Improvements, such as widening, deepening, relocating, clearing, protecting, or otherwise improving existing lakes and shore lines, stream beds and other watercourses, for the control of mosquitoes and public health nuisance, shall be provided by the developer in accordance with standards and requirements of the health department. 
H.  Any water impoundment structure shall be constructed so as to minimize mosquito breeding and other nuisance hazards. The outside toe of any dam shall be at least fifty (50) feet away from the toe of the street right-of-way slope. Any dam to be constructed within the city shall require the approval of the city engineer and the health department, and shall be constructed in accordance with standards and specifications as determined by them. 
I.  Use of land determined by the city engineer to be subject to flooding shall be governed in all respects by the requirements of Article 3, Section 15.48.270 through and including Section 15.48.340, provisions for flood hazard reduction of Chapter 15.48, flood damage prevention, of this code." 
J.  All storm drainage facilities shall be installed according to the specifications contained in the Utilities Handbook, copies of which are on file at the city utility department and the city building and zoning office. 
(Ord. dated 9/19/11, § 1; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.12.090 - Monuments and iron pipes. 
    Permanent monuments shall be accurately set and established at the following points: 
A.  All subdivisions of residential property resulting in a total of three or more parcels and all subdivisions or site developments consisting of nonresidential property, without regard to the number of resulting parcels, shall have a boundary monument installed at each corner of its common boundary line with any public street or road right-of-way. 
B.  Each subdivision monument shall be embedded in concrete or similar permanent material, complete with brass cap with a unique identification stamped or engraved into the cap face. 
C.  Where subdivision plat boundary lines intersect with land lot lines monuments shall consist of a two-inch iron pipe, sixteen (16) inches in length. Monuments shall be set so that the top of the pipe shall be six inches above the ground level unless otherwise approved by the city engineer. 
D.  The accurate location, material, and size of all existing monuments shall be shown on the final plat, as well as the future location of monuments to be placed after street improvements have been completed. 
E.  Iron pipes at least three-fourths inch in diameter by sixteen (16) inches long shall be placed at all corners of each lot and driven so as to be set two inches above the finished grade. 
F.  Map registration and accuracy shall be in Georgia State Plane (West) North American Datum 1983 coordinates for boundary monuments, will be annotated on the final plat and also provided under separate cover to the GIS Manager. The standard accuracy for same shall be in accordance with application American Land Title Act (ALTA) requirements for suburban surveys in all three planes (X, Y, and Z). 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 9/21/15(3), § 1) 
14.12.100 - Fire hydrants. 
    Fire hydrants shall be approved by the local fire marshal and located and set in accordance with specifications for fire hydrants contained in the Utilities Handbook, copies of which are on file in the city utility department and the city building and zoning office. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.12.110 - Street trees. 
    Street trees and other shrubbery that may be retained or planted shall be placed or retained so as not to obstruct sight distances at street intersections. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 14.16 - DESIGN STANDARDS 

14.16.010 - Suitability of the land. 
    Land subject to improper drainage and/or erosion, as determined by the city engineer, and any land deemed by the planning commission or county health department to be unsuitable for development shall not be platted for any uses as may continue such conditions or increase danger of health, safety, life or property unless steps are taken to eliminate the above-mentioned hazards. 
    Land within a proposed subdivision detrimental to the development of the subdivision shall be set aside for uses as shall not be endangered by the conditions set forth in this section. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.16.020 - Access. 
A.  Every subdivision and every lot within a subdivision shall be served by a publicly-dedicated street. 
B.  When land is subdivided into larger parcels than ordinary building lots, such parcels shall be arranged and designed so as to allow for the opening of future streets and to provide access to those areas not presently served by streets. 
C.  No subdivision shall be designed so as to completely eliminate street access to adjoining parcels of land. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.16.030 - Conformance to the master plan. 
A.  All proposed subdivisions shall conform to the master plan and development policies in effect at the time of submission to the planning commission. 
B.  All highways, streets and other features of the master plan shall be platted by the subdivider in the location and to the dimension indicated on the master plan. In subdivisions related to or affecting any state or federally numbered highway, the approval of the Georgia State Highway Department may be required by the planning commission. 
C.  Where features of the master plan (other than minor streets and collector streets) such as school sites, parks, arterial streets, major thoroughfares, and other public spaces are located in whole or in part in a proposed subdivision, or when these features have not been anticipated by the master plan and planning policy, but are considered essential by the planning commission, such features shall be dedicated or in lieu of dedication shall be reserved by the subdivider. Whenever such reserved land, or any portion thereof, is not acquired, optioned, or condemned by the appropriate public agency within a one year period from the date of recording the subdivision, the subdivider may claim the original reservation, or portion thereof, and cause it to be subdivided in a manner suitable to the subdivider subject to the provisions of these rules and regulations. 
D.  The planning commission may waive the above-mentioned platting and reservation requirements of subsections B and C of this section, whenever stating that such a planned feature is not being acquired. 
E.  The planning commission shall disapprove plats when such planned features, as specified by the master plan, are not incorporated into the plat. 
F.  Whenever the plat proposes the dedication of land to public use and the planning commission or the appropriate agency finds that such land is not required or suitable for public use, the planning commission may either refuse to approve said plat or it may require the rearrangement of lots to include such land. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.16.040 - Zoning and other ordinances. 
    Whenever there is a discrepancy between minimum standards or dimensions noted herein and those contained in zoning ordinance, building code, or other official regulations or resolutions, the most restrictive shall apply. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.16.050 - Modifications. 
A.  Modifications of the provisions set forth in these rules and regulations may be authorized by the planning commission in specific cases when, in its opinion, undue hardships may result from strict compliance; provided any such determination shall be based fundamentally on the fact that unusual topographical and other exceptional conditions require such modifications, and that the granting of the modifications will not adversely affect the general public or nullify the intent of these regulations; provided further that any such modifications granted by the planning commission shall be made in writing to the subdivider and also made a part of the planning commission's records and the plat. 
B.  Application for any modifications must be filed in writing with necessary supporting documents with the planning commission by the subdivider and shall explain in detail reasons and facts supporting the application. 
C.  Continuity of Dimensional Standards. Where construction of a previously approved, multi-phased development began prior to the adoption of this chapter and later ceased, the engineering department director may authorize subsequent phases of such development to be constructed to the same dimensional standards as those previous phase(s) to ensure continuity. 
    A request of such continuation of dimensional standards shall be made in writing to the engineering department director by the owner(s) of the subsequent phase(s). The director shall provide a written response to such a request within forty-five (45) days stating specific reasons for the decision to grant or deny the request. 
    The request for continuity of previous dimensional standards shall show the following: 
1.  The difference between previous and current standards is detrimental to the build out of the remaining subdivision; 
2.  The previous standards are not a hazard to life safety; 
3.  The continuation of previous standards will not create dangerous or unsanitary conditions; and 
4.  The continuation of previous standards will not increase the density previously approved for the development. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 5/2/16(3), § 1) 
14.16.060 - Design. 
    The design standards set forth in this chapter shall be observed in all plats which are required to be approved by the planning commission, except that standards for improvements shall be applicable only to those plats for which improvements or improvement plans are required as a condition of plat approval. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.16.070 - Streets. 
A.  The arrangements, character, extent, width, grade, and location of all streets shall conform to the major thoroughfare plan for the city and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
B.  Where such is not shown in the major thoroughfare plan for the city, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
1.  Provide for the continuation of appropriate projection of existing streets in surrounding areas at the same or greater width, but in no case less than the required minimum width. 
2.  Conform to a plan for a neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
C.  Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
D.  Where a subdivision contains a dead-end street other than a cul-de-sac, the planning commission may require the subdivider to provide a temporary vehicular turn-around within the right-of-way, when the planning commission considers such to be necessary for effective traffic circulation. 
E.  Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, double frontage lots with screen planting contained in a nonaccess reservation along the rear property lines, deep lots with rear service drives, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
F.  Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
G.  Street right-of-way widths shall be dedicated as follows: 
1.  Major thoroughfares: one hundred (100) feet. 
2.  Arterial streets (industrial, commercial, and high-density multiple family): eighty (80) feet. 
3.  Collector streets (single-family and low density, multiple-family, depending on densities): sixty (60) feet. 
4.  Minor streets: fifty (50) feet. 
5.  Cul-de-sacs and loop streets: fifty (50) feet. 
6.  Subdivision streets: fifty-five (55) feet. 
7.  Cul-de-sacs turn-around (radius): residential fifty-three (53) feet; residential with island fifty-eight (58) feet; commercial and industrial: seventy-five (75) feet. 
8.  Right-of-way requirements on new streets in excess of sixty (60) feet shall be reserved for acquisition by the appropriate public body, subject to the provisions of Section 14.16.030(C). 
H.  Street paving widths shall be no less than as follows, measured from face of curb to face of curb: 
1.  Major thoroughfares (one hundred (100) feet r-o-w): eighty-one (81) feet (a median may be required). 
2.  Arterial streets (eighty (80) feet r-o-w): forty-nine (49) feet (a median may be required). 
3.  Collector streets (sixty (60) feet r-o-w): thirty-three (33) feet. 
4.  Minor streets (fifty (50) feet r-o-w): twenty-three (23) feet. 
5.  Cul-de-sac and loop streets (fifty (50) feet r-o-w): twenty-three (23) feet. 
6.  Subdivision streets (fifty-five (55) feet r-o-w): twenty-eight (28) feet. 
7.  Cul-de-sac turn-around: 
a.  Residential, outside paving radius: 38.5 feet. 
b.  Commercial and industrial, outside pavement radius: sixty (60) feet. 
8.  Alleys, service drives or private drives: twenty (20) feet. 
I.  Where a subdivision abuts an existing street, the subdivider shall dedicate additional right-of-way on said existing streets to meet the above minimum street width requirements from each side of the centerline. 
J.  Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as possible, and no intersection shall be at an angle less than sixty (60) degrees. Detailed designs of intersections may be required. 
K.  Horizontal Curvature. The minimum radii of centerline curvature shall be as follows: 
1.  Major thoroughfares and arterial streets: eight hundred (800) feet. 
2.  Collector streets: two hundred (200) feet. 
3.  Minor streets and alleys: one hundred (100) feet. 
L.  Tangents. Between reverse curves, there shall be a tangent having a length of not less than the following: 
1.  Major thoroughfares and arterial streets: two hundred (200) feet. 
2.  Collector and minor streets: one hundred (100) feet. 
M.  Vertical Alignment. Vertical alignment shall be that the following requirements are met: 
1.  Major thoroughfares and arterial streets shall have a sight distance of at least five hundred (500) feet above ground level. 
2.  Collector streets shall have a sight distance of at least two hundred (200) feet at six feet aboveground level. 
N.  Curb line radius at street intersections of less than ninety (90) degrees, the planning commission may require a greater radius. 
O.  Right-of-way radius at street intersections shall parallel the curb line radius. 
P.  Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than one hundred twenty-five (125) feet shall not be permitted. 
Q.  Cul-de-sac streets shall be designed so that the maximum desirable length shall be one thousand (1,000) feet, including circular turn-around, unless excepted by the planning commission. 
R.  Alleys or service drives may be required on any lots to be used for multiple-family, commercial or industrial developments, but shall not be provided in residential blocks except where the subdivider produces evidence satisfactory to the planning commission of the need for alleys or service drives. 
S.  Half-streets shall be prohibited. 
T.  Reserve strips controlling access to streets, alleys, or public grounds shall not be permitted. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.16.080 - Blocks. 
A.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the types of use contemplated. 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions unless a planned unit development is contemplated. 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. 
4.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
B.  In general, residential blocks shall not be greater than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet in length, or less than six hundred (600) feet in length. In blocks over one thousand (1,000) feet long, the planning commission may, when existing or proposed public gathering places so justify, require public crosswalks across the block. 
C.  Residential blocks shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots, except where fronting on major streets or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning commission may require and/or approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.16.090 - Lots. 
A.  Insofar as practical, side lot lines shall be perpendicular or radial to street lines. Each lot shall abut upon a public street. 
B.  The size, shape, and orientation of every lot shall be subject to approval of the planning commission for the type of development and use contemplated. No lot shall be more than six times as deep as it is wide at the building setback line, unless excepted by the planning commission. 
C.  Every residential lot shall conform to the minimum dimension and area requirements of the zoning ordinance, provided that every lot not served by a public sewer or community sanitary sewage system and/or public water shall meet the dimension and area requirements of the health department. 
D.  Additional building setback lines shall conform to front yard and building setback requirements of the zoning ordinance, unless excepted by the planning commission. 
E.  Size, shape, and arrangement of commercial and industrial lots, where platted, shall be subject to the planning commission, provided that approval is not granted under the provisions of Chapter 14.08 of these rules and regulations. 
F.  Double frontage, unless required by the planning commission, shall be prohibited except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography, orientation, and property size. A planting screen reservation of at least ten (10) feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, may be required along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
G.  Corner lots shall, as required in the zoning ordinance, have extra width to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
H.  Lot remnants (lot below minimum area or width left over after subdividing tracts of land) shall be prohibited. Such remnant areas shall be added to adjacent lots, rather than remain as unusable parcels. 
I.  The subdividing of the land shall be such as to provide each lot with direct abutting access to an existing public street or to a street contained within the proposed subdivision. 
J.  The subdividing of land adjacent to or surrounding an existing or proposed lake, shall be such that lots abut the centerline of the water course which would pass through the lake should it be cleared. Such requirements may be waived upon submittal to the planning commission of an acceptable method for the maintenance of the lake and any recreational operations to be provided thereon. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 14.20 - PROTECTION OF GROUNDWATER RECHARGE AREAS 

14.20.010 - Findings of fact. 
    The mayor and council of the city find that in order to provide for the health, safety and welfare of the public and a healthy economic climate within the city it is essential that the quality of public drinking water be insured. It is therefore necessary to protect the subsurface water resources that the city and surrounding communities rely upon as sources of public water. To that end it is also necessary to manage land use within groundwater recharge areas so that pollution threats are minimized. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.20.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases have the meanings set forth in this section: 
    "Acre-foot" means the volume of water that would cover one acre of land to a depth of one foot. 
    "Aquifer" means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
    "DRASTIC" means the standardized system for evaluating groundwater pollution potential using the hydrogeologic settings described in U.S. Environmental Protection Agency document EPA-600-2-87-035. 
    "Pollution susceptibility" means the relative vulnerability of an aquifer to being polluted from spills, discharges, leaks, impoundments, applications of chemicals, injections and other human activities in the recharge area. 
    "Pollution susceptibility map" means maps of relative vulnerability to pollution prepared by the Department of Natural Resources, using the DRASTIC methodology. (Georgia Department of Natural Resources Hydrologic Atlas 20: Groundwater Pollution Susceptibility Map of Georgia) 
    "Recharge area" means any portion of the earth's surface, where water infiltrates into the ground to replenish an aquifer. 
    "Significant recharge areas" means those areas mapped by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in Hydrologic Atlas 20 (1989 edition). 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.20.030 - Groundwater recharge area protections district. 
    The boundaries of groundwater recharge area district shall be coterminous with the boundaries of all lands within the city which are designated as significant recharge areas by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources in "Hydrologic Atlas 20, 1992 edition", a copy of which is maintained in the city building and zoning office and which is by reference thereto incorporated herein and made a part hereof. Each recharge area shall have a pollution susceptibility of high, medium or low as shown on the Georgia Pollution Susceptibility Map contained in the aforesaid Hydrologic Atlas 20. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.20.040 - Protection criteria. 
    The following criteria shall be applicable to all activity or improvements within the groundwater recharge area district. 
A.  No construction may proceed on a building or mobile home to be served by a septic tank unless the Newton County environmental department first approves the proposed septic tank installation as meeting the requirements of the manual of the Georgia Department of Human Resource for On-Site Sewage Management (hereinafter DHR Manual), a copy of which is maintained in the city building and zoning office and which is by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof, and subsections B and C of this section. 
B.  New homes served by a septic tank/drain field system shall be on lots having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-1 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-1). The minimums set forth in Table MT-1 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in this chapter) of the DHR Manual. 
1.  One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  One hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
3.  One hundred ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-1 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
C.  New mobile home parks served by septic tank/drain field systems shall have lots or spaces having minimum size limitations as follows, based on application of Table MT-2 of the DHR Manual (hereinafter DHR Table MT-2). The minimums set forth in Table MT-2 may be increased further based on consideration of other factors (set forth in this chapter) of the DHR Manual. 
1.  One hundred fifty (150) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; 
2.  One hundred twenty-five (125) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a medium pollution susceptibility area; and 
3.  One hundred ten (110) percent of the subdivision minimum lot or space size calculated based on application of DHR Table MT-2 if they are within a low pollution susceptibility area. 
D.  New aboveground chemical or petroleum storage tanks, having a minimum volume of six hundred sixty (660) gallons, shall have secondary containment for one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of such tanks or one hundred ten (110) percent of the volume of the largest tank in a cluster of tanks. Such tanks used for agricultural purposes are exempt, provided they comply with a federal requirements. 
E.  New facilities that handle hazardous materials of the types listed in Section 312 of the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act of 1976 (excluding underground storage tanks) and in amounts of ten thousand (10,000) pounds or more on any one day, shall perform their operations on impervious surfaces and in conformance with any applicable federal spill prevention requirements and local fire code requirements. 
F.  Permanent stormwater infiltration basins shall not be constructed in areas having high pollution susceptibility. 
G.  New agricultural waste impoundment sites shall be lined if they are within a high pollution susceptibility area; a medium pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifteen (15) acre-feet; or a low pollution susceptibility area and exceed fifty (50) acre-feet. As a minimum, the liner shall be constructed of compacted clay having a thickness of one foot and vertical hydraulic conductivity of less than 5 × 10 -7 cm/sec or other criteria established by the Natural Resources Conservation Service. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.20.050 - Exemptions. 
    The city may, with the approval of the planning commission, exempt any lot of record on the date of enactment of this section from the minimum lot size requirements of Section 14.20.040(B) and (C) of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.20.060 - Administration and enforcement. 
    This section shall be administered and enforced in the same manner as provided in Section 15.04.020 of this code for enforcement of state minimum standards codes. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 14.24 - STORMWATER MANAGEMENT 
Article 1 - Connection and Discharge Into Storm Sewer System 

14.24.010 - Findings of fact. 
    The mayor and council of the city find that discharges into the city's separate storm sewer that are not composed entirely of stormwater runoff contribute to increased nonpoint source pollution and degradation of receiving waters. Nonstormwater discharges occur due to spills, dumping and improper connections to the city's separate storm sewer system from residential, industrial, commercial and institutional establishments. Impacts of such discharges adversely effect public health and safety, drinking water supplies, recreation, fish and other aquatic life, property values and other uses of land and water, and can be minimized through the regulation of spills, dumping and discharges into the city's storm sewer system and proper management of post-development stormwater runoff. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter, the following words and phrases shall have the meanings set forth in this section: 
    "Accidental discharge" means a discharge prohibited by this chapter which occurs by chance and without planning or thought prior to occurrence. 
    "Applicant" means a person submitting a post-development stormwater management application and plan for approval. 
    "Authorized enforcement agency" means the public works department of the city. 
    "Channel" means a natural or artificial watercourse with a definite bed and banks that conducts continuously or periodically flowing water. 
    "City's separate storm sewer system" means any facility designed or used for collecting and/or conveying stormwater, including but not limited to any roads with drainage systems, highways, city streets, curbs, gutters, inlets, catch basins, piped storm drains, pumping facilities, structural stormwater controls, ditches, swales, natural, man-made or altered drainage channels, reservoirs, and other drainage structures, and which is: 
1.  Owned or maintained by the city; 
2.  Not a combined sewer; and 
3.  Not part of a publicly-owned treatment works. 
    "Clean Water Act" means the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (33 U.S.C. Section 1251 et seq.) and any subsequent amendments thereto. 
    "Conservation easement" means an agreement between a land owner and the city or other governmental agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
    "Construction activity" means an activity subject to the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Control Act or NPDES general construction permits. Such activities include but are not limited to clearing and grubbing, grading, excavating, demolition and other projects resulting in land disturbance. 
    "Detention" means the temporary storage of stormwater runoff in a stormwater management facility for the purpose of controlling peak discharges. 
    "Detention facility" means a detention basin or structure designed for the detention of stormwater runoff and gradual release of stored water at controlled rates. 
    "Developer" means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    "Development" means a land development or land development project. 
    "Drainage easement" means an easement appurtenant or attached to a tract or parcel of land allowing the owner of adjacent tracts or other persons to discharge stormwater runoff onto the tract or parcel of land subject to the drainage easement. 
    "Erosion and sedimentation control plan" means a plan that is designed to minimize the accelerated erosion and sediment runoff at a site during land disturbance activities. 
    "Extended detention" means the detention of stormwater runoff for an extended period, typically twenty-four (24) hours or greater. 
    "Extreme flood protection" means measures taken to prevent adverse impacts from large low-frequency storm events with a return frequency of one hundred (100) years or more. 
    "Flooding" means a volume of surface water that is too great to be confined within the banks or walls of a conveyance or stream channel and that overflows onto adjacent lands. 
    "Greenspace" or "open space" means permanently protected areas of a site that are preserved in a natural state. 
    "Hotspot" means an area where the use of the land has the potential to generate highly contaminated runoff, with concentrations of pollutants in excess of those typically found in stormwater. 
    "Hydrologic soil group (HSG)" means a natural resource conservation service classification system in which soils are categorized into four runoff potential groups. The groups range from group A soils, with high permeability and little runoff produced, to group D soils, which have low permeability rates and produce much more runoff. 
    "Illegal connection" means either of the following: 
1.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance, whether on the surface or subsurface, which allows an illicit discharge to enter the city's storm drain system, including but not limited to any conveyances which allow any nonstormwater discharge such as sewage, chemicals, process wastewater, and wash water to enter the storm drain system, regardless of whether such pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance has been previously allowed, permitted, or approved by an authorized enforcement agency; or 
2.  Any pipe, open channel, drain or conveyance connected to the city's separate storm sewer system which has not been documented in plans, maps, or equivalent records and approved by an authorized enforcement agency. 
    "Illicit discharge" means any direct or indirect nonstormwater discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system, except as expressly exempted under the provision of this chapter. 
    "Impervious surfaces" means those areas which prevent or impede the infiltration of stormwater into the soil as it entered in natural conditions prior to development. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awnings and other fabric or plastic coverings. 
    "Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 CFR, Section 122.26(b)(14). 
    "Industrial stormwater permit" means a National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit issued to an industry or group of industries which regulates the pollutant levels associated with industrial stormwater discharges or specifies on-site pollution control strategies. 
    "Infiltration" means the process of percolating stormwater runoff into the subsoil. 
    "Inspection and maintenance agreement" means a written agreement providing for the long-term inspection and maintenance of stormwater management facilities and practices on a site or with respect to a land development project, which when properly recorded in the deed records constitutes a restriction on the title to a site or other land involved in a land development project. 
    "Jurisdictional wetland" means an area that is inundated or saturated by surface water or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions, commonly known as hydrophytic vegetation. 
    "Land development" means any land change, including, but not limited to, clearing, digging, grubbing, stripping, removal of vegetation, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting and filling of land, construction, paving, and any other installation of impervious surface. 
    "Land development activities" means those actions or activities which comprise, facilitate or result in land development. 
    "Land development project" means a discrete land development undertaking. 
    "National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) stormwater discharge permit" means a permit issued by the Georgia EPD under authority delegated pursuant to 33 USC Section 1342(b) that authorizes the discharge of pollutants to waters of the United States, whether the permit is applicable on an individual, group, or general area-wide basis. 
    "New development" means a land development activity on a previously undeveloped site. 
    "Nonpoint source pollution" means a form of water pollution that does not originate from a discrete point such as a sewage treatment plant or industrial discharge, but involves the transport of pollutants such as sediment, fertilizers, pesticides, heavy metals, oil, grease, bacteria, organic materials and other contaminants from land to surface water and groundwater via mechanisms such as precipitation, stormwater runoff, and leaching. Nonpoint source pollution is a by-product of land use practices such as agriculture, silviculture, mining, construction, subsurface disposal and urban runoff sources. 
    "Nonstormwater discharge" means any discharge to the storm drain system that is not composed entirely of stormwater. 
    "Nonstructural stormwater management practice" or "nonstructural practice" means any natural or planted vegetation or other nonstructural component of the stormwater management plan that provides for or enhances stormwater quality and/or quality control or other stormwater management benefits, and includes, but is not limited to, riparian buffers, open and greenspace areas, overland flow filtration areas, natural depressions, and vegetated channels. 
    "Off-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located outside the boundaries of a site. 
    "On-site facility" means a stormwater management facility located within the boundaries of a site. 
    "Overbank flood protection" means measures taken to prevent an increase in the frequency and magnitude of out-of-bank flooding (i.e., flow events that exceed the capacity of the channel and enter the floodplain), and that are intended to protect downstream properties from flooding for the two-year through twenty-five (25) year frequency storm events. 
    "Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, lessee or other person, firm or corporation in control of the site. 
    "Permit" means the permit issued by the city to the applicant which is required for undertaking any land development activity. 
    "Person" means, except to the extent exempted from the provisions of this chapter, any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, city, county or other political subdivision of Georgia, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    "Pollutant" means anything which causes or contributes to pollution. Pollutants may include, but are not limited to: paints, varnishes, and solvents; petroleum hydrocarbons; automotive fluids; cooking grease; detergents (biodegradable or otherwise); degreasers; cleaning chemicals; non-hazardous liquid and solid wastes and yard wastes; refuse, rubbish, garbage, litter, or other discarded or abandoned objects and accumulations that may cause or contribute to pollution; floatables; pesticides, herbicides, and fertilizers; liquid and solid wastes; sewage, fecal coliform and pathogens; dissolved and particulate metals; animal wastes; wastes and residues that result from constructing a building or structure; concrete and cement; and noxious or offensive matter of any other kind. 
    "Pollution" means the contamination or other alteration of any water's physical, chemical or biological properties by the addition of any constituent and includes but is not limited to, a change in temperature, taste, color, turbidity, or odor of such waters, or the discharge of any liquid, gas, solid, radioactive material, or other substance into any such waters as will or is likely to create a nuisance or render such waters harmful, detrimental or injurious to the public health, safety, welfare, or environment, or to domestic, commercial, industrial, agricultural, recreational, or other legitimate beneficial uses, or to livestock, wild animals, birds, fish or other aquatic life. 
    "Post-development" refers to the time period, or the conditions that may reasonably be expected or anticipated to exist, after completion of the land development activity on a site as the context may require. 
    "Pre-development" refers to the time period or the conditions that exist on a site prior to the commencement of a land development project and at the time that plans for the land development of a site are approved by the plan approving authority. Where phased development or plan approval occurs, such as in the case of preliminary grading, roads and utilities, the existing conditions at the time prior to the first item being approved or permitted shall establish pre-development conditions. 
    "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land, whether improved or unimproved, including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    "Project" means a land development project. 
    "Redevelopment" means a land development project on a previously developed site, but excludes ordinary maintenance activities, remodeling of existing buildings, resurfacing of paved areas, and exterior changes or improvements which do not materially increase or concentrate stormwater runoff or cause additional nonpoint source pollution. 
    "Regional stormwater management facility" or "regional facility" means stormwater management facilities designed to control stormwater runoff from multiple properties, where the owners or developers of the individual properties may assist in the financing of the facility, and the requirement for on-site controls is either eliminated or reduced. 
    "Runoff" means stormwater runoff. 
    "Site" means the parcel of land being developed, or the portion thereof on which the land development project is located. 
    "State waters" means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface and subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state of Georgia which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single person. 
    "Stormwater better site drainage" means nonstructural site design approaches and techniques that can reduce a site's impact on the watershed and can provide for nonstructural stormwater management. Stormwater better site design includes conserving and protecting natural areas and greenspace, reducing impervious surface and using natural features for stormwater management. 
    "Stormwater management" means the collection, conveyance, storage, treatment and disposal of stormwater runoff in a manner intended to prevent increased flood damage, streambank channel erosion, habitat degradation and water quality degradation, and to enhance and promote the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    "Stormwater management facility" means any infrastructure that controls or conveys stormwater runoff. 
    "Stormwater management measure" means any stormwater management facility or nonstructural stormwater practice. 
    "Stormwater management plan" means a document describing how existing runoff characteristics will be affected by a land development project and containing measures for complying with the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Stormwater management system" means the entire set of structural and nonstructural stormwater management facilities and practices that are used to capture, convey and control the quantity and quality of the stormwater runoff from a site. 
    "Stormwater retrofit" means a stormwater management practice designed for a currently developed site that previously had either no stormwater management practice in place or a practice inadequate to meet the stormwater management requirements of the site. 
    "Stormwater runoff" or "stormwater" means any surface flow, runoff, or drainage consisting entirely of water from any form of natural precipitation, and resulting from such precipitation. 
    "Structural stormwater control" means a structural stormwater management facility or device that controls stormwater runoff and changes the characteristics of that runoff including, but not limited to, the quantity and quality, the period of release or the velocity of flow of the stormwater. 
    "Subdivision" means the division of a tract or parcel of land resulting in one or more new lots or building sites for the purpose, whether immediately or in the future, of sale, other transfer of ownership or land development, and includes divisions of land resulting from or made in connection with the layout or development of a new street or roadway or a change in an existing street or roadway. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.030 - Illicit discharges. 
    No person shall throw, drain, or otherwise discharge, cause, or allow others under its control to throw, drain, or otherwise discharge into the city's separate storm sewer system any pollutants or waters containing any pollutants, other than stormwater. 
    The following discharges are exempt from the provisions of this section: water line flushing performed by a government agency, other potable water sources, landscape irrigation or lawn watering, diverted stream flows, rising groundwater, groundwater infiltration to storm drains, uncontaminated pumped groundwater, foundation or footing drains (not including active groundwater dewatering systems), crawl space pumps, air conditioning condensation, springs, natural riparian habitat or wetland flows, and any other water source not containing pollutants; discharges or flows from firefighting, or other discharges necessary to protect public health and safety; discharges from domestic or other noncommercial cleaning of motor vehicles. 
    The prohibition provision of this section shall not apply to any nonstormwater discharge permitted under an NPDES permit or order issued to the discharger and administered under the authority of the state and the Federal Environmental Protection Agency, provided that the discharger is in full compliance with all requirements of the permit, waiver, or order and other applicable laws and regulations, and further provided that written approval has been granted by the city's public works department for any discharge to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.040 - Illegal connections. 
    The construction, connection, use, maintenance or continued existence of any illegal connection to the city's separate storm sewer system is prohibited. This prohibition expressly includes, without limitation, illegal connections made in the past, regardless of whether the connection was permissible under law or practices applicable or prevailing at the time of connection. Connections in violation of this section must be disconnected and redirected to an approved on-site wastewater management system or, with the written approval of the city's public works department, to the city's sanitary sewer system. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.050 - Location of connections. 
    Any drain or conveyance that has not been documented in plans, maps or equivalent, and which may be connected to the city's storm sewer system, shall be located by the owner or occupant of property served by such connection upon receipt of written notice of violation from the city requiring that such location be completed. Such notice shall specify a reasonable time period within which the location of the drain or conveyance is to be completed, that the drain or conveyance be identified as storm sewer, sanitary sewer or other type of facility, and that the outfall location or point of connection to the city's storm sewer system, sanitary sewer system or other discharge point be identified. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.060 - Industrial or construction activity discharges. 
    Any person subject to an industrial or construction activity NPDES stormwater discharge permit shall comply with all provisions of such permit. Proof of compliance with such permit may be required in a form acceptable to the city prior to allowing discharges to the city's separate storm sewer system. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.070 - Access and inspection of properties and facilities. 
    Authorized representatives of the city shall be permitted to enter and inspect properties and facilities at reasonable times as often as may be necessary to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
A.  If a property or facility has security measures in force which require proper identification and clearance before entry into its premises, the owner or operator shall make the necessary arrangements to allow access to representatives of the city. 
B.  The owner or operator shall allow the city ready access to all parts of the premises for the purposes of inspection, sampling, photography, videotaping, examination and copying of any records that are required under the conditions of an NPDES permit to discharge stormwater. 
C.  The city shall have the right to set up on any property or facility such devices as are necessary in the opinion of the city to conduct monitoring and/or sampling of flow discharges. 
D.  The city may require the owner or operator to install monitoring equipment and perform monitoring as necessary, and make the monitoring data available to the city. This sampling and monitoring equipment shall be maintained at all times in a safe and proper operating condition by the owner or operator at his or her own expense. All devices used to measure flow and quality shall be maintained and calibrated by the owner or operator to ensure their accuracy. 
E.  Any temporary or permanent obstruction to safe and easy access to the property or facility to be inspected and/or sampled shall be promptly removed by the owner or operator at the written or oral request of the city and shall not be replaced. The costs of clearing such access shall be borne by the owner or operator. 
F.  Unreasonable delays in allowing the city access to a facility for the purpose of such inspections is a violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  If the city has been refused access to any part of the premises from which stormwater is discharged, and the city is able to demonstrate probable cause to believe that there may be a violation of the provisions of this chapter, or that there is a need to inspect and/or sample as part of a routine inspection and sampling program designed to verify compliance with the provisions of this chapter or any order issued hereunder, or to protect the overall public health, safety, environment and welfare of the community, then the city may seek issuance of a search warrant from any court of competent jurisdiction. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.080 - Notification of accidental discharges and spills. 
    Notwithstanding other requirements of law, as soon as any person responsible for a facility, activity or operation, or responsible for emergency response for a facility, activity or operation has information of any known or suspected release of pollutants or nonstormwater discharges from that facility or operation which is resulting or may result in illicit discharges into stormwater, the city's separate storm sewer system, state waters, or waters of the U.S., said person shall forthwith take all necessary steps to ensure the discovery, containment, and cleanup of such release so as to minimize the effects of the discharge. 
    Said person shall notify the authorized enforcement agency in person or by phone or facsimile within twenty-four (24) hours of discovery of such release or discharge of the nature, quality and time of occurrence of the discharge. Notifications in person or by phone shall be confirmed by written notice addressed and mailed to the city within three business days of the phone, facsimile or in person notice. If the discharge of prohibited materials emanates from a commercial or industrial establishment, the owner or operator of such establishment shall also make and retain an on-site written record of the discharge and the actions taken to prevent its recurrence. Such records shall be retained for at least three years from the date of discovery of such release or discharge. Said person shall also take immediate steps to ensure that there is no recurrence of the discharge or spill. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Article 2 - Post-development Stormwater Control 

14.24.090 - Applicability. 
A.  The provisions of this article shall be applicable to all land development within the corporate limits of the city, including, but not limited to, site plan applications, subdivision applications, and grading applications, unless exempt pursuant to subsection B of this section. The provisions of this article further apply to any new development or redevelopment site that meets one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  New development that involves the creation of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface, or that involves other land development activities of one acre or more; 
2.  Redevelopment that includes the creation, addition or replacement of five thousand (5,000) square feet or more of impervious surface, or that involves other land development activity of one acre or more; 
3.  Any new development or redevelopment, regardless of size, that is determined by the public works director of the city to be a hotspot land use; or 
4.  Land development activities that are smaller than the minimum applicability criteria set forth in subsections (A)(1) and (A)(2) of this section if such activities are part of a larger common plan of development, even though multiple, separate and distinct land development activities may take place in connection with such development at different times on different schedules. 
B.  The following activities are exempt from this section: 
1.  Individual single-family or duplex residential lots that are not part of a subdivision or phased development project; 
2.  Additions or modifications to existing single-family or duplex residential structures that are not part of a subdivision or phased development; 
3.  Agricultural or silvicultural land management activities within areas zoned for these activities; and 
4.  Repairs to any stormwater management facility or practice deemed necessary by the public works director of the city. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.100 - Stormwater design manual. 
    The city will utilize the policies, criteria and information, including technical specifications and standards, in the current edition of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (GSMM), the provisions of which are incorporated herein by reference, for the proper implementation of the provisions of this chapter. A current copy of the GSMM will be maintained and available for public reference during office hours in the city building and zoning office. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.110 - Permit application. 
    No owner or developer shall commence any land development activities without having met the requirements of this article. Unless specifically exempted by this, any owner or developer proposing a land development activity shall submit to the public works department of the city a permit application on a form provided by the city. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.120 - Stormwater management plan. 
    The stormwater management plan shall detail how post-development stormwater runoff will be controlled or managed and how the proposed project will meet the requirements of this chapter, including the performance criteria set forth in this article. 
    The stormwater management plan shall be in accordance with the criteria established in this section and must be submitted with the stamp and signature of a Georgia licensed professional engineer, who must verify that the design of all stormwater management facilities and practices meets the submittal requirements outlined in the submittal checklist(s) found in the Georgia Stormwater Design Manual. 
    The plan shall consist of maps, narrative, and supporting design calculations (hydrologic and hydraulic) for the proposed stormwater management system and shall include all of the information required in the stormwater management site plan checklist found in the Georgia Stormwater Design Manual. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.130 - Application procedure. 
A.  Applications for land development permits shall be filed with the public works department of the city. 
B.  Permit applications shall include the items set forth in Section 16.24.110 in this chapter. 
C.  Within thirty (30) days of the date of filing the application the city shall inform the applicant whether the application, stormwater management plan and inspection and maintenance agreement are approved or disapproved, and if, disapproved shall specify the basis for disapproval and the curative measures necessary for approval. 
D.  Upon approval of the application the city shall issue a permit for the land development project. 
E.  In the event that the applicant is not notified of the city's action within thirty (30) days of the date of filing the application, the application shall be deemed to have been approved and the city shall issue a permit for the land development project. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.140 - Post-development stormwater management performance criteria. 
    The following performance criteria shall be applicable to all stormwater management plans, unless otherwise provided for in this chapter: 
A.  Water Quality. All stormwater runoff generated from a site shall be adequately treated before discharge. It will be presumed that a stormwater management system complies with this requirement if: 
1.  It is sized to treat the prescribed water quality treatment volume from the site, as defined in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual; 
2.  Appropriate structural stormwater or nonstructural practices are selected, designed, constructed or preserved, and maintained according to the specific criteria in the GSMM; and 
3.  Runoff from hotspot land uses and activities identified by the city are adequately treated and addressed through the use of appropriate structural stormwater controls, nonstructural practices and pollution prevention practices. 
B.  Stream Channel Protection. Protection of stream channels from bank and bed erosion and degradation shall be provided by using all of the following three approaches: 
1.  Preservation, restoration and/or reforestation (with native vegetation) of the applicable stream buffer; 
2.  Twenty-four (24) hour extended detention storage of the one-year, twenty-four (24) hour return frequency storm event. 
    This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites that discharge directly into larger streams, rivers, wetlands, or lakes, or to a man-made channel or conveyance system where the reduction in these flows will not have an impact on upstream or downstream streambank or channel integrity; 
3.  Erosion prevention measures such as energy dissipation and velocity control. 
C.  Overbank Flooding Protection. Downstream overbank flood and property protection shall be provided by controlling (attenuating) the post-development peak discharge rate to the pre-development rate for the twenty-five (25) year, twenty-four (24) hour return frequency storm event. If control of the one-year, twenty-four (24) hour storm under subsection (B)(2) of this section is exempted, then peak discharge rate attenuation of the two-year through the twenty-five (25) year return frequency storm event must be provided. 
    This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
D.  Extreme Flooding Protection. Extreme flood and public safety protection shall be provided by controlling and safely conveying the one hundred (100) year, twenty-four (24) hour return frequency storm event such that flooding is not exacerbated. 
    This requirement may be adjusted or waived by the city for sites where the post-development downstream analysis shows that uncontrolled post-development conditions will not increase downstream peak flows, or that meeting the requirement will cause greater peak flow downstream impacts than the uncontrolled post-development conditions. 
E.  Structural Stormwater Controls. All structural stormwater management facilities shall be selected and designed using the appropriate criteria from the GSMM. All structural stormwater controls must be designed appropriately to meet their intended function. For other structural stormwater controls not included in the GSMM, or for which pollutant removal rates have not been provided, the effectiveness and pollutant removal of the structural control must be documented through prior studies, literature reviews, or other means and receive approval from the city before being included in the design of a stormwater management system. In addition, if hydrologic or topographic conditions, or land use activities warrant greater control than that provided by the GSMM control requirements, the city may impose additional requirements deemed necessary to protect upstream and downstream properties and aquatic resources from damage due to increased volume, frequency, and rate of stormwater runoff or increased nonpoint source pollution loads created on the site in question. 
    Applicants shall consult the GSMM for guidance on the factors that determine site design feasibility when selecting and locating a structural stormwater control. 
F.  Stormwater Credits for Nonstructural Measures. The use of one or more site design measures by the applicant may allow for a reduction in the water quality treatment volume required under GSMM. The applicant may, if approved by the city, take credit for the use of stormwater better site design practices and reduce the water quality volume requirement. For each potential credit, GSMM provides a minimum set of criteria and requirements which identify the conditions or circumstances under which the credit may be applied. The site design practices that qualify for this credit and the criteria and procedures for applying and calculating the credits are included in the GSMM. 
G.  Drainage System Guidelines. Stormwater conveyance facilities, which may include but are not limited to culverts, stormwater drainage pipes, catch basins, drop inlets, junction boxes, headwalls, gutter, swales, channels, ditches, and energy dissipaters shall be provided when necessary for the protection of public right-of-way and private properties adjoining project sites and/or public rights-of-way. Stormwater conveyance facilities that are designed to carry runoff from more than one parcel, existing or proposed, shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Methods to calculate stormwater flows shall be in accordance with the GSMM; 
2.  All culverts, pipe systems and open channel flow systems shall be sized in accordance with the stormwater management plan using the methods included in the GSMM; and 
3.  Design and construction of stormwater conveyance facilities shall be in accordance with the criteria and specifications found in the GSMM. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.150 - Construction inspections of post-development stormwater management system. 
A.  Inspections to Ensure Plan Compliance During Construction. Periodic inspections of the stormwater management system construction shall be conducted by the staff of the city or conducted and certified by a Georgia licensed professional engineer. Construction inspections shall utilize the approved stormwater management plan for establishing compliance. 
    All inspections shall be documented with written reports that contain the following information: 
1.  The date and location of the inspection; 
2.  Whether construction is in compliance with the approved stormwater management plan; 
3.  Variations from the approved construction specifications; and 
4.  Any other variations or violations of the conditions of the approved stormwater management plan. 
    If any violations are found, the applicant shall be notified in writing of the nature of the violation and the required corrective actions. 
B.  Final Inspection and As Built Plans. Upon completion of a project, and before a certificate of occupancy shall be granted, the applicant shall be responsible for certifying that the completed project is in accordance with the approved stormwater management plan. All applicants are required to submit actual "as built" plans for any stormwater management facilities or practices after final construction is completed. The plan must show the final design specifications for all stormwater management facilities and practices and must be certified by a Georgia licensed professional engineer. The plans shall be submitted in hard copy and digital CAD or GIS format. A final inspection by the city is required before the release of any performance securities can occur. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.160 - Stormwater management facility dedication to city. 
    Prior to the issuance of any permit for a land development activity requiring a stormwater management facility or practice hereunder and for which the city requires ongoing maintenance, the applicant or owner of the site must, unless an on-site stormwater management facility or practice is dedicated to and accepted by the city, execute an inspection and maintenance agreement, and/or a conservation easement, if applicable, in recordable form containing a proper legal description of the affected real property that shall be a covenant running with the land binding in perpetuity on all subsequent owners of the site. 
    The inspection and maintenance agreement, if applicable, must be approved by the city prior to plan approval, and recorded in the Newton County deed records upon final plat approval. 
    The inspection and maintenance agreement shall identify by name or official title the person(s) responsible for carrying out the inspection and maintenance. Responsibility for the operation and maintenance of the stormwater management facility or practice, unless assumed by a governmental agency, shall remain with the property owner and shall pass to any successor owner. If portions of the land are sold or otherwise transferred, legally binding arrangements shall be made to pass the inspection and maintenance responsibility to the appropriate successors in title. These arrangements shall designate for each portion of the site, the entity to be responsible in perpetuity for its inspection and maintenance. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Article 3 - Enforcement; Appeal; Penalties 

14.24.170 - Notice of violation. 
    Whenever the city determines that a violation of the provisions of this chapter has occurred it may order compliance by serving a written notice of violation upon the alleged violator. Such notice shall contain: 
A.  The name and address of the alleged violator; 
B.  The street address, when available, or a description of the building, structure or land upon which the violation is occurring or has occurred; 
C.  A statement specifying the nature of the violation; 
D.  A statement of the remedial measures necessary to restore compliance with the provisions of this chapter, including a timetable for the completion of such remedial action; 
E.  A statement of the applicable penalty provisions of this article; 
F.  A statement that the city's determination of violation may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals, as hereinafter provided; and 
G.  Such other information relating to the violation as the city may deem appropriate. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.180 - Appeals. 
    The city's determination of violation of the provisions of this chapter may be appealed to the board of zoning appeals as provided in Section 16.12.050 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.190 - Enforcement. 
    In the event that the violation has not been corrected in accordance with the notice of violation, or, in the event of an appeal, within thirty (30) days of a decision of the board of zoning appeals affirming the city's determination of violation, the city may take any and all measures necessary or appropriate to remedy the violation and the city shall have a lien against the property in the amount of the costs of such remediation unless the owner of the property shall have fully repaid the city for such costs within thirty (30) days of said owner's receipt of a statement of such costs from the city. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.200 - Penalties. 
    Violations of the provisions of this chapter are declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance, and in the event of final determination of such violation, the city may impose any or all of the following penalties in addition to the enforcement provisions of Section 14.24.190 of this article: 
A.  Issuance of a stop work order by the public works director, under the procedure provided in Section 15.04.020(G)(3) of this code; 
B.  Suspension, modification or revocation of the applicable land development permit; 
C.  Withholding of a certificate of occupancy for any building or other structure located on the affected property; 
D.  Filing a complaint in the Covington municipal court seeking imposition of punishment for violation of the provisions of this chapter, as further provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code; 
E.  Filing a complaint in the Covington municipal Court seeking abatement of the violation as a nuisance as further provided in Chapter 8.12 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.24.210 - Stormwater management regulations. 
    The public works department of the city shall be authorized to promulgate and publish such written rules, regulations, standards, criteria or procedures as may be appropriate to effect the provisions of this chapter, and shall maintain a copy of same for public inspection at City Hall, 2194 Emory Street, Covington, Georgia. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 14.28 - TREE PRESERVATION 

14.28.010 - Title. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall be known as the city's "Tree Preservation Ordinance." 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.020 - Purpose. 
    Tree Canopy Cover. The purpose of these provisions is to regulate the conservation, protection, maintenance, and establishment of trees within the city in order to maintain at least sixty (60) percent tree canopy cover across the city and increase the city's tree canopy cover wherever and whenever possible, to preserve tree and community forest health, and to contribute to community health, safety, and welfare. 
    Trees as Infrastructure. Trees and the community forest are a component of the community infrastructure, and as such provide benefits and require management, including maintenance, removal, and replacement to maximize their useful service life. As with other infrastructure, trees shall be maintained in a safe and healthy condition to provide maximum benefits with minimum risk. 
    Tree Benefits. Trees, tree canopy, and tree roots conserve soil and maintain soil health, reduce soil erosion and sedimentation, shade streams, and improve water quality. 
    Trees and tree canopy shade the soil, pavement, buildings, other property, and infrastructure, and cool the environment through the evaporation of water during leaf transpiration. Trees moderate temperatures, decrease the urban heat island effect, reduce the amount of volatile organic compounds released from parked vehicles, and extend the useful life of property and infrastructure. 
    Trees and tree canopy filter particulate matter from the air and absorb carbon dioxide and other harmful compounds, reduce air pollution, and contribute to human survival and health. 
    Trees and tree canopy provide recreational places and opportunities. The presence of trees has psychological and social benefits, including reduction of domestic violence, improvement in learning among youth, reduction in healing times, hospital stays, and medication needs, and calming of traffic. 
    Trees and tree canopy provide economic benefits because they increase property values and bring residents and visitors to a community, resulting in increased commerce and trade. 
    Trees are effective buffers and provide visual screening, noise reduction, and reduce light glare. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.030 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter unless otherwise specifically stated. 
    "Appraised value" means the dollar value assigned to a tree and calculated using the methods outlined in the latest edition of the Guide for Plant Appraisal. 
    "Best management practices" means recommended practices established by the American National Standards Institute and published by the International Society of Arboriculture for the management of trees and community forests that are based upon professional experience and the results of ongoing research. 
    "Buffer" means a natural, undeveloped portion, or planted portion, of a lot or parcel of land set aside for open space and visual screening for the purpose of separating different use districts, or to separate uses on one property from uses on another property of the same use district. 
    "Buildable area" means the portion of a parcel that is not located within any required yard, landscaped area, open area, recreation area, buffer, or screen, i.e., that portion of a parcel wherein a building may be located in compliance with applicable zoning regulations. 
    "Building activities" means activities on existing development sites including, but not limited to, the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, or moving of buildings or structures. 
    "Building official" means the person appointed by the city who has the responsibility for the issuance of building permits and the administration and enforcement of the Georgia State Minimum Construction Codes; or, the head of the city building and zoning department. 
    Where the term "building official" is used, it shall also indicate any person designated by the building official to act on his/her behalf in carrying out the responsibilities of the department and the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Caliper" means the diameter of the trunk of a replacement tree (new nursery stock) measured six inches above the ground line for trees of four-inch caliper or smaller, and measured twelve (12) inches above the ground line for trees larger than four inches in caliper. 
    "Canopy tree" means a generally long-lived, overstory tree that grows tall and to a large size, usually with a height of forty (40) feet or greater at maturity. Trees listed as large or medium in the community tree species list described in Section 14.28.110 are considered canopy trees. 
    "Certified arborist" means a person who voluntarily has been certified as an arborist by the International Society of Arboriculture and maintains that certification in good standing. 
    "Community forest management practices" means practices conducted to maintain and improve the health, function, and safety of the trees and forests within a community. 
    "Critical root zone" means the area of soil and roots beneath a tree's canopy, within the dripline, or within a circular area of soil and roots with a radius out from the tree trunk a distance of one and one-half feet for every one-inch of DBH, whichever is greater. 
    "Crown" means the upper portion of the tree that includes the scaffold limbs, branches, and leaves. 
    "CTLA" means the Council of Tree and Landscape Appraisers, a national council that periodically defines the accepted professional methods for determining the appraised value of trees and cost of cure for tree damage and destruction. 
    "Cut" means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
    "DBH" means diameter at breast height, which is the diameter of a tree trunk measured in inches at a height of four and one-half feet above the ground line for individual trunks, and at the narrowest point below the fork for trees forked below four and one-half feet. 
    "Deciduous tree" means a tree that loses its leaves annually in the fall, or late in the winter (tardily deciduous), and produces new leaves in the spring. 
    "Decline" means a state of health characterized by loss of living tissue and wood volume, such as in branch dieback and shedding, slowing of the annual growth rate, and reduction in overall tree health and vigor. 
    "Dripline" means a vertical line extending downward from the outermost tips of a tree's branches, creating a more or less circular projection on the ground; the outline of a tree's canopy as it is projected on the ground. 
    "Encroachment activity" means any activity that is conducted on or encroaches on adjacent public property or the public street right-of-way, including, but not limited to, land disturbing activities, building activities, installation of irrigation systems, sod installation, pesticide application, tree planting, tree pruning, and tree removal, and they may impact the soil, vegetation (including trees), sidewalk, curb, landscape strip, road, utilities, or other infrastructure as determined by the building official. 
    "Erosion" means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice, or gravity. 
    "Evergreen tree" means a tree that retains its leaves throughout the year; evergreen trees may lose their older leaves on a regular or irregular basis. 
    Excavation. See "Cut." 
    "Fill" means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
    "Forest management practices" means practices for managing the age, composition, health, and wood production of a forested tract of land, including, but not limited to: the removal of trees for commercial use and sold as pulpwood, shortwood, chip and saw, sawtimber, plylogs, wood chips, or other hardwood or softwood products; site preparation for tree planting including tilling, root raking, tree planting; herbicide application for herbaceous or woody plant control; fertilization; and pest control. 
    "Grading" means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions, and/or slopes; includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling, and shaping or any combination thereof. 
    "Grubbing" means the removal of woody vegetation from a site using heavy, mechanized equipment. 
    "Impervious surface" means any surface through which water does not penetrate. 
    "ISA" means the International Society of Arboriculture, an international organization that developed and administers the Certified Arborist, Certified Tree Worker, and Certified Utility Worker programs. 
    "Land disturbing activity" means any activity that disturbs the soil, removes woody vegetation, or results in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, excavating, filling, grading, grubbing, root or stump removal, trenching, or transporting of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in Section 15.36.210(E). 
    "Landscaped area" means ground covered with a combination of turf, shrubs, herbaceous plants, trees, and/or mulch. 
    "Large tree" means a tree expected to grow to a minimum height of forty (40) feet at maturity under urban conditions. 
    "Medium tree" means a tree expected to grow to a maximum height of twenty-five (25) to forty (40) feet at maturity under urban conditions. 
    "Net area or acreage" means the project area or acreage not including required buffers, open space, or recreation areas. 
    "Overstory tree" means a tree whose crown, at maturity, is dominant or at the least co-dominant in the canopy of the forest. A canopy tree. 
    "Parking area" means that portion of a development required and used exclusively for the parking in unenclosed spaces of vehicles of employees, residents, or customers. 
    "Permit" means the authorization necessary to conduct land disturbing, timber harvesting, or building activities as described in this chapter. 
    "Permit holder" means the person authorized by the issuance of a permit to conduct land disturbing, timber harvesting, or building activities as described in this chapter. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality, or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    "pH" means a measure of the concentration of hydrogen ions in substances such as water or soil. A measurement of 7.0 is neutral, below 7.0 is acidic, and above 7.0 is alkaline. For each 0.1 change in number, there is a one hundred (100) times change in the pH. 
    "Private tree" means a tree located on privately owned property; not a public tree. 
    "Project area" means the entire proposed development area, including but not limited to, all proposed yards, buffers, open space, recreation areas, tree conservation areas, tree protection zones, landscaped areas, roads, buildings, and parking areas, but including only the current phase. 
    "Public tree" means a tree located on city property including, but not limited to, city street rights-of-way, buildings, parks, and cemeteries. 
    "Registered forester" means a person who is licensed to practice professional forestry in Georgia. 
    "Registered landscape architect" means a person who is licensed to practice landscape architecture in Georgia. 
    "Root zone" means the area beneath the soil containing the majority of the roots of an individual tree or group of trees. Tree roots typically grow out from the tree two to three times the width of the crown and are concentrated in the top twenty-four (24) inches of soil. 
    "Roots" means the woody and nonwoody (fibrous) structures of a tree that are located within the soil and function to take up water and nutrients from the soil. 
    "Shrub" means a woody, perennial, usually multi-stemmed plant that generally achieves a height at maturity of less than fifteen (15) feet. 
    "Small tree" means a tree expected to grow to a maximum height of twenty-five (25) feet at maturity under urban conditions. 
    "Soil" means a composite of mineral, biological, and chemical substances that can be categorized by its structure, texture, moisture, and pH. 
    "Street right-of-way" means that land to which the public has the paramount right for use as a thoroughfare; the width of the right-of-way is that distance, measured perpendicular to the centerline of such thoroughfare, between the front lot lines of the abutting properties on each side of the thoroughfare. 
    "Tilling" means the mechanized turning and aeration of soil, usually to a depth of less than twelve (12) inches, for the purpose of preparing a site for planting of turf or herbaceous plants. 
    "Timber harvesting" means the cutting and removal of standing, living trees from the forest for the milling and manufacture of wood products; also known as "logging" or "timbering." 
    Topping. "Tree topping" means the removal of tree limbs, branches, or stems by cutting between branch attachments to achieve a desired tree height or shape. 
    "Tree" means a self-supporting, generally single-stemmed, woody perennial plant that is capable of growing to a trunk diameter of at least three inches and a height of at least fifteen (15) feet. A multi-stemmed woody plant may be considered a tree if at least one stem meets the criteria above. 
    "Tree bank" means an account established by the city for the purpose of collecting and expending forfeited bonds and penalties as provided for in this chapter. 
    "Tree conservation" means the retention and protection of trees on a site, either individually or in a group. 
    "Tree establishment" means the process of establishing a new tree on a site including, but not limited to, site selection, species selection, selection of planting stock, site preparation, planting, mulching, watering, pruning, pest management, and inspection. The number of years required to successfully establish a tree during which time intensive and routine maintenance is required shall, for the purposes of this chapter, be three years from the date of planting. 
    "Tree preservation" means ongoing maintenance and protection of a tree, whether newly planted, juvenile, mature, or declining, to preserve its health. 
    "Tree protection zone" means the area around a tree and within the critical root zone extending at least two feet below ground and encompassing the entire aboveground portion of the tree. The area around a tree that requires ongoing protection. 
    "Trunk" means the woody stem of a tree that supports the crown. Multiple or forked trunks may be present. 
    "Understory tree" means a tree whose crown, at maturity, is subordinate to and beneath the forest canopy. Trees listed as small or very small in the community tree species list as described in Section 14.28.100 are considered understory trees. 
    "Very small tree" means a tree expected to grow to a maximum height of fifteen (15) feet at maturity under urban conditions. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.040 - Applicability. 
    The provisions of this chapter shall apply to any land disturbing activity on real property within the corporate limits of the city including, but not limited to, all activities that require a sediment and erosion control permit or a land disturbance permit; and, to any activity that requires a building permit including, but not limited to, the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation, redevelopment, or moving of buildings or structures. 
    Exemptions. Activities on residential lots, or the construction of, individual, single-family detached dwellings by the resident homeowner, shall be exempt, unless otherwise stated in this chapter. 
    Activities performed by city staff during the course of their daily work and activities at the land application facility shall be exempt from the provisions of this chapter. However, best management practices for tree care shall be incorporated into daily work activities. 
    Forest management practices, including timber harvesting, which are being conducted as part of an ongoing forest management program and are based upon a long-term forest management plan, shall be exempt. Forest management practices, including timber harvesting, that are incidental to land development, shall not be exempt. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.050 - Tree canopy cover measurements. 
    To maintain current information on the state of the city's tree canopy cover and to track changes in tree canopy over time, measurements of the overall percent of tree canopy cover and other types of cover within the city and of tree canopy cover on all developments required to conserve or plant trees under the provisions of this chapter shall be made by the city within one year of the receipt of updated aerial photography. 
    Cover types to be measured across the city shall include, but are not limited to, impervious surfaces (buildings, other structures, and pavement), turf, other vegetation, exposed soil, and open water. Tree canopy cover only shall be measured on all developments required to conserve or plant trees under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.060 - Tree preservation board. 
    Purpose. A tree preservation board (hereinafter referred to as the "board") is established to assist the city building and zoning department in interpreting and enforcing the provisions of this chapter and to advise the mayor and city council on matters pertaining to the preservation of trees and conservation of tree canopy cover within the city. 
    Members. The tree preservation board shall consist of no fewer than five nor more than nine members, all of whom shall be residents of the city, though one member may be a nonresident with professional expertise in arboriculture or horticulture. Members shall be appointed by the mayor and city council and shall serve without compensation. 
    Chairman and Vice-chairman. A chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected by the board from among the board members. Nominations for these positions shall be submitted to the board annually at least ten (10) working days and not more than thirty (30) working days prior to the first meeting of each calendar year. Elections shall be held at the first meeting of each calendar year, at which time the term of office shall begin. 
    Secretary. The zoning administrator shall act as secretary of the board. The secretary shall be a nonvoting member. 
    Records. The secretary shall maintain records of the board's proceedings and assist the building official with dissemination of information, public awareness, and such other administrative duties as may be assigned by the board. 
    Term of Office. Each member of the tree preservation board shall serve for three years, with exception of the members of the first board, which shall have three members serving for only one year, three members serving for two years, and one member serving for three years. The term of office of the chairman and vice-chairman shall be one year. 
    Vacancy. In the event that a vacancy occurs during the term of any member, his or her successor shall be appointed by the mayor and council to serve the unexpired portion of the term. The chairman of the tree preservation board shall recommend to the mayor and council that a replacement be appointed for any member who fails to perform his/her duties. 
    Quorum. A majority of the members of the board shall constitute a quorum. In varying the application of any provisions of this code, affirmative votes of a majority of the members present and voting shall be required. 
    Meetings. The tree preservation board shall meet not less frequently than quarterly and shall establish rules and regulations for its operations consistent with the provision of this chapter. 
    Administrative Guidelines. The tree preservation board shall have the power to adopt and promulgate such further administrative guidelines, standards, and regulations as may be necessary or desirable to carry out the provisions of this chapter. The maintenance of the city's community tree species list shall be the responsibility of the board. Current copies of the community tree species list and other such administrative guidelines, standards, or regulations shall be maintained at the city building and zoning department and shall be made available to the public for inspection and copying during normal business hours. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.070 - Soil and tree conservation. 
    Permit Required. No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity or building activity within the city without first obtaining a soil and tree conservation permit from the city building and zoning department to perform such activity. A soil and tree conservation permit shall be required for new developments prior to the issuance of an erosion and sedimentation control permit and/or land disturbing permit and/or approval of a preliminary plat or preliminary plan, and for existing developments prior to the issuance of a building permit. The property owner or authorized agent is the only person that can obtain a soil and tree conservation permit. No soil and tree conservation permit shall be issued unless all provisions of this chapter have been satisfied. 
    To obtain a soil and tree conservation permit, a permit application and a soil and tree conservation plan as specified in this section must be submitted to the city building and zoning department in accordance with this chapter. 
    If the activity is to occur in phases, then a separate soil and tree conservation permit shall be required for each phase. 
    The soil and tree conservation permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the building official, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the soil and tree conservation plan, upon finding that the soil and tree conservation permit holder is not in compliance with the approved soil and tree conservation plan or is in violation of this chapter. 
    The soil and tree conservation permit shall expire after one year of inactivity on the site. 
    Soil Conservation. The soil on site shall be conserved and protected to the greatest extent possible. To protect tree roots, soil within the tree protection zone shall not be compacted, cultivated, altered, or disturbed in any manner. 
    Where trees are to be planted, topsoil shall remain on site or be moved, stored, and then replaced prior to planting. 
    Application Process. Applications for a soil and tree conservation permit shall include three copies of the soil and tree conservation plan. Upon receipt of a completed application and soil and tree conservation plan, the city building and zoning department shall have thirty (30) days to review the application and soil and tree conservation plan and either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the soil and tree conservation permit with comments. 
    Fee. Upon the approval of an application for a soil and tree conservation permit, before a permit will be issued the applicant shall pay an administrative fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution. 
    Soil and Tree Conservation Plan. The soil and tree conservation plan shall be completed and signed by a registered forester, a certified arborist, or a registered landscape architect. A soil and tree conservation plan shall not be required for any construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, or restoration of existing structures or site when the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, or restoration is less than fifty (50) percent of the assessed value of the structure or site. 
    The soil and tree conservation plan shall include, as a minimum, the following information: 
A.  Project name; 
B.  Project description; 
C.  Project location and tax parcel number(s); 
D.  Name, address, and telephone number of property owner; 
E.  Name, address, and telephone number of developer; 
F.  Name, address, and telephone number of the person responsible for preparing the soil and tree conservation plan, and the seal, signature, and statement of professional qualifications of such person; 
G.  Size of project area in acres or square feet; 
H.  Size of the buildable area in acres or square feet; 
I.  Total landscaped area required in percent and square foot area; 
J.  Total canopy cover required in percent and square foot area; 
K.  Summary table of tree canopy coverage for conserved trees by individual tree or tree groups, and for planted trees by species, mature size and canopy category; 
L.  Delineation of required buffers, landscaped areas, open space, and recreation areas; 
M.  Location and size of proposed structures or additions to existing structures, paved areas, and all other site improvements; 
N.  Construction entrance and exit; 
O.  Delineation of tree conservation areas; 
P.  Species, DBH, and location of trees to be conserved; include both trunk location and extent of tree protection zone; 
Q.  For existing developments, location, species, and size of any tree previously conserved or planted to achieve required tree canopy cover, including trunk location, DBH, and location and dimensions of tree protection zones; 
R.  Location of all existing and proposed overhead and underground utilities; 
S.  Type and location of tree protection fencing and other tree protection structures required; 
T.  Type and location of tree protection area signs; 
U.  Species, caliper, and location of trees to be planted; 
V.  Tree protection statement for all conserved trees: "Tree protection measures will be maintained at all times. Additional tree protection measures will be installed if deemed necessary by on-site inspection"; 
W.  Tree maintenance statement for all planted trees: "Trees will be maintained throughout their life using best management practices; maintenance within the first three years after planting will include watering, mulching, and pruning"; 
X.  Species, DBH, and location of trees growing on the adjacent public street right-of-way or public property; 
Y.  Project activity schedule. 
    Tree Protection Bond. The applicant shall be required to provide an escrow deposit or post a bond or irrevocable letter of credit with a surety or issuer acceptable to the city in the amount of five hundred dollars ($500.00) for each one thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet of tree canopy cover conserved on a site after approval of an application and soil and tree conservation plan, and prior to the issuance of a soil and tree conservation permit. For all developments, except new residential subdivisions, the bond shall be released after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and the successful and complete implementation of the provisions of this chapter related to tree conservation, as determined by the building official. 
    For new residential subdivisions, the bond shall be released to the developer after final plat approval and at least fifty (50) percent of the lots have been sold and all provisions of this chapter have been met for each phase of development. Separate tree protection bonds shall be required from the general contractor providing improvements on each lot sold according to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Tree Establishment Bond. Prior to the issuance of final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy, the soil and tree conservation permit holder shall be required to provide an escrow deposit or post a bond or irrevocable letter of credit with a surety or issuer acceptable to the city in the amount of three hundred dollars ($300.00) per tree planted or required to be planted to meet canopy cover requirements. For all developments except new residential subdivisions, the bond shall be held by the city for a minimum of thirty-six (36) months. If the applicant does not comply with any provision of this chapter or with the conditions of the soil and tree conservation permit after issuance, the bond may be forfeited. Trees that do not survive in good condition as determined by the building official shall be replaced prior to the release of the bond. If the trees are not replaced within forty-eight (48) months from the original date of planting, the bond shall be forfeited and the entire sum deposited in the city's tree bank account. 
    For new residential subdivisions, the bond shall be released to the developer after final plat approval and at least fifty (50) percent of the lots have been sold and all provisions of this chapter have been met. Separate tree establishment bonds shall be required from the general contractor providing improvements on any lot sold according to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 13) 
14.28.080 - Timber harvesting. 
    Permit Required. A timber harvesting permit shall be required for tree removal and timber harvesting operations that are part of the development process. A timber harvesting permit shall not be required for timber harvesting in any zone if included as part of an ongoing forest management program. 
    The property owner is the only party that can obtain a timber harvesting permit. No timber harvesting permit shall be issued unless all provisions of this chapter have been satisfied. 
    The timber harvesting permit shall expire after one year of inactivity on the site. 
    After the issuance of a timber harvesting permit, the owner will be eligible for additional development related permits including, but not limited to, sediment and erosion control permits, land disturbance permits, site and tree conservation permits, and right-of-way encroachment permits. 
    When timber harvesting occurs with or without a timber harvesting permit and the tree canopy cover remaining is less than that required in Section 14.28.100, or is wholly or partly of unacceptable quality according to the building official, then no additional development related permits for such harvesting site shall be issued for a minimum of three years including, but not limited to, sediment and erosion control permits, land disturbance permits, site and tree conservation permits, and right-of-way encroachment permits. 
    Application Process. Application for a timber harvesting permit shall be submitted to the city building and zoning department. A separate application is required for each location. Upon receipt of a completed application for a timber harvesting permit the city building and zoning department shall have five days to review the application and issue a permit. 
    Fee. No fee shall be required for a timber harvesting permit. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.090 - Right-of-way encroachment. 
    Permit Required. A right-of-way encroachment permit is required for any land disturbing activity or building activity conducted by any person that encroaches on city property, other than mowing turf, and for any activity that may impact the soil, vegetation (including trees), sidewalk, curb, landscape strip, road, utilities, or other infrastructure as determined by the building official. City property includes, but is not limited to, parks, city buildings, and street rights-of-way. 
    Permit Expiration. The right-of-way encroachment permit shall expire on the date of completion listed on the application, or after one year of inactivity on the site, whichever comes first. 
    Application Process. Application for a right-of-way encroachment permit shall be submitted by the person proposing to engage in the encroachment activity, to the city building and zoning, department along with a right-of-way encroachment plan. A separate application and right-of-way encroachment plan is required for each location. Upon receipt of a completed application and right-of-way encroachment plan the city building and zoning department shall have ten (10) working days to review the application and either approve, approve with conditions, or deny the right-of-way encroachment permit with comments. If a right-of-way encroachment permit is denied the applicant may resubmit the application with the required changes to restart the application and permit process. If no notice of action on the right-of-way encroachment permit taken by the city building and zoning department is received by the applicant within ten (10) working days from the date of filing of the application, the application will be deemed to have been approved as of the eleventh day following the date of such filing. 
    Fee. Upon the approval of an application for a right-of-way encroachment permit, before a right-of-way encroachment permit will be issued the applicant shall pay an administrative fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution. 
    Fee Waived. The fee shall be waived for any person performing activities requested by the city. However, an application, right-of-way encroachment plan, and right-of-way encroachment permit shall be required. 
    Tree Protection. All trees located on city property shall be protected from root, trunk, or crown damage during the proposed encroachment according to the provisions of this chapter. 
    Tree Protection Bond. The applicant may be required by the building official to furnish a tree protection bond prior to the issuance of a right-of-way encroachment permit in an amount not to exceed the appraised value of the trees growing on the permit site. 
    Right-of-Way Encroachment Plan. Applications for a right-of-way encroachment permit shall include three copies of the right-of-way encroachment plan. The right-of-way encroachment plan shall include, as a minimum, the following information: 
A.  Name, address, and telephone number of the applicant; 
B.  Name, address, and telephone number of the person preparing the plan; 
C.  Date the plan was prepared; 
D.  Location of the encroachment (address); 
E.  Location of existing trees, structures, and utilities; 
F.  Location and description of tree protection measures; 
G.  Location of proposed structures or the location of the encroachment; 
H.  Date encroachment activity is to commence; 
I.  Date encroachment activity is to end; 
J.  How pedestrian traffic will be rerouted during the encroachment activity; 
K.  How vehicular traffic will be rerouted during the encroachment activity." 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 14) 
14.28.100 - Tree canopy cover. 
    Minimum Tree Canopy Cover Required. For new developments within each zoning district, a minimum amount of healthy tree canopy cover, measured in square feet of projection of the canopy onto the ground, shall be conserved and/or established within the net area of each parcel. The required amount of tree canopy cover shall be maintained throughout the life of the development except as exempted in Section 14.28.050. Tree canopy cover requirements are listed by zoning district in Table A of this section. Trees in poor or declining condition, as determined by the building official, shall not be credited toward the required tree canopy coverage. 
Table A 
Minimum Tree Canopy Coverage and Landscaped 
Area Required by Zoning District 
Zoning 
District Tree Canopy 
Coverage Landscaped 
Area NR1 50% 30% NR2 50% 30% NR3 60% 30% CR 50% 30% TCR 40% 20% NM 45% 20% CM 45% 20% TCM 30% 15% M-l 30% 15% M-2 30% 15%  
    Minimum Amount of Conserved Trees. For all new developments, a minimum of one-half of the tree canopy cover required shall originate from the conservation of existing trees, if there are sufficient existing trees in good condition on the site as determined by the building official. If there are no sufficient trees in good condition and the one-half requirement cannot be met, then the deficit shall be made up through tree planting. 
    Distribution. Tree canopy cover shall be distributed as evenly as practicable throughout the development. 
    Parking Areas. Within parking areas at least one canopy tree shall be planted or conserved within the interior and along the perimeter of the parking lot for each seven parking spaces. In no case shall a parking space be greater than one hundred sixty-five (165) feet from a tree. Trees planted or conserved to meet this requirement shall be counted toward the overall tree canopy cover requirement. 
    Buffers, Open Areas, and Recreation Areas. Where buffers, open areas, and recreation areas are required, the required canopy cover percent shall apply to the net area. 
    Size Composition. In no case shall the number of medium or large maturing canopy trees conserved and/or planted account for less than seventy (70) percent of the total canopy cover required. 
    Canopy Cover Calculations. The canopy of each conserved tree shall be calculated by measuring the diameter of the crown at its widest point and multiplying that by the diameter of the crown perpendicular to the first measurement. The resulting square foot area is the contribution of the tree to total tree canopy cover area required. In lieu of measuring actual tree canopy cover, each tree conserved may be assigned the canopy cover areas listed below: 
Large Trees One thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet; Medium Trees Nine hundred (900) square feet; Small Trees Four hundred (400) square feet; Very Small Trees One hundred fifty (150) square feet.  
    When calculating the number of trees required, any fraction below 0.5 shall be rounded down to the next lower whole number, and any fraction equal to or greater than 0.5 shall be rounded up to the next highest whole number. 
    For conserved trees, multiple, adjacent trees with overlapping crowns shall be credited with the amount of canopy cover they collectively project onto the ground. Trees with trunks growing directly on top of a property boundary line shall be credited with only that portion of the canopy projection that falls onto the permitted property, or one-half of the assigned canopy cover area as provided for in this section. No credit shall be given for trees whose trunks are growing solely on adjacent property that overhang the permitted property. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.110 - Community tree species list. 
    The city shall maintain a list of tree species approved for conservation and planting within the city as well as those not recommended. The list shall be known as the city's community tree species list, hereinafter referred to as the "tree species list." The tree species list includes the canopy cover category of each species, the mature size category of each species, notations on which species may be planted beneath utility lines, and other species characteristics. 
    The list is maintained by the tree preservation board and may change without notice to incorporate results of research and experience with individual species, and is available from the city building and zoning department. 
    Canopy Cover Category. Each species included in the tree species list shall be assigned a canopy cover category of "canopy" or "understory." Canopy trees shall also be known as overstory trees. 
    Mature Size Category. Each species included in the tree species list shall be assigned a mature size category of "large," "medium," "small," or "very small." The mature size limits of each category are as follows: 
Large Tree Average mature height of forty (40) feet or greater; Medium Tree Average mature height of twenty-five (25) to forty (40) feet; Small Tree Average mature height of fifteen (15) to twenty-five (25) feet.  
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.120 - Permeable surfaces. 
    Minimum Permeable Surface Area Required. For each tree conserved or planted a minimum amount of permeable surface area is required around the tree to provide for tree and root health, soil aeration, percolation of water, and exchange of gases. 
    Permeable surfaces include, but are not limited to, mulch, turf, crushed rock, and permeable paving materials, as well as areas covered by shrubs and herbaceous plants. 
    For conserved trees, the required permeable surface area shall coincide with the critical root zone. The building official may allow permeable pavement or materials in up to thirty (30) percent of the critical root zone. In no case shall less than seventy (70) percent of the critical root zone consist of soil covered with mulch. The area of soil covered with mulch shall be a circle that has the tree trunk as its center. 
    Where natural, undisturbed forest conditions and a natural leaf litter layer exist, no mulch shall be required. 
    For planted trees, the amount of permeable surface area required shall be based upon the mature tree size category as follows: 
Large Trees Six hundred forty (640) square feet; Medium Trees Three hundred sixty (360) square feet; Small Trees One hundred sixty (160) square feet; Very Small Trees Sixty (60) square feet.  
    For planted trees, a minimum of fifty (50) percent of the permeable surface area required shall consist of soil covered with mulch and shall be that area immediately surrounding the tree trunk. Exposed soil shall not be allowed but shall be covered with a three to four inch layer of organic mulch. 
    The same permeable surface area cannot be counted for more than one tree except as approved by the building official. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.130 - Landscaped area. 
    Minimum Landscaped Area Required. For each site, a minimum amount of landscaped area within the buildable area is required within each zoning district. Minimum landscaped areas are listed in percent of buildable area by zoning district in Table A of Section 14.28.090 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.140 - Tree protection. 
    Conserved Trees. All conserved trees shall be actively protected during the development process and passively protected throughout the life of the development. The entire tree, including the crown, trunk, and roots, and the critical root zone, shall be protected. 
    Minimum Tree Protection Measures. Active tree protection shall consist of, at a minimum, establishing a tree protection zone around each tree or grouping of trees by the installation of fencing at the outer edges of the critical root zone. 
    Tree protection fencing and tree protection area signs shall be installed after the issuance of a soil and tree conservation permit or right-of-way encroachment permit and prior to any land disturbance activity or building activity. Tree protection fencing shall be at least four feet high and shall be installed with either sturdy wooden or metal fence posts around the tree protection zone. Tree protection fencing shall remain in good condition throughout the development and construction processes, and shall only be removed after final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy has been issued. The critical root zone within the tree protection area shall be mulched with a minimum of three inches and not more than eight inches of organic mulch such as pine straw, wood chips, tree leaves, or compost. 
    The building official may require the installation of additional tree protection measures to insure survivability of conserved trees. 
    Prohibited Activities. Within the tree protection areas, the following activities shall be prohibited: 
A.  Vehicle traffic or parking; 
B.  Materials or equipment storage; 
C.  Soil disturbance; 
D.  Soil excavation; 
E.  Removal of topsoil; 
F.  Trenching; 
G.  Soil fill; 
H.  Change in soil pH; 
I.  Change in soil drainage; 
J.  Equipment washouts or disposal (including concrete); 
K.  Fires; 
L.  Chemical or trash disposal; 
M.  Other activities harmful to the trees as determined by the building official. 
    Planted Trees. All planted trees shall be actively protected during the development process and passively protected throughout the life of the development. The entire tree, including the crown, trunk, and roots, and the critical root zone, shall be protected. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.150 - Tree establishment. 
    Planting Required. The planting of canopy trees shall be required to achieve the tree canopy cover amounts listed in Table A of Section 14.28.100 of this chapter where existing, conserved tree canopy cover is not adequate or cannot be conserved. 
    Species Composition. Canopy trees planted shall be any combination of species listed in the tree species list, except that in no case shall any one genus (for example, "maple" or "oak") comprise more than thirty (30) percent of the trees planted on a site and in no case shall any one species (for example "red maple" or "white oak") comprise more than ten (10) percent of the number of trees planted on a site. Understory trees may also be planted but shall account for no more than ten (10) percent of the total canopy cover requirements. 
    Minimum Caliper. All trees planted and credited toward tree canopy cover requirements shall be at least two inches in caliper. 
    Tree Condition. All trees planted and credited toward tree canopy cover requirements shall be planted according to current arboricultural standards and shall be in good health and structural condition as determined by the building official. 
    Canopy Cover Area Assigned. Each tree planted shall be assigned the canopy cover areas listed below: 
Large Trees One thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet; Medium Trees Nine hundred (900) square feet; Small Trees Four hundred (400) square feet; Very Small Trees One hundred fifty (150) square feet.  
    For planted trees, multiple, adjacent trees with overlapping minimum permeable surface areas shall be credited with one-half of the assigned canopy cover area. 
    Growing Space. All trees planted shall be provided with adequate space to grow unobstructed to maturity, avoid sight obstructions, and maintain pedestrian, vehicular, and building clearances. Minimum growing space requirements for trees by mature size are listed in Table B of this section. The building official may waive the minimum space requirements if the planting design will not cause conflicts with infrastructure, enhances tree function, and provides the required tree canopy cover. 
Table B 
Minimum Growing Space Requirements 
by Mature Size 
Large Trees Distance to other large trees 40 feet Distance to street intersections 35 feet Distance to traffic signs 20 feet Distance to light poles 20 feet Distance to overhead power lines 20 feet Distance to driveways 15 feet Distance to mailboxes 15 feet Distance to fire hydrants, electrical transmission boxes, water meters, or other similar infrastructure 15 feet Distance to curb or sidewalk 4 feet Width of planting site 8 feet Medium Trees Distance to street intersections 35 feet Distance to other medium trees 30 feet Distance to traffic signs 20 feet Distance to light poles 20 feet Distance to overhead power lines 20 feet Distance to driveways 15 feet Distance to mailboxes 15 feet Distance to fire hydrants, electrical transmission boxes, water meters, or other such infrastructure 15 feet Distance to curb or sidewalk 4 feet Width of planting site 6 feet Small Trees Distance to street intersections 35 feet Distance to traffic signs 20 feet Distance to other small trees 15 feet Distance to light poles 15 feet Distance to driveways 15 feet Distance to mailboxes 15 feet Distance to fire hydrants, electrical transmission boxes, water meters, or other such infrastructure 15 feet Distance to overhead power lines 0 feet Distance to curb or sidewalk 2 feet Width of planting site 4 feet Very Small Trees Distance to street intersections 35 feet Distance to traffic signs 20 feet Distance to light poles 15 feet Distance to driveways 15 feet Distance to mailboxes 15 feet Distance to fire hydrants, electrical transmission boxes, water meters, or other such infrastructure 15 feet Distance to other very small trees 10 feet Distance to overhead power lines 0 feet Distance to curb or sidewalk 2 feet Width of planting site 3 feet  
    Tree Maintenance Required. Trees established as part of the canopy cover requirement shall be maintained according to the standards described in Section 14.28.190. 
    Seasonal Planting. Final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy may be issued prior to the establishment of trees planned to meet the tree canopy cover requirements, if the building official determines that the season is inappropriate for planting. In such cases the trees shall be planted by the last day of February following the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final plat approval. If they have not been planted by the last day of February following the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final plat approval, the soil and tree conservation permit holder shall be considered to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.160 - Public trees. 
    Authority. The city shall have the right to plant, maintain, prune, and remove trees, shrubs, and plants within the rights-of-way of all city streets, roads, and highways, in parks, around city facilities, and on other city grounds, as may be necessary or desirable to insure public safety, to preserve tree health, and to maintain and increase tree canopy cover. 
    Protection. All trees growing on city property shall be protected from damage to the crown, trunk, and roots. 
    It is unlawful for any person to engage in any activity on private property that directly or indirectly adversely affects the health, safety, or condition of a tree on city property. Furthermore, active tree protection measures, as described in this chapter, shall be undertaken by the person engaging in any such activity to protect each affected tree's roots, trunk, crown, and critical root zone, from damage. If a person damages, destroys, or fails to protect a city tree, the city may require the person responsible for the damage to pay a fine equal to the appraised value of the tree, the cost of repairing the damage, and/or the cost of restoring the site to its original condition or as near as possible to its original condition. 
    Appraised Tree Value. The value of a city tree shall be equal to the appraised value. 
    Pruning and Removal. The city may prune, remove or cause to be pruned or removed, any city tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its location or condition is or may be injurious to sewers, water lines, electric power lines, gas lines, or other public improvements, or is infested with any injurious fungus, insect, or other pest. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.170 - Private trees. 
    Pruning and Removal. It shall be the responsibility of private property tree owners to prune, remove or cause to be pruned or removed, any tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe condition or which by reason of its location or condition is or may be injurious to sewers, water lines, electric power lines, gas lines, or other public improvements, or is infested with any injurious disease, insect, or other pest. 
    Notification. The city shall notify the owner in writing delivered by certified or registered mail of the need to prune or remove any such tree within ten (10) working days of establishing the need. The tree owner shall have thirty (30) days after receipt of such notice to complete the required action. 
    Action by the City. If no action is taken by the tree owner, the city may prune, remove or cause to be pruned or removed, the tree or part thereof which is in an unsafe or injurious condition as stated above, and require reimbursement from the property owner for the reasonable cost of such pruning or removal. 
    Abatement as Nuisance. As an additional remedy, cumulative of the provisions of this section and of any other provisions of this chapter, upon the failure or refusal of any person or persons responsible therefore to maintain trees as hereinabove provided, after the notice provided for in Title 8, Health and Safety, Chapter 8.12 Nuisances Generally, Section 8.12.030 Abatement of Nuisances procedure of this code has been given, the city may treat such violation as a nuisance. In such event, the city clerk shall file the complaint with the police department as provided by Section 8.12.030(A), and the provisions of the chapter shall be fully and completely applicable. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.175 - Historic trees. 
    A classification of trees known as "historic trees" is established, along with a program to designate qualifying trees as historic trees. The tree preservation board shall administer the historic tree program. 
A.  Criteria for Designation. Historic trees shall be healthy trees that meet one or more of the following criteria: 
1.  Age greater than fifty (50) years as determined by planting records or the written opinion of the city arborist; 
2.  Large canopy trees greater than thirty-six (36) inches dbh, medium canopy trees greater than twenty-four (24) inches dbh, and small canopy trees greater than twelve (12) inches dbh; 
3.  Unique or rare species; 
4.  Association with a documented historic event, person, or community landmark; 
5.  Trees planted for Arbor Day celebrations and other community-wide public celebrations; 
6.  Trees planted in honor or memory of an individual or an event; or 
7.  Trees belonging to a significant cross-property or neighborhood-wide planting that affect the greater landscape beyond the property on which they grow. 
B.  Application. Only the owner may apply for historic tree status for a tree growing on their property. Applications shall be available from the city building and zoning office. The city arborist shall review each application, conduct an inspection of the candidate tree, and either approve or deny the application. 
C.  Historic Tree Official Record. The city arborist shall keep an official record of the location and description of all designated historic trees. Such record shall be maintained in the city building and zoning office and available for public inspection during regular business hours. In addition the location of a designated historic tree shall be entered into a historic tree GIS layer and maintained by the city engineering department. 
D.  Appeal of Denial of Historic Tree Designation. An appeal to approve an application for historic tree designation that has been denied may be made to the tree preservation board in writing. A copy of the original application for historic tree designation shall accompany the appeal. The tree preservation board shall act upon city arborist's decision at its next regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of such appeal. 
E.  Maintenance of Historic Trees. The pruning, maintenance, and protection of historic trees shall be done in accordance with standards promulgated by the tree preservation board and available for public inspection in the city building and zoning office during regular business hours. Failure to comply with such regulations shall be grounds for revocation of historic tree status by the city arborist. An appeal to reinstate a historic tree designation may be made by the tree owner to the tree preservation board in writing. The tree preservation board shall act upon the appeal for reinstatement at its next regularly scheduled meeting after receipt of such appeal. Historic tree owners are encouraged to hire professional certified arborists experienced in the care of mature and special trees to assist in maintaining historic trees. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.180 - Certification. 
    All persons engaged as contractors in tree related work for the city, including, but not limited to, tree management, planting, maintenance (pruning), evaluation, and inspection, shall either be, or be under the supervision of, an ISA Certified Arborist. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.190 - Standards. 
    All planting, protection, and maintenance activities performed on conserved or established trees to be included as part of the tree canopy cover requirements, and all maintenance activities performed on city trees, shall be done according to best management practices, the standards described below, and the administrative guidelines developed by the tree preservation board. 
    Nursery Stock. All nursery stock shall meet standards defined in the most current edition of American Standard for Nursery Stock published by the National Planting. All tree planting shall be done in accordance with standards defined in the most current edition of the "Tree and Shrub Transplanting Manual." 
    Pruning. All tree pruning shall be done in accordance with the most current edition of the American National Standards Institute A300 Standards for Tree Care Operations - Pruning. 
    Tree Topping. Tree topping is not allowed. Crown reduction pruning shall be used instead of topping to reduce the height of a tree when necessary. Topped trees shall not be counted toward tree canopy cover requirements. 
    Fertilization. All tree fertilization shall be performed in accordance with the most current edition of the American National Standards Institute's A300 (Part 2) Standards for Tree Care Operations -Fertilization. 
    Tree Support Systems: Cabling, Bracing, and Guying. All tree support system installation and maintenance shall be performed in accordance with the most current edition of the American National Standards Institute's A300 (Part 3) Standards for Tree Care Operations - Cabling and Bracing. 
    Lightning Protection Systems. All lightning protection system installation and maintenance shall be performed in accordance with the most current edition of the American National Standards Institute's A300 (Part 4) Standards for Tree Care Operations-Lightning Protection. 
    Safety. All tree care operations shall be performed in accordance with the most current edition of the American National Standards Institute's Z133.1 Standards for Tree Care Operations-Safe Work Practices. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.200 - Site inspections. 
    Authority. The building official has the authority to perform site inspections and enforce the provisions of this chapter. 
    Site Inspections. Prior to the issuance of a soil and tree conservation permit or right-of-way encroachment permit, a visit shall be made to the proposed site by the building official and the applicant for the purpose of discussing the provisions of this chapter. 
    After a soil and tree conservation permit or right-of-way encroachment permit is issued and tree protection measures have been installed, and prior to any land disturbance, another site inspection shall be made by the building official. 
    Another site inspection shall occur prior to the issuance of final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy. All provisions of this chapter shall be met before final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy can be issued. 
    Other site inspections may take place without notice at any time prior to or after the issuance of a certificate of occupancy or final plat approval to insure continuing compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Access. No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the building official who requests entry for the purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper, or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
    Release of Bond. Prior to the release of a tree establishment bond and within thirty-six (36) months of issuance of final plat approval or a certificate of occupancy, a site inspection will be made to determine ongoing compliance with the provisions of this chapter. If noncompliance exists, the bond shall be held until compliance occurs or for a maximum of forty-eight (48) months. If compliance does not occur within forty-eight (48) months from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy or final plat approval, the bond shall be forfeited to the city and deposited in the tree bank. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.210 - Tree bank. 
    When a documented hardship exists that results in a person's inability to achieve the required tree canopy cover, the building official may require a fee to be paid to the city for deposit in the city's tree bank in lieu of the conservation or establishment of trees. Funds in the tree bank shall be used for planting or maintaining trees on city property. The fee shall be calculated by first subtracting the number of square feet of tree canopy achievable from the number of square feet of tree canopy required, and then multiplying the result by one dollar ($1.00). For example, if ten thousand (10,000) square feet of tree canopy is required, and only eight thousand (8,000) is achievable, then the difference in the two, two thousand (2,000) feet, is multiplied by one dollar ($1.00), equaling two thousand dollars ($2,000.00). 
    Tree protection bonds and tree establishment bonds forfeited due to failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter shall also be deposited in the tree bank and used for planting or maintaining city trees. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.220 - Enforcement. 
    The building official shall enforce the provisions of this chapter. The tree preservation board shall assist the building official in the administration of this chapter. The building official shall have authority, upon violation of any provision of this chapter, to issue a stop work order on any soil and tree conservation permit, timber harvesting permit, right-of-way encroachment permit, or building permit for the site where such violation occurs. 
    If it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing or building activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with his approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person personally or by certified or registered mail. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the activity fails to comply in a timely manner with the terms of such notice, such person shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.230 - Penalties. 
    Failure to Obtain Permit. If any person commences any land disturbing activity or building activity requiring a site and tree conservation permit or a right-of-way encroachment permit without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be deemed to be in violation of the provisions of this chapter. 
    Violations. The owner of any property wherein a violation exists, and any builder, contractor, or agent who may have assisted in the commission of any such violation, may be chargeable with separate offenses for each such violation. 
    Stop Work Orders. For the first violation of any provision of this chapter, the building official or the city shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have forty-eight (48) hours to correct the violation. 
    If the violation is not corrected within forty-eight (48) hours, the building official or the city shall issue a stop work order requiring that land disturbing or building activities cease until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to a conserved or planted tree the building official or the city shall issue an immediate stop work order in lieu of a warning. For second and subsequent violations, the building official or the city shall issue an immediate stop work order. 
    All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
    Monetary Penalties. Any person who violates any provision of this chapter, any soil and tree conservation permit or right-of-way encroachment permit condition, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final order which the building official issues as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a penalty of up to one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) per day for each violation of the provisions of this chapter. Each day that such failure or refusal continues shall constitute a separate violation. 
    Any person violating any of the provisions of this chapter other than as hereinabove provided shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. Each day during which such violation occurs or continues shall constitute and be punishable as a separate offense. 
    No certificate of occupancy or final plat approval shall be issued while a stop work order is in effect or until an assessed fine has been paid. 
    Responsibility. The building official is responsible for determining whether a violation has occurred. Violations may include, but are not limited to: deviation from the approved plan; failure to properly install tree protection structures; failure to maintain tree protection structures in effective condition; evidence of harmful activities occurring within the tree protection zone; improper planting; failure to conserve or establish the required tree canopy cover; failure to deliver a tree protection or tree establishment bond; unauthorized delay in tree planting; damage to a conserved or established tree's crown, trunk, roots, or critical root zone; and damage to a city tree's crown, trunk, roots, or critical root zone. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.240 - Appeals. 
    Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by a decision of the building official or the tree preservation board pertaining to the application of the provisions of this chapter may, within thirty (30) days of such decision, appeal the same to the board of zoning appeals as provided in Section 16.12.180 of this code. Any person aggrieved or adversely affected by the decision of the board of zoning appeals may, within thirty (30) days of such decision, appeal the same to the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia, as provided in Section 16.12.180 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.250 - Street tree plantings. 
A.  Street trees are required and shall be planted in the ground a maximum of fifty (50) feet on center. 
B.  All newly planted trees shall be a minimum of three inches in caliper measured six inches above ground, shall be a minimum of sixteen (16) feet in height, shall have a minimum mature height of forty (40) feet, and shall be limbed up to a minimum height of ten (10) feet. Said trees shall be in proportion in height to the first floor of building. 
C.  Trees in plazas or paved public pedestrian areas shall have a minimum planting area of forty-eight (48) square feet and shall have a three-inch raised curb provided along the perimeter of the planting area. All plantings, planting replacement, and planting removal shall be approved by the city arborist and the planning director. 
D.  The area between required plantings shall either be planted with sod or shall be paved as approved by the city arborist and the planning director. 
E.  Required tree plantings may be permitted to be planted in the adjacent front yard when extreme conditions prevent the planting of street trees within the landscape zone and only as approved by the city arborist and the planning director. 
F.  Street tree species shall not be mono-specied or mono-cultured when greater than six trees are planted. 
G.  Street lights or pedestrian lights in the landscape zone shall be spaced equidistant between all required street trees. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.28.260 - Parking lot landscaping. 
A.  There shall be one landscape island, a minimum of twenty-five (25) square feet, for every seven parking spaces and at the terminus of each parking row. All landscape islands shall be designed with at least sixty (60) percent coverage in shrubs and no more than forty (40) percent coverage in groundcover. The landscape island shall be planted with a minimum of one overstory tree with a minimum of four-inch diameter at breast height at the time of planting. No plant materials, with the exception of trees, shall exceed three feet in height in a landscape island. Turf grass, however, shall not be permitted in a landscape island. All landscape islands and landscape strips shall be curbed to prevent vehicular encroachment. Landscape islands and strips shall be designed to prevent compaction. This may be accomplished by planting a dense shrub cover or by elevating the planting area a minimum of one foot above the curb. 
B.  Vehicles shall be separated from sidewalks, driveways and streets in public rights-of-way by wheel bumpers and by a strip of land at least ten feet wide reserved as public space and planted in grass containing at least one understory or overstory tree of at least four-inch diameter at breast height and no more than fifty (50) feet on center. 
C.  Head-to-head parking shall provide an eight-foot-wide grass strip separating the wheel bumpers. The grass strip may be counted as part of the landscaped areas and shall have one overstory tree of a least four-inch diameter at breast height for every fifty (50) feet, and ten shrubs, per fifty (50) linear feet, and a minimum of seventy (70) percent living groundcover, sod, and/or annual or perennial color in the landscape strip surface area. 
D.  There shall be a pedestrian walkway that is a minimum of five feet in width along the front of all buildings for the purpose of allowing pedestrians to walk from the parking facility to the building in safety. 
E.  All parking decks and parking structures shall have a landscape strip a minimum width of eight feet immediately contiguous to the parking facility for the whole of the exterior perimeter of the parking facility containing at least one understory or overstory tree every fifty (50) feet, as appropriate. 
F.  Landscape materials in parking lot landscape islands shall be selected to be compatible with the bioretention function of the landscaped areas, and adequate drainage shall be provided for the chosen species. Recommended plant species are shown in the table below. Additional appropriate species are listed in the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual, Volume 2, Appendix F, Table F-5 on page F-23, a copy of which is maintained in the city's planning and zoning department office at 2116 Stalling Street in Covington. 
G.  Approved Plant Species for Bioretention Areas in Parking Lots. 
1.  Trees: Red Maple, River Birch, Eastern Red Cedar, Golden Rain Tree, Black Gum, London Plane, Sycamore, Pin Oak, Willow Oak, Black Willow. 
2.  Shrubs: Bottlebrush Buckeye, Red Chokeberry, Fothergill, Witch Hazel, Common St. Johns Wort, Inkberry, Winterberry, Creeping Juniper, Spicebush, Bayberry. 
3.  Herbaceous Plants: Broom sedge, Joe Pye Weed, Day Lily, Yellow Iris, Cardinal Flower, Switchgrass, Fountaingrass, Greenhead Coneflower, Woolgrass, Ironweed. 
H.  Planting Specifications. The city wants to promote tree-lined streets, therefore a minimum of ten-foot-wide landscape strip shall be provided along all public rights-of-way, which shall contain landscaping and plantings within said strip as follows: 
1.  One overstory tree at intervals of no more than fifty (50) linear feet on center of landscape strip length shall be provided. Each tree shall be a minimum of four-inch diameter at breast height at the time of planting and shall be a species identified on the Covington Tree Species List, a copy of which is maintained for public inspection at the planning and zoning office at 2116 Stallings Street in Covington. 
2.  Shrubs shall be provided to screen paved areas and parking lots from the public right-of-way. Shrubs shall be no less than two feet high at the time of planting, two rows deep and shall provide a screen within three years of planting. Each shrub shall be a species native or suitable to this region. Alternate screening methods such as fencing may be approved by the city planning director. 
3.  Trees and shrubs required herein may be planted and spaced singly or in groups as authorized by the city planning director as long as the design exceeds the standards specified in this section. 
4.  The remaining ground area shall be sodded with grass, and/or planted with groundcover species and/or provide with other landscape material, or any combination thereof approved by the city planning director. 
I.  A minimum five-foot-wide landscape strip shall be provided along all property lines which do not adjoin a public right-of-way. One overstory tree at intervals of no more than fifty (50) linear feet on center of landscape strip length shall be provided. Each tree shall be at a minimum of four-inch diameter at breast height at the time of planting and shall be a species identified on the Covington Tree Species List, a copy of which is maintained for public inspection at the planning and zoning office at 2116 Stallings Street in Covington. 
J.  Encroachment into Landscape Strips. Required landscape strips shall not be encroached upon by parking spaces, driveway surfaces or stormwater detention facilities. Signage and driveway crossings may traverse such strips as near to a perpendicular alignment as practicable. 
K.  Continuing Maintenance. The owner, occupant, tenant, and respective agent of each, if any, shall be jointly and severally responsible for the perpetual maintenance and protection of buffers and landscape plantings required by this section. The planning department is hereby authorized to order diseased, infested, dying, dead or damaged landscaping required by this section to be replaced. Buffers that, over a period of time, lose their screening ability shall be replanted to meet the requirements of this section. Replacement trees and landscaping shall be in accordance with the applicable provisions of this section. 
L.  Violations and Penalties. Any person convicted of violating provisions of this section may be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 9-15-2014(4), § 1) 
14.28.270 - Hazardous trees. 
    It shall be the duty of owners of property within the corporate limits of the city to maintain trees growing thereon so as to prevent such trees from becoming a danger to existing city streets, sidewalks or utility right-of-way easements and appurtenances thereto. In the event that the city arborist, city marshal or building inspector, upon inspection as authorized in Section 14.28.200 of this chapter, determines that a tree constitutes a danger to an existing city street, sidewalk or utility right-of-way easement, due to overgrowth or root encroachment or risk of falling limbs or trunk resulting from decline or death of the tree, the building official shall notify the appropriate property owner of the condition constituting such danger, the action required to eliminate the danger and the time, not to exceed fifteen (15) days, within which the condition must be eliminated. Such notice shall be given in writing by mail, addressed to the last known address of the record owner of the property. The notice shall be deemed effective two days after mailing. If the condition constituting such danger is not eliminated in accordance with the terms of the notice, the condition shall be deemed a nuisance and prosecuted as provided in Chapter 8.12 of this Code. 
(Ord. dated 10/16/17(1), § 1; Ord. dated 9/15/08 § 1) 
Chapter 14.32 - OVERLAY DISTRICTS 

14.32.010 - Conservation village design overlay district. 
A.  General Statement. The provisions of this section and the regulations set forth in the next following section shall govern all development in the CVD overlay district. This district will be an overlay zone on the official zoning map. 
B.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose and intent of the CVD district (CVDD) is to allow, coordinate and regulate large scale or comprehensive group development which may not follow standard design practices otherwise allowed by the city's zoning regulations. CVDD developments will not normally contemplate the normal layout of lots, blocks and streets or single uses. 
C.  Adherence to Procedures and Regulations Required. Conservation village design districts will sometimes involve mixed uses, varying density, the grouping of housing and/or open areas, and densities and setbacks that are not traditional in developments of the type being sought by the initial developer in a CVDD. 
D.  Conditions for Rezoning. Property will be considered for rezoning to the CVDD only in accordance with the following conditions, procedures and regulations: 
1.  Ownership-Sale or Transfer. All of the land to be contained within a proposed CVDD must be owned at the time of the application by the same individual, corporation or other legal entity. Further, no interest in the said land may be sold or otherwise transferred until the original applicant has had an acknowledgment in the form approved by the city recorded in the Newton County deed records that the overall tract of land described therein is a portion of a CVDD which will result in substantial, perpetual restrictions on the future use of the said land, including: 
a.  Designating portions thereof as open areas which will prohibit, in perpetuity, the areas so designated for any use other than as open areas; and 
b.  Prohibiting the redevelopment of any areas of the CVDD at a density greater than that assigned to the area of the CVDD at the time of final approval of the development plan for that area; however, this shall not prohibit the same owner of more than one area of a CVDD from reassigning density rights between two or more areas of the CVDD as long as such reassignment is approved by the planning commission, does not increase the overall density of the CVDD and is otherwise consistent with the provisions of this section. 
2.  Conditions for Preliminary Approval. In considering the preliminary approval for the rezoning of property to the CVDD use district, the planning commission and the mayor and council shall consider the following, and give preliminary approval only upon satisfaction of the conditions: 
a.  The proposal utilizes design and development standards which would not be permitted in any other zoning district or which would combine various types of uses of housing into a single district; 
b.  The proposal would not substantially alter or adversely affect nearby property values; 
c.  The proposal would not be incompatible with existing land use within the area; 
d.  The proposal would not be inconsistent with the goals and policies of the city's comprehensive land use plan or with the purposes of this chapter; 
e.  The site plan for the proposal provides for adequate ingress and egress for vehicular traffic and would not create safety, health or unreasonable traffic problems in the area; 
f.  The proposal makes adequate provisions for community facilities such as water, sewer, recreation and open areas. The recreation and open areas shall consist of not less than fifty (50) percent of the proposed CVDD land area, of which not less than one-half must be outside of all flood hazard areas as defined in Chapter 15.48 of this code. 
g.  The proposal is justified based on facts presented to indicate the need for such development as called for in the city's comprehensive zoning plan; 
h.  The proposal does not have commercial areas in excess of three percent of the CVDD's land area; and 
i.  Off-street parking and loading space are provided in accordance with Chapter 16.44. 
3.  Minimum Size. Due to the administrative expense and procedures involved in approving and monitoring CVDD developments to ensure compliance with CVDD special conditions, such as density and limits on nonresidential uses, the minimum area that will qualify for CVDD zoning is fifty (50) acres; provided, however, that smaller tracts of land contiguous to an existing CVDD may be rezoned to CVDD if same are an expansion of the existing adjacent CVDD. 
4.  Permitted Uses. The CVD district is planned to be primarily a residential district with small percentages of the total land area contained within the district being available for use for multifamily, residential/professional, community commercial and zero lot line development. In order to assure that the limited use and overall density requirements for a CVDD are not violated, the following express limitations must be satisfied in each phase of the CVDD approval and development: 
a.  The maximum area of a CVDD to be developed or allotted for development as neighborhood mixed use (NM district, Chapter 16.16 of this code) and corridor mixed use (CM district, Chapter 16.16) cannot exceed three percent of the total CVDD area. All areas of a CVDD designated for neighborhood mixed use or corridor mixed use will be subject to the same use restrictions contained in the said code sections, respectively; provided further that no such areas of the CVDD may be contiguous to any property outside of the CVDD that is in the NR1, NR2 and NR3 districts, as shown on the city's official. 
b.  The maximum area of a CVDD to be developed or allotted for development as multifamily areas within the CVDD shall be subject to the same conditions and restrictions as developments within the city's CR district; provided, however, that the maximum density per acre within the multifamily portion of the CVDD may be increased as provided in subsection (D)(5) of this section. 
c.  Any use permitted in the NR1 use district under Chapter 16.16 of this code, subject to the same conditions as the aforesaid section, except lot size, building size and setbacks shall be permitted anywhere in the CVDD except in those areas set aside as open areas. 
d.  Open areas shall be dispersed throughout the CVDD development so as to be readily available to various developments within the CVDD. Building improvements designed for use in conjunction with the open areas in excess of one percent of the total area of the open areas and parking lots and other impervious coverings on open areas in excess of three percent of the total open space area shall not be considered open areas for the purpose of determining density requirements for the overall CVDD project. 
e.  Except as hereinafter provided, height limitations, minimum lot areas, setbacks (front, side and rear yard) and minimum building size shall be established by the planning commission and approved by the mayor and council in conjunction with the final approval for each area of development within the CVDD. Unless there is a dedicated open area at least fifty (50) feet in width as measured at right angles to the outer boundary of the CVDD that separates property outside of the CVDD from improvements inside the CVDD, the height, lot area, building size, and setbacks adjacent to the outer boundary of the CVDD shall conform to those of the zoning district adjacent to the respective boundaries of the CVDD. The foregoing provisions may be waived as to those areas of the exterior boundary of the CVDD for which the adjoining property owner signs a written waiver in recording form approved by the city building official. 
5.  Density. Unless increased by approval of the planning commission and the mayor and council as part of the general approval of special criteria, the gross density for the CVDD shall be as provided for in Chapter 16.16 of this code. "Net acreage" means the gross area within the CVDD exterior boundaries inclusive of streets, roads and other rights-of-way, but excluding the maximum area planned for either residential/professional or community commercial development and those portions of the areas designated as open areas that exceed the permitted limitations on building area and impervious surface areas (such as parking lots) contained in subsection (D)(4)(d) of this section. 
6.  Application of Other Code Provisions. Unless waived by the mayor and council as a part of its general approval of special criteria for the CVDD, each development within the CVDD shall comply with all other ordinances and regulations contained within this code, including, but not limited to, off-street parking requirements, utilities specifications, floodplain and soil erosion regulations, issuance of building permits and inspections, the Georgia State Energy Code, all Standard Building Codes, National Electrical Code, Fire Codes, fire walls, fire petitions, planning commission review for subdivisions and any other code provisions or regulation that are normally applicable to developing property within the city. 
7.  Right-of-Way Requirements. Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, upon approval of the planning commission, streets within CVDD may remain private as long as all city specifications for right-of-way widths, grading and paving are fulfilled. 
8.  Land Use. Since the primary intended use of land area within a CVDD is single-family residential, any area of a CVDD may be platted and subdivided in accordance with the city's subdivision regulations as though the same were in the NR1 use district unless such subdivision would result in exceeding the overall density requirements of the CVDD. 
E.  Approval Process. The process to secure the zoning and approval for development of property as a CVDD will involve the following three separate steps: 
1.  The preliminary approval, which may result in property being rezoned to the CVDD use district; 
2.  The general approval of special criteria, whereby the exact metes and bounds description of the CVDD is established and any special criteria (including mixed uses and special exceptions such as densities not otherwise approved) are established; 
3.  The final approval, which involves: 
a.  The planning commission's approval of a subdivision plat for recordation in accordance with the provisions of Sections 16.12.140 and 16.12.250 of this code, except as such provisions may be modified by the provisions of this section and the general approval of special criteria by the mayor and council; and 
b.  Approval of such plat by the mayor and council. 
F.  Specific Requirements for CVDD Approval. 
1.  Preliminary Approval. The preliminary approval process shall be commenced by the applicant's submission of an application to the planning commission, requesting that the property described be considered for a CVDD development. The planning commission shall conduct a hearing to review the application, the site plan, and tentative draft of regulations concerning the applicant's proposed CVDD. If the planning commission determines that the application is consistent with the provisions of the regulations contained in this section, it shall recommend to the mayor and council that the property be considered for rezoning to the CVDD classification. In making such recommendation, the planning commission shall point out any areas of special concern regarding the application and shall enumerate same for further consideration by the applicant and by the mayor and council at a subsequent public hearing. The applicant may also request that the planning commission consider the general approval of special criteria in conjunction with its consideration of the preliminary approval. After the planning commission takes its action on the preliminary approval (and the general approval of special criteria, if applicable), the secretary to the planning commission shall coordinate with the city clerk in scheduling the application (both preliminary approval and general approval of special criteria) for a public hearing before the mayor and council. Since final action by the mayor and council on the preliminary approval shall constitute a rezoning of the property from the existing zoning district to the CVDD, the city clerk shall cause a legal notice to be placed in the legal organ for Newton County, Georgia, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the scheduled public hearing. The notice shall give the time, place and purpose of the public hearing. After conducting the public hearing, the mayor and council shall either: (i) reject the application, stating the reasons therefor, (ii) remand the application to the planning commission for further consideration with recommendations thereon in light of any comments developed at the public hearing, or (iii) grant preliminary approval. A grant of preliminary approval by the mayor and council shall have the legal effect of changing the property in question from the then existing zoning district to the CVD district. Notwithstanding the fact that consideration of preliminary approval by the mayor and council shall have included consideration of the applicant's request for a general approval of special criteria and the applicant's proposed regulations concerning the CVDD development, the grant of preliminary approval shall not constitute approval either in whole or in part of such regulations and/or special criteria. 
2.  General Approval of Special Criteria. Either in conjunction with the applicant's preliminary approval application, as specified in the immediately preceding subsection, or after the mayor and council have granted preliminary approval, the applicant shall apply to the planning commission for general approval of special criteria. The application shall be in the form specified by the planning commission and shall address, in detail, the following: 
a.  The exact amount of acreage contained in the applicant's CVDD areas as shown on a plat of survey thereof by a Georgia licensed surveyor or engineer; 
b.  The minimum land of area to be dedicated as open area and the maximum land area to be developed for multifamily residential use; 
c.  The maximum land area to be developed for residential/professional and/or community commercial uses; 
d.  Proposed restrictive covenants; and 
e.  Specifications for the general areas within CVDD to be developed for the respective proposed uses and a statement of the maximum number of residences to be constructed within the CVDD if greater than that allowed under subsection (D)(5) of this section; 
f.  After receipt of the application for general approval of special criteria, the planning commission shall conduct a hearing thereon and either specify the reasons for refusing to recommend approval of any or all of the special criteria requested (in which event the applicant shall be entitled to gather further information or change the special criteria requested), or the planning commission shall recommend approval thereof to the mayor and council. Upon recommendation of the special criteria by the planning commission, the secretary to the planning commission shall coordinate with the city clerk to schedule a public hearing thereon before the mayor and council after publication of notice of the type required for preliminary approval as specified in subsection (F)(1) of this section. 
g.  After the public hearing on the application for general approval of special criteria, the mayor and council shall either approve or reject the application either in whole or in part and specify the reasons therefor. Only those special criteria expressly approved by the mayor and council as aforesaid may be incorporated by the applicant into the final development plans for the CVDD or any portion thereof. The mayor and council may grant tentative general approval of special criteria (for example, in approving tentative drafts of restrictive covenants for various developments within the CVDD) and reserve final approval on specific special criteria items as a part of the final approval process. 
3.  Final Approval. Final approval shall be appropriate only after the developer has submitted detailed plans and specifications for plat approval, both preliminary and final, in accordance with the city's subdivision regulations contained in Chapter 14.08 of this title. The approval process shall be in accordance with the provisions of Chapter 14.08 of this title, but modified to the extent necessary to reflect that: 
a.  The density, lot size and setback requirements that apply to each phase of the development may be in accordance with the provisions of this section, including any special criteria contained in the general approval of special criteria; 
b.  If the development contemplated by this application has a proposed density greater than the maximum overall density per acre within the CVDD, the applicant shall have designated and dedicated sufficient open area to ensure that the overall approved density within the CVDD will not be exceeded if developed to its full potential. As used herein the term "dedicated" as it relates to open areas, shall mean the official designation in the deed records of Newton County, Georgia, of a land area by plat dedication and/or written declaration, with a metes and bounds description of an area as "open area" in a conservation village design district under the city's CVDD regulations, in form and substance satisfactory to the city attorney; 
c.  Together with the final plat the developer shall submit the final restrictive covenants and/or easements for the area encompassed by the plat under consideration for approval; 
d.  After the planning commission has approved the plat and the developer's restrictive covenants, the planning commission shall forward same to the mayor and council, and approval thereof by the mayor and council shall constitute final approval of the areas encompassed by the plat(s) and the restrictive covenants; and 
e.  The city's building official shall maintain such information as necessary to ensure that each CVDD complies with the provisions of this section. Such information shall include a detailed listing of total areas within the CVDD, the maximum amount of multifamily residential development, the maximum amount of residential/professional or community commercial development, the maximum number of residential units permitted within CVDD, the maximum number of residential units per acre to be constructed in areas dedicated from time to time as open area and a running total of final approvals given and areas thereby committed to specified densities and uses. 
G.  Modifications. After securing final approval by the mayor and council for a development within a CVDD, all development on that portion must be done according to the plans approved, and no adjustments or alterations to said plans shall be made without prior approval of each body whose approval was required to secure such final approval. 
1.  In all areas that have received final approval for the development of a portion of the CVDD for neighborhood mixed use or corridor mixed use of this commercial use, all signs shall be in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 16.48 of this code applicable to the city's NM and CM districts. 
2.  In all other areas of the CVDD not covered by subsection (G)(1) of this section, all signs shall be in conformity with the provisions of Chapter 16.48 of this code applicable to the city's NR1 and NR2 single-family residential use districts. 
H.  Conservation village design subdivision conditions for preliminary approval. The applicant shall provide a map of the primary conservation area site, including basic topography, location of wetlands, hundred-year floodplains, slopes exceeding twenty-five (25) percent and soils subject to slumping. 
I.  Density Incentives. 
1.  Maintenance Endowment. To endow maintenance fund the city may allow a density bonus to generate additional income to the applicant for the express and sole purpose of endowing a permanent fund to offset continuing open space maintenance costs. Endowment funds should be twenty (20) times the annual amount estimated to be required to maintain the open space. On the assumption that the sale of an additional lot, over and above the maximum number that would ordinarily be permitted on the site, would be without allocable development costs and would represent true profit, seventy-five (75) percent of the net selling price of such lot shall be donated to the open space endowment fund for maintenance of the preserved lands within the subdivision. Such maintenance estimates shall be prepared by an agency or organization with experience in open space management acceptable to the planning commission. The fund shall be transferred by the developer to a designated entity, such as a homeowner's association, or a trustee approved by the planning commission. 
2.  Public Access. 
a.  Ten (10) percent of the total land shall be dedicated for public use. 
b.  The density bonus for open space that would be in addition to the ten (10) percent public land dedication shall be computed on the basis of a maximum of one dwelling unit for each five acres of open space dedicated for public use. The decision as to whether to accept an applicant's offer to dedicate open space for public use shall be within the discretion of the planning commission, which shall be guided by the recommendations contained in the city's open space recreation and environmental resources plan, particularly as said plan relates to trail networks and/or recreational facilities. 
3.  Affordable Housing. 
a.  A density increase may be permitted where the conservation subdivision proposal provides on-site or off-site housing opportunities for low or moderate income families. 
b.  The amount of the density increase shall be based on the following standard: For each affordable housing unit provided under this section, one additional building lot or dwelling unit shall be permitted, up to a maximum fifteen (15) percent increase in dwelling units. Affordable housing is herein defined as units to be sold or rented to families earning seventy (70) to one hundred twenty (120) percent of the county median income, adjusted for family size as determined by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development. 
J.  Minimum Percentage of Open Space. The minimum percentage of land that shall be designated as permanent open space, not to be further subdivided and protected through a conservation easement held by the city or by a recognized land trust or conservancy, shall be as specified below. 
1.  A minimum of fifty (50) percent of the total tract area, after deducting the following kinds of land that is undesirable for building purposes: 
a.  Wetlands, i.e., land that is generally inundated (land under ponds, lakes, creeks, etc.); 
b.  All of the floodway and floodway fringe within the hundred-year floodplain, as shown on official FEMA maps; 
c.  Land with slopes exceeding twenty-five (25) percent or with soil subject to slumping; 
d.  Lands required for street rights-of-way, but not more than ten (10) percent of the net tract area; 
e.  Land under permanent easement prohibiting future development (including easements for drainage, access and utilities); 
f.  The above areas shall generally be designated as undivided open areas in order to facilitate easement monitoring and enforcement and to promote appropriate management by a single entity according to approved management standards. 
2.  At least twenty-five (25) percent of the minimum required open space shall be suitable for active recreation purposes, but no more than fifty (50) percent shall be utilized for that purpose, in order to preserve a reasonable proportion of natural areas on the site. The purpose for which open space areas are proposed shall be documented by the applicant. 
3.  The required open space may be used, without restrictions, for underground drainage fields for individual or community septic systems and for spray fields for spray irrigation purposes in a land application wastewater reclamation system. These systems shall be limited to no more than ten (10) percent of the required minimum open space. 
4.  Stormwater management ponds or basins may be included as part of the minimum required open space, as well as land within the right-of-way for underground pipe lines. However, land within the right-of-way of high-tension power lines shall not be included as comprising part of the minimum required open space. 
K.  Location of Open Space. The location of open space conserved through compact residential development shall be consistent with the policies contained in the open space, recreation and environmental resources element of the city's comprehensive plan, the recommendations contained in this section and the evaluation criteria hereinafter set forth. All undivided open space and any lot capable of further subdivision shall be restricted from further subdivision through a permanent conservation easement, in a form acceptable to the city and duly recorded in the Newton County deed records. 
L.  Classifications of Open Space. Open space shall be comprised of primary and secondary conservation areas. Both classes shall be protected by a permanent conservation easement prohibiting further development. 
1.  Primary Conservation Area. This class consists of wetlands that are generally inundated (under ponds, lakes, creeks, etc.), lands within the hundred-year floodplain, slopes exceeding twenty-five (25) percent, and soils subject to slumping. These sensitive lands shall be deducted from the total parcel acreage to produce the adjusted tract acreage on which density shall be based. 
2.  Secondary Conservation Area. In addition to the primary conservation areas, at least fifty (50) percent of the remaining land shall be designated as permanently protected. Full density credit shall be allowed for land in this category that would otherwise be buildable under local regulations, so that its development potential is not reduced by this designation. Greater latitude exists in the designation of secondary conservation areas, except that they shall include a one hundred (100) foot green-way buffer along all water bodies and watercourses, and a fifty (50) foot green-way buffer alongside wetlands soils classified as "very poorly drained" in the medium intensity county soil survey. The location of secondary conservation areas shall be guided by the maps and policies contained in the open space, recreation, and environmental resources element of the city's comprehensive plan, and shall typically include all or part of the following kinds of resources: 
a.  Mature woodlands; 
b.  Areas with highly permeable (excessively drained) soil; 
c.  Significant wildlife habitat areas; 
d.  Scenic views into the property from existing public roads; and 
e.  Secondary conservation areas therefore typically consist of upland forest, meadows, pastures, and farm fields, as a part of the ecologically connected matrix of natural areas significant for wildlife habitat and water quality protection. Although the resource lands listed as potential secondary conservation areas may comprise more than half of the remaining land on a development parcel (after primary conservation areas have been deducted), no applicant shall be required to designate more than fifty (50) percent of that remaining land as a secondary conservation area. 
3.  General Location Standards. Subdivisions and planned residential developments shall be designed around both the primary and secondary conservation areas, which together constitute the total required open space. The design process should, therefore, commence with the delineation of all potential open space, after which potential house sites are located. Both primary and secondary conservation areas shall be placed in undivided preserves, which may adjoin housing areas that have been designed more compactly to create larger areas that may be enjoyed equally by all residents of the development. 
4.  Undivided open space shall be directly accessible to the largest practicable number of lots within a conservation subdivision. 
    The majority of house lots should abut undivided open space in order to provide direct views and access. Safe and convenient pedestrian access to the open space from all lots not adjoining the open space shall be provided, except such areas that are specifically designed as village greens, ball fields, upland buffers to wetlands, water bodies, watercourses or trail links. 
5.  Interconnected Open Space Network. The protected open spaces in each new subdivision will eventually adjoin each other, ultimately forming an interconnected network of primary and secondary conservation areas. 
M.  Evaluation Criteria. In evaluating the layout of lots and open space, the following criteria will be considered by the planning commission as indicating design appropriate to the site's natural, historic, and cultural features, and meeting the purposes of this section. Diversity and originality in lot layout shall be encouraged to achieve the best possible relationship between development and conservation areas. Accordingly, the planning commission shall evaluate proposals to determine whether the proposed conceptual preliminary plan: 
1.  Protects and preserves all floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes from clearing, grading, filling or construction (except as may be approved by the city for essential infrastructure or recreation amenities); 
2.  Preserves and maintains mature woodlands, existing fields, pastures, meadows, and orchards, and creates sufficient buffer areas to minimize conflicts between residential and agricultural uses. Locating house lots and driveways within wooded areas is generally recommended except where such location: 
a.  Involves significant wildlife habitat or mature woodlands that raise an equal or greater preservation concern, as described in subsections (M)(5) and (M)(8) of this section, 
b.  Involves predominantly agricultural areas where remnant tree groups provide the only natural areas for wildlife habitat; 
3.  If development must be located on open fields or pastures because of greater constraints in all other parts of the site, the following must apply: 
a.  Dwellings should be sited on the least desirable agricultural soils or in locations at the far edge of a field, as seen from existing public roads, and 
b.  The development should be visually buffered from existing public roads, such as by a planting screen consisting of a variety of indigenous native trees, shrubs and wildflowers; 
4.  Maintains or creates an upland buffer of natural native species vegetation of at least one hundred (100) feet in depth adjacent to wetlands and surface waters, including creeks, streams, springs, lakes and ponds; 
5.  Designs around existing hedgerow and tree lines between fields or meadows, and minimizes impacts on large woodlands in poor condition with limited management potential which can provide suitable locations for residential developments. When any woodland is developed great care shall be taken to design all disturbed areas (for buildings, roads, yards, etc.) in locations where there are no large trees or obvious wildlife areas, to the fullest extent that is practicable; 
6.  Leaves scenic views and vistas open for uninterrupted viewing, particularly as seen from public thoroughfare, utilizing the following criteria: 
a.  In open agrarian landscapes, a deep "no-build, no-plant" buffer is recommended along any public thoroughfare where those views or vistas are prominent or locally significant, 
b.  The concept of "foreground meadows," with homes facing the public thoroughfare across a broad grassy expanse is strongly preferred to mere buffer strips, with or without berms or vegetative screening, and 
c.  In wooded areas where the sense of enclosure is a feature that should be maintained, a deep "no-built, no-cut" buffer should be respected, to preserve existing vegetation; 
7.  Avoids siting new construction on prominent hilltops or ridges by taking advantage of lower topography feature; 
8.  Protects wildlife habitat areas of species listed as endangered, threatened, or of special concern; 
9.  Designs around and preserves sites of historic, archaeological, or cultural value, and their environment, insofar as needed to safeguard the character of the feature, including stone walls, spring houses, barns, foundations, cellar holes, earthworks and burial grounds; 
10.  Protects rural roadside character and improves public safety and vehicular carrying capacity by avoiding development fronting directly onto existing public streets and establishes buffer zones along the scenic corridors or rural roads with historic buildings, stone walls, hedgerows or other significant features; 
11.  Landscapes common areas (in compliance with the city's tree ordinance), such as cul-de-sac islands and both sides of new streets, with native species shade trees and flowering shrubs with high wildlife conservation value; 
12.  Provides active recreational areas in suitable locations that offer convenient access by residents and adequate screening from nearby house lots; 
13.  Includes a pedestrian circulation system designed to assure that pedestrians can walk safely and easily on the site, between properties and activities or special features within the neighborhood open space system. All roadside footpaths should connect with off-road trails, which in turn should link with potential open space on adjoining undeveloped parcels; 
14.  Provides open space that is reasonably contiguous utilizing the following criteria: 
a.  Fragmentation of open space should be minimized so that these resource areas are not divided into numerous small parcels located in various parts of the development, 
b.  Conservation land shall be designed as a single block with logical, straightforward boundaries. Long thin strips of conservation land shall be avoided, unless the conservation feature is linear or unless such configuration is necessary to connect with other streams and trails, 
c.  Open spaces shall generally abut existing or potential open space land on adjacent parcels. Such subdivision open space shall be designed as part of larger contiguous and integrated green-way systems, as set forth in the open space, recreation, and environmental resources element of the city's comprehensive plan. 
N.  Conservation Village Design Site Planning Procedures. The following sequence of procedural steps prescribed in this chapter shall be followed in the order listed and may be combined only at the discretion of the planning commission: 
1.  Pre-Application Discussion. A pre-application discussion is strongly encouraged between the applicant, the site designer and the planning commission. The purpose of this meeting is to introduce the applicant and the site designer to the city zoning and subdivision regulations and procedures and to discuss the applicant's objectives in relation to the city's policies and code requirements. 
2.  Existing Features (Site Analysis) Plan. Plans analyzing each site's special features are required for all proposed CVDD subdivisions, as they form the basis of the design process for green-way lands, house locations, street alignments and lot lines. The applicant or his/her representative shall bring a copy of the existing features (site analysis) plan to the on-site walking inspections. Such site analysis plans must include at least: 
a.  A contour map based upon topographical maps published by the U.S. Geological Survey; 
b.  The location of severely constraining elements such as steep slopes (over twenty-five (25) percent), wetlands, watercourses, intermittent streams, one hundred (100) year floodplain and all right-of-way easements; 
c.  Soil boundaries as shown on U.S.D.A. Natural Resources Conservation Service medium intensity maps; 
d.  The location of significant features such as woodlands, tree lines, open fields or meadows, scenic views into or out from the property, watershed divides, drainage ways, fences, stone walls, rock outcrops, existing structures, roads, tracks and trails; 
e.  These existing features shall identify both primary conservation areas (floodplains, wetlands, and steep slopes, as defined in the process for computing "adjusted tract acreage") and secondary conservation areas, as described in subsection (L)(2) of this section. Together, these primary and secondary conservation areas comprise the development's proposed open space, the location of which shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan. The site analysis plan shall form the basis for the conceptual preliminary plan which shall show the tentative location of houses, streets, lot lines and green-way lands in new subdivisions, according to the four-step design process described in subsection (N)(7) of this section. 
3.  On-Site Walking Inspection by Planning Commission and Applicant. After the site analysis plan has been prepared, the planning commission shall schedule a mutually convenient date to walk the property with the applicant and the applicant's site designer. The purpose of this visit is to familiarize city officials with the property's special features and to provide them with an opportunity to offer guidance to the applicant regarding the tentative location of secondary conservation areas and potential house locations and street alignments. If the visit is not scheduled before submission of the sketch plan or the conceptual preliminary plan, it should occur soon thereafter. 
4.  Pre-Submission Conference. Prior to the submission of the sketch plan or a conceptual preliminary plan, the applicant shall meet with the planning commission to discuss how the four-step approach to designing subdivision described in subsection (N)(7) of this section, could be applied to the subject property. At the discretion of the planning commission this conference may be combined with the on-site walking inspection. 
5.  Conceptual Preliminary Plan. After the pre-submission conference, a sketch plan or a conceptual preliminary plan shall be submitted for any proposed CVDD subdivision. As used in this section, the term "conceptual preliminary plan" refers to a preliminary engineered sketch plan drawn to illustrate initial thoughts about a conceptual layout for green-way lands, house sites and street alignments. At this stage are tentatively illustrated before premature engineering costs are incurred in the design of any proposed subdivision layout. Conceptual preliminary plans shall be prepared by a team that includes a landscape architect and a civil engineer. This plan shall be submitted by the applicant to the city zoning official who will then submit it to the planning commission for review for the purpose of securing early agreement on the overall pattern of streets, house lots, primary and secondary conservation areas and potential trail linkages prior to any significant expenditures for engineering the street design, stormwater management, or accurate delineation of internal lot boundaries. 
6.  Within thirty (30) days of receiving the conceptual preliminary plan the planning commission shall approve, disapprove or approve it with conditions, stating the reasons for its decision in writing. The remaining sixty (60) days of the statutory ninety (90) day review period for preliminary plans shall be utilized by the applicant to submit a detailed preliminary plan which shall contain all the customary engineering data, and for the planning commission to review said plan and to render its decision in writing. Either or both of these time periods may be formally extended if mutually agreeable to the applicant and the planning commission. 
7.  Four-Step Process. Each conceptual preliminary plan shall follow a four-step design process, as described below. When the conceptual preliminary plan is submitted, the applicant shall be prepared to demonstrate to the planning commission that these four design steps were followed by their site designers in determining the layout of their proposed streets, house lots, and green-way lands. This process shall be accomplished during the first thirty (30) days of the statutory ninety (90) day review period for preliminary plans. 
a.  Designating the Open Spaces. During the first step, all potential conservation areas (both primary and secondary) are identified, using the site analysis plan. Guidance on which parts of the remaining land to classify as secondary conservation areas shall be based upon: 
i.  On-site visits or walking inspections; 
ii.  The open space location criteria contained in subsection (L)(3) of this section; 
b.  The evaluation criteria listed in subsection M of this section; 
c.  Information from published data and reports; and 
d.  Conversation with existing or recent owners of the property and members of the mayor and council and planning commission. 
8.  Location of House Sites. During the second step, potential house sites are tentatively located. Because the proposed locations of houses within each lot represents a significant decision with potential impacts on the ability of the development to meet the evaluation criteria contained in subsection U of this section, subdivision applicants shall identify tentative house sites on the conceptual preliminary plan and proposed house sites on the detailed final plan. House sites should generally be located not closer than one hundred (100) feet from primary conservation areas, but may be situated within fifty (50) feet of secondary conservation areas, in order to enjoy views of the latter without negatively impacting the former the building foot-print of proposed residences may be changed by more than fifty (50) feet in any direction with majority approval of the planning commission. Such changes involving less than fifty (50) feet do not require such approval. 
9.  Street and Lot Layout. The third step consists of aligning proposed streets to provide vehicular access to each house in the most reasonable and economical way. When lots and access streets are laid out, they shall be located in a way that avoids or at least minimizes adverse impacts on the primary and secondary conservation areas. To the greatest extent practicable, wetland crossings and streets traversing existing slopes of over fifteen (15) percent shall be strongly discouraged. Street connections shall generally be encouraged to minimize the number of new cul-de-sacs to be maintained by the city, and to facilitate easy access to and from homes in different parts of the property and on adjoining parcels. Where cul-de-sacs are necessary, those serving six or fewer homes may be designed with a "hammerhead" configuration, facilitating three-point turns. Cul-de-sacs serving more than six homes shall generally be designed with a central island containing indigenous trees and shrubs, either conserved on site or planted on site. In a CVD where more formal, "neo-traditional," or village type layouts are proposed, the preceding steps two and three may be reversed, so that the location of house sites follows the location of streets and squares. 
10.  Lot Lines. The fourth step is to draw in the lot lines. They are generally drawn midway between house locations and may include L-shaped "flag lots" meeting the city's minimum standard codes for the same. 
O.  Preliminary Engineering Certification. Prior to approval of the conceptual preliminary plan, the applicant shall submit to the planning commission a preliminary engineering certification from a Georgia licensed professional engineer that the approximate layout of proposed streets, house lots, and open space lands complies with the city's zoning and subdivision ordinances, particularly those sections governing the design of subdivision streets and stormwater management facilities. This requirement is meant to provide the city with assurance that the proposed plan is feasible under the current regulations of the city. The certification shall also note any waivers needed to implement the plan as drawn. 
P.  Ownership and Maintenance of Open Space. Different ownership and management options apply to the permanently protected open spaces created through the CVD development process. Such open spaces shall remain undivided and may be owned and managed by a homeowner's association, the city, or a recognized land trust or conservancy. However, in a low-density rural subdivision with ten (10) or more acres per dwelling, all or part of the required open space may be located without the house lots. Dedication of open spaces for public use, not exceeding ten (10) percent of the total parcel size, may be required by the city in order to facilitate trail connections. A narrative describing ownership, use and maintenance responsibilities shall be submitted for all common and public improvements, utilities and open spaces in a proposed CVD. 
Q.  Ownership Standards. Common open space within a CVD development shall be owned, administered and maintained by any of the following methods, either individually or in combination, and subject to approval by the planning commission. 
1.  Offer of Dedication. The city shall have the first and last offer of dedication of undivided open space in the event said land is to be conveyed. Dedication shall take the form of a conveyance of fee simple title to the open space. The city may, but shall not be required to accept undivided open space, provided: 
a.  Such land is accessible to the residents of the subdivision; 
b.  There is no cost of acquisition other than any cost incidental to the transfer of ownership, such as title insurance or deed recording fees; and 
c.  The residents of the subdivision agree to and have access to maintain such land; 
d.  Where the residents of the subdivision accept dedication of common open space that contains improvements, the residents may require the posting of financial security to ensure structural integrity of said improvements as well as the functioning of said improvements for a term not to exceed eighteen (18) months from the date of acceptance of dedication. The amount of financial security shall not exceed fifteen (15) percent of the actual cost of installation of said improvements. 
2.  Homeowners' Association. The undivided open space and associated facilities may be held in common ownership by a homeowners' association. The association shall be formed and operated under the following provisions: 
a.  The developer shall provide a description of the association, including its by laws and methods for maintaining open spaces. 
b.  The association shall be organized by the developer and shall be operated with a financial subsidy from the developer before the sale of any lots within the development. 
c.  Membership in the association is automatic (mandatory) for all purchasers of homes in the subdivision and their successors in interest. The conditions and timing of transfer of control of the association from developer to homeowners shall be established by the developer. 
d.  The association shall be responsible for maintenance taxes on undivided open spaces. The association may place liens on the subdivision property of the members who fail to pay their association dues in a timely manner. Such liens may include the imposition of penalties and interest charges. 
e.  The members of the association shall share equitably in the cost of maintaining and developing open spaces. Shares shall be defined within the association by laws. 
f.  In the event of a proposed transfer of open space land by the homeowners' association within the methods herein permitted, notice of such action shall be given to all property owners within the subdivision. 
g.  The association shall provide adequate staff to administer common facilities and property and continually maintain open spaces. 
h.  The homeowners' association may lease open spaces to any other qualified person or corporation, for operation and maintenance of such open spaces, but such a lease agreement shall provide: 
i.  That the residents of the development shall at all times have access to the open spaces contained therein, except croplands during the growing season; 
ii.  That the open spaces to be leased shall be maintained for the purpose set forth in this chapter; 
iii.  That the operation of open space facilities may be for the benefit of the residents only, or may be open to nonresidents of the subdivision, at the election of the developer and/or homeowner's association, as the case may be; and 
iv.  That the lease shall be subject to the approval of the governing body of the homeowners' association and any transfer or assignment of the lease shall be further subject to the approval of the said board. 
v.  Lease agreements so entered upon shall be recorded in the Newton County deed records within thirty (30) days of their execution, and a copy of the recorded lease shall be filed with the city. 
R.  Condominiums. Open spaces and associated facilities may be controlled through the use of condominium agreements approved by the residents of the subdivision. Such agreements shall be in conformance with the Georgia Condominium Act, O.C.G.A. Sections 44-3-70, et seq. All open space land shall be held as a "common element" as provided in said statute. 
S.  Dedication of Easements. The residents of the subdivision may, but shall not be required to, dedicate easements for public use of any portion or portions of open space land, title to which shall remain in ownership by condominium or homeowners' association, provided: 
1.  Such land is accessible to subdivision residents; 
2.  There is no cost of acquisition other than any cost incidental to the conveyance of such easements, such as recording fees; and 
3.  A satisfactory maintenance agreement is reached between the developer, condominium or homeowners' association, and the city. 
T.  Transfer of Easements to a Private Conservation Organization. With the permission of the residents of the subdivision, the developer may convey easements to a private, nonprofit organization, among whose purposes it is to conserve open space, provided that: 
1.  The organization is acceptable to the residents of the subdivision, and is a bona fide conservation organization with perpetual existence; 
2.  The conveyance contains appropriate provisions for proper reversion or retransfer in the event that the organization becomes unwilling or unable to continue carrying out its functions; and 
3.  A maintenance agreement acceptable to the governing body of the homeowners' association is entered into by the developer and the organization. 
U.  Maintenance Standards. 
1.  The ultimate owner of an open space, (typically a homeowners' association), shall be responsible for raising all funds required for operation, maintenance, and physical improvement to the open space through annual dues or special assessments. The homeowners' association shall be authorized under its by laws to place liens on subdivision property of residents who fall delinquent in payment of such dues or assessments. 
2.  In the event that the association or any successor organization shall, at any time after establishment of a development containing an open space, fail to maintain the open space in reasonable condition in accordance with the development plan, the city may proceed with the enforcement provisions established in Sections 8.04.130 through 8.04.180 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
14.32.020 - Wetlands protection overlay zoning district. 
A.  The mayor and council of the city find that the wetlands within the city are indispensable and fragile natural resources with significant development constraints due to flooding, erosion and soil quality. Wetlands provide habitat areas for aquatic and other wildlife; unique vegetation; water quality maintenance; pollution, flood and erosion control; and educational and recreational opportunities. Wise management of the wetlands within the city is necessary to the economic welfare of the city. It is, therefore, appropriate for the city to provide by ordinance for the protection of wetlands from alterations or uses that will negatively affect their primary functions of water quality enhancement, flood and erosion control, ground water recharge, wildlife habitat and aesthetic appeal. 
B.  Wetlands Protection District. This is an overlay use district which shall include all wetlands located within the city as shown on the wetland map, as well as land in the city within fifty (50) feet from any boundary of such wetlands, all as indicated on the city's official wetlands map. 
C.  Uses Allowed Without Permit. The following uses shall be allowed in the wetland protection district as a matter of right without obtaining a development permit, provided they are otherwise lawful and do not require grading, filling, drainage, dredging or the erection of any structure, except as provided herein: 
1.  Conservation of soil, water, vegetation, aquatic and other wildlife, provided that such activities do not affect waters of Georgia or the United States in a manner that would require a Section 404 permit; 
2.  Outdoor passive research, educational and recreational activities, including fishing, observation of wildlife, hiking, boating, horseback riding and canoeing; 
3.  Forestry practices applied in accordance with best management practices approved by the Georgia Forestry Commission and as specified in Section 404 of the Clean Water Act (33 USC Section 1344); 
4.  Cultivation of agricultural crops in conformity with best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture; 
5.  Pasturing of livestock, provided that riparian wetlands are protected, that soil profiles are not disturbed and that best management practices approved by the Georgia Department of Agriculture are followed. 
D.  Permit Requirements. It is unlawful to engage in any development activity within the boundaries of a wetlands protection district without first obtaining a permit for such activity from the city's planning and zoning department. Prior to the issuance of any permit for development activity within the fifty (50) foot setback area adjacent to wetlands an applicant must furnish the following: 
1.  A U.S. Army Corps of Engineers determination pursuant to the provisions of the Clean Air Act (33 USC Section 1344) and, where required thereunder, a Section 404 permit; and 
2.  A site plan, drawn at a scale of one inch equals fifty (50) feet, containing the following information: 
a.  A map of all planned excavation and fill, including calculations of the volume of cut and fill involved, cross sectional drawings showing existing and proposed grades. Elevations horizontal scale and vertical scale must be shown on the cross sectional drawings, 
b.  Location of any wetland boundaries occurring within the site, 
c.  Location, dimensions and area of all impervious surfaces, both existing and proposed, on the site and adjacent to the site for a distance of fifty (50) feet, 
d.  The orientation and distance from the boundaries of the proposed site to the nearest bank of an affected perennial stream or water body, 
e.  Elevations of the site and adjacent lands within two hundred (200) feet of the site at contour intervals of no greater than two feet; and no greater than one-foot for slopes less than or equal to two percent, 
f.  Location and detailed design of any spill and leak collection systems designed for the purpose of containing accidentally released hazardous or toxic materials, 
g.  All proposed temporary disruptions or diversions of local hydrology; 
3.  Certification by a Georgia registered professional engineer that the following post-development conditions will prevail at the site: 
a.  The rate of stormwater runoff from the site, including volume and peak runoff, will not exceed predevelopment conditions, 
b.  The amount of phosphorus, nitrogen, zinc and lead carried within the stormwater runoff will not exceed predevelopment conditions, 
c.  Biological oxygen demand and turbidity will not exceed predevelopment levels; 
4.  An application fee in an amount adopted from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council to cover evaluation of the application. Additional application fees, as adopted from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council, may be assessed where deemed necessary by the city to retain expert consultants to provide services reasonably required for evaluation of technical aspects of the site plan. 
E.  Conformity with Site Plan. All development activities or site work conducted after issuance of the permit required hereunder shall conform to the specifications of the site plan. The site plan may be amended only upon written approval of the city planning and zoning department. 
F.  Temporary Emergency Permit. A temporary emergency permit may be issued for the following activities in a wetlands protection district: 
1.  Maintenance or repair of lawfully located roads or structures and of facilities used in the service of the public to provide transportation, electric, gas, water, telephone, telegraph, telecommunication or other services, provided that such roads, structures, or facilities are not materially changed or enlarged and that, prior to the commencement of work, written notice has been given to the city and further provided that the work is conducted using best management practices to ensure that flow and circulation patterns, chemical and biological characteristics of the wetland, are not impaired and that any adverse effect on the aquatic environment will be minimized. 
2.  Temporary water level stabilization measures associated with silvicultural operations, provided that they are necessary to alleviate abnormally wet or dry conditions that would have an adverse impact on the conduct of silvicultural activities if not corrected. 
3.  Limited ditching, tilling, dredging, excavating, or filling done solely for the purpose of maintaining or repairing existing drainage systems necessary for the cultivation of agricultural crops, provided that the maintenance or repair activity does not result in the impairment, alteration, or loss of wetlands not previously subject to agricultural and silvicultural use. 
4.  Limited excavating and filling necessary for the repair and maintenance of piers, walkways, nature trails, observation decks, wildlife management shelters, boathouses, or other similar water-related structures, provided that they are built on pilings to allow unobstructed flow of water and preserve the natural contour of the wetland. 
G.  Application Review Procedure. Applications for wetlands development permits shall be filed in the city planning and zoning office and will be reviewed by the appropriate officials within ten (10) working days of the date of filing a complete application. The review shall include preparation of written findings of approval or disapproval a copy of which shall be sent by first class mail to the applicant. If the review process is not completed within the time provided herein the application shall be deemed to have been approved and the applicant shall be entitled to the issuance of a permit as a matter of right unless the applicant agrees in writing to an extension of time. 
H.  Duration of Permit. 
1.  If construction described in the development permit has not commenced within twelve (12) months from the date of issuance, the permit shall expire. 
2.  If construction described in the development permit is suspended or abandoned after work has commenced, the permit shall expire twelve (12) months after the date that work ceased. 
3.  Written notice of any pending expiration of a development permit shall be issued by the city's planning and zoning department. 
I.  Appeals. Applicants for a wetland development permit may appeal adverse decisions on such applications to the city's board of appeals. Such appeals shall follow the procedures and standards of Section 16.12.180(A). Decisions of the board shall be as provided in Section 16.12.180(A) and shall be subject to further appeal to the superior court of Newton County pursuant to Section 16.12.180(B). 
J.  Administration and Enforcement. The city planning and zoning department shall have primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section and shall have all requisite power and authority necessary to carry out such responsibility, including without limitation entry onto private property for inspections, issuance of administrative orders, and civil or criminal prosecution of violations of said provisions. Additionally, the city may require a bond in an amount not exceeding three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre of affected wetlands and with surety and conditions sufficient to secure compliance with the conditions set forth in the permit. The particular amount and the conditions of the bond shall be consistent with the purposes of this section. In the event of a breach of any condition of any such bond, the city may institute an action in a court of competent jurisdiction upon such bond and prosecute the same to judgment and execution. 
K.  Remedies for Violations. 
1.  Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 16.04.100 of this code. Each violation shall be a separate offense, and, in the case of a continuing violation, each day's continuance shall be deemed to be a separate and distinct offense. 
2.  When a building or other structure has been constructed in violation of this section, the violator may be required to remove the structure, at the discretion of the city. 
3.  When removal of vegetative cover, excavation or fill has taken place in violation of this section, the violator may be required to restore the affected land to its original contours and to restore vegetation, as far as practicable, at the discretion of the city. 
4.  If a violation is discovered that also constitutes a violation of any provision of the Clean Water Act (33 USC Section 1344) the city shall issue written notification of the violation to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the owner of the affected wetland. 
5.  The city may suspend or revoke a permit if it finds that the applicant has not complied with the conditions or limitations set forth in the permit or has exceeded the scope of the work set forth in the permit, and shall promptly provide written notice of such suspension or revocation and the reasons therefore to the holder of the permit. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 6/1/15(1), § 1) 
14.32.030 - Watershed protection overlay zoning district. 
A.  Scope and Applicability. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. 12-2-8 and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division's Rules for Environmental Planning Criteria, Chapter 391-3-16, the watershed protection overlay district for small water supply watersheds establishes standards and procedures that apply to any development, use, or alteration of land or structures on any lot which is in whole or in part contained within the boundaries of the watershed protection overlay district for small water supply watersheds. 
B.  Purpose and Intent. The purpose of this district is to: 
1.  Provide watersheds and drinking water supplies from activities that could degrade drinking water quality in streams, rivers, lakes, and reservoirs; and 
2.  Protect water supply reservoirs from sedimentation, which would reduce their storage capacity, shorten their useful life, and reduce their drought-withstanding capabilities. 
C.  Watershed Protection Overlay District. To achieve the purpose and intent of this section, all of the land that drains to the public water supply intake is declared to be within this district, including without limitation: 
1.  Cornish Creek reservoir (Lake Varner); 
2.  Proposed Bear Creek reservoir; 
3.  Big Haynes Creek watershed; and 
4.  City pond. 
    The boundaries of these districts are defined by the ridgelines of the respective watersheds and are drawn on the Newton County/city of Covington watershed protection overlay district map, which is available for inspection during office hours in the city of Covington planning and zoning department, 2116 Stallings Street, Covington, Georgia. 
D.  Use Restrictions. 
1.  Underground fuel or chemical storage tanks located within permitted areas of these districts shall meet all applicable requirements set by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
2.  Unless existing and legally established prior to the establishment of these districts, and notwithstanding anything contained in the use table to the contrary, the following uses within such districts shall require a special use permit: 
a.  Industries or businesses that distribute or warehouse hazardous material; 
b.  Uses that provide for the sale of fuel for motor vehicles; 
c.  Confined animal feeding operations; 
d.  Landfills or wastewater disposal facilities of any kind (except for septic tanks approved by the Newton County health department); 
e.  Underground or aboveground fuel or chemical storage tanks; 
f.  The manufacture of chemicals and allied products, dairy products, fats and oils, leather tanning, meat, fish and poultry packing, paper and allied products, petroleum and related industries, primary metal, rubber and plastics, or concrete products; 
g.  Junkyards and auto wrecking facilities; 
h.  Bulk storage of petroleum; 
i.  Truck terminals; 
j.  Railroad terminals, classification yards or intermodal freight terminals; 
k.  Auto and truck rental and repair shops; 
l.  Auto and truck washes. 
E.  Development Standards. Within the watershed disturbance of any of the following types of lands is prohibited, except for perpendicular crossings of roadways, drainageways, trails, paths, and utility easements, as approved by the building official and city engineer based on a site plan conforming to city standards: 
1.  Riparian buffers as described in subsection F of this section; 
2.  Wetlands as determined from field delineations without a permit authorized by Section 404 of the Federal Clean Water Act; 
3.  Areas within the one hundred (100) year floodplain; 
4.  Areas which have a natural slope in excess of fifteen (15) percent; and 
5.  Soils with severe limitations according to the United States Department of Agriculture, Natural Resources Conservation Service "Soil Survey for Newton and Rockdale Counties, Georgia, 1999." 
F.  Buffers. 
1.  All development and disturbance of land within the watershed shall preserve a natural and undisturbed buffer one hundred (100) feet in width along the shorelines of lakes and banks of rivers identified on the U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute quadrangle map. All structures, septic tanks and septic tank drain fields shall be set back a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the shorelines of lakes and banks of rivers identified in the U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute quadrangle map. Roadways, drainageways, paths, trails, and utility easements, shall be allowed to cross riparian buffers in a perpendicular manner, subject to the approval of the building official and city engineer. 
2.  A natural and undisturbed buffer shall be maintained for a distance of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the boundary of any water supply reservoir. 
G.  Impervious Surface. The total impervious surface areas, including all public or private structures, utilities or facilities, of the entire water supply watershed shall be limited to twenty-five (25) percent, or existing impervious surface, whichever is greater. 
H.  Street Standards. Within this district, new collector and local streets may be designed using ten (10) foot travel lanes without curb and gutter, subject to approval by the building official and city engineer. Drainage may be provided through open swale and natural filtration systems unless otherwise required by the city engineer because of topographical or engineering conditions, or in order to ensure compatibility with publicly funded improvements. 
I.  Required Parking Areas. Within this district, minimum parking requirements shall be reduced by ten (10) percent for all nonresidential uses. Parking spaces in excess of the minimum number required by this section shall be constructed of porous or pervious block surfaces, gravel, grass, or other materials approved by the building official and city engineer. 
J.  Exemptions. The following uses are exempt from the riparian buffer and setback requirements for this district if they meet the stipulated conditions: 
1.  Legally established land uses existing prior to the establishment of the district; 
2.  Mining activities are subject to prior approval by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act; 
3.  Utilities. 
a.  Utilities must be located as far from any stream bank as reasonably possible, 
b.  Utilities must be installed and maintained to protect the integrity of any buffer area, 
c.  Utilities may not degrade the quality of any drinking water stream; 
4.  Forestry and agricultural activities must be consistent with best management practices established by Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture and shall not impair the quality of drinking water; 
5.  Perpetual conservation easements on land within this district must be at least as restrictive as the provisions of this section. 
K.  Watershed Protection Overlay for Large Watersheds, Alcovy River/Little River Watershed Protection District. The provisions of this section are adopted for the purpose of protecting the vital resources of river water in the city, preserving the quality of the water for future use, protecting the wildlife living in the area, and preserving the aesthetic beauty of any river corridor. 
1.  All land within the Alcovy River watershed and all land within the Little River watershed (excepting land otherwise protected under the provisions of subsections A through J of this section, is contained within the Alcovy River/Little River watershed protection district. The respective watersheds are defined by the ridgelines of the watersheds (excepting the areas protected by subsections A through J of this section), and the boundaries of this district are indicated on the Newton watershed protection overlay map which is available for inspection during office hours in the city of Covington planning and zoning department, 2116 Stallings Street, Covington, Georgia. 
2.  Use Restrictions. Underground fuel or chemical storage tanks located within permitted areas of this district shall meet all applicable requirements set by the Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Environmental Protection Division. 
3.  Development Standards. Within this district, disturbance of any property is prohibited, except for perpendicular crossing of roadways, drainageways, trails, paths and utility easements, as approved by the building official and city engineer. 
4.  Riparian Buffers. 
a.  All development and disturbance of land located within this district shall preserve a natural and undisturbed riparian buffer of one hundred (100) feet in width along the shorelines of lakes and banks of rivers identified on the U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute quadrangle map. An additional fifty (50) feet shall be required as a buffer that may be minimally disturbed by natural trails, or naturally landscaped and replanted areas (no sod or grass permitted). 
b.  All impervious surfaces, structures, septic tanks, and septic tank drain fields shall be set back a minimum of seventy-five (75) feet from the shorelines of lakes and banks of rivers identified on the U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minutes quadrangle map. 
c.  Roadways, drainageways, paths, trails, and utility easements shall be allowed to cross riparian buffers in a perpendicular manner, subject to the approval of the city engineer, and the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity within the buffer area. 
5.  Street and Parking Standards. 
a.  Within this district, new collector and local streets may be designed using ten (10) foot travel lanes without curb and gutter, subject to approval by the planning and zoning department. Drainage may be provided through open swale and natural filtration systems unless required otherwise by the city engineer because of topographic or engineering conditions, or in order to insure compatibility with publicly funded improvements. 
b.  Within this district, minimum parking requirements shall be reduced by ten (10) percent for all nonresidential uses. 
6.  Exemptions. The following uses are exempt from the riparian buffer and setback requirements for this district if they meet the stipulated conditions: 
a.  Legally established land uses existing prior to the establishment of this district, which shall become nonconforming and shall not be expanded, provided they do not impair or degrade the water quality; 
b.  Mining activities are permitted only if authorized by the Department of Natural Resources under the Surface Mining Act and shall not impair or degrade the water quality; 
c.  Utilities must be located as far from any stream bank as reasonably possible, installed and maintained to protect the integrity of the buffer and setback areas as best as reasonably possible, and shall not impair or degrade the water quality. Sanitary sewer lines may be installed pursuant to best engineering practices within a buffer, but after such installation the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity within the buffer area; 
d.  Forestry and agricultural activities that are consistent with best management practices established by the Georgia Forestry Commission or the Georgia Department of Agriculture shall be permitted, provided such activity does not impair or degrade the water quality; 
e.  Perpetual conservation easements on land within this district must be at least as restrictive as the provisions of this section. 
L.  Yellow River Watershed Protection District. The provisions of this section are adopted for the purpose of protecting the vital resources of river water in the city, preserving the quality of the water for future use, protecting the wildlife living in the area, and preserving the aesthetic beauty of any river corridor. 
1.  Scope. All land within the Yellow River watershed, is contained within the Yellow River watershed protection district. This watershed is defined by the ridgelines of the watershed, and the boundaries of the Yellow River watershed protection district are indicated on the Newton County/city of Covington watershed protection overlay map which is available for inspection during office hours in the city of Covington planning and zoning department, 2116 Stallings Street, Covington, Georgia. 
2.  Riparian Buffers. 
a.  All development and disturbance of land within this district shall preserve a natural and undisturbed riparian buffer of one hundred (100) feet in width along the shorelines of lakes and banks of rivers identified on the U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute quadrangle map. 
b.  All impervious surfaces, structures, septic tanks, and septic tank drain fields shall be set back a minimum of one hundred fifty (150) feet from the shorelines of lakes and banks of rivers identified on the U.S. Geological Survey 7.5 minute quadrangle map. 
c.  Roadways, drainageways, paths, trails, and utility easements shall be allowed to cross riparian buffers in a perpendicular manner, subject to the approval of the city engineer, and the natural vegetative buffer shall be restored as quickly as possible following any land-disturbing activity within the buffer area. 
3.  Exemptions. The uses listed in subsection (K)(6) of this section are exempt from the riparian buffer and setback requirements for this district if they meet the stipulated conditions set forth in subsection (K)(6) of this section. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Title 15 - BUILDINGS AND CONSTRUCTION 
Chapter 15.04 - CONSTRUCTION CODES 

15.04.010 - Certain state minimum standard codes and appendices adopted. 
A.  The governing body having determined that enforcement of certain Georgia minimum standard codes for construction and operation of real and personal property in the city promotes and protects the life, health, safety, property and general welfare of its citizens, the following Georgia minimum codes, together with such future revisions and amendments thereto as may be adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs pursuant to state law, are adopted and by reference incorporated into this code as fully and completely as if set forth verbatim herein: 
1.  International Building Code; 
2.  International Mechanical Code; 
3.  International Gas Code; 
4.  International Plumbing Code; 
5.  National Electric Code; 
6.  International Residential One and Two Family Dwelling Code; 
7.  Georgia State Energy Code; 
8.  Standard Amusement Device Code; 
9.  Excavation and Grading Code; 
10.  Standard Swimming Pool Code; 
11.  Standard Unsafe Building Abatement Code; and 
12.  International Existing Building Code. 
B.  The following appendices to state minimum standard codes having statewide application, together with such future revisions and amendments thereto as may be adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs pursuant to state law, are adopted and by reference made a part of this code as fully as if set forth verbatim herein: 
1.  International Building Code: 
a.  Appendix C, "Agricultural Buildings"; 
b.  Appendix E, "Supplemental Accessibility Requirements"; 
c.  Appendix G, "Flood Resistant Construction"; 
d.  Appendix J, "Supplemental Accessibility Requirements for Qualified Historic Buildings and Facilities." 
2.  International Plumbing Code: 
a.  Appendix B, "Rates of Rainfall for Various Cities"; 
b.  Appendix C, "Gray Water Recycling Systems"; 
c.  Appendix E, "Sizing of Water Piping System." 
3.  International Gas Code: 
a.  Appendix A, "Sizing and Capacities of Gas Piping"; 
b.  Appendix B, "Sizing of Venting Systems Serving Appliances Equipped with Draft Hoods, Category 1 Appliances, and Appliances Listed for Use and Type B Vents." 
4.  International Mechanical Code: 
a.  Appendix A, "Combustion Air Openings and Chimney Connector Pass-throughs." 
5.  International Existing Building Code: 
a.  Appendix A, "Guidelines for Seismic Retrofit of Existing Buildings"; 
b.  Appendix B, "Supplementary Accessibility Requirements for Existing Buildings and Facilities." 
C.  The boards of adjustments and appeals, as created or referred to under the terms and provisions of any of the state minimum standard codes adopted pursuant to this section or the state minimum standard codes having statewide application, shall be the board of adjustment and appeals created pursuant to Section 15.04.020(J) of this chapter. 
D.  Copies of each of the current state minimum standard codes adopted pursuant to this section and the current state minimum standard codes having statewide application shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and the office of the building inspector and shall be made available for public inspection or copying during regular business hours. 
E.  The official of the city having duties corresponding to the duties of designated officials under the provisions of the state minimum standard codes adopted pursuant to this section or the state minimum standard codes having statewide application shall be deemed to be the city official responsible for performing the duties of such designated official as provided in the respective state minimum standard codes. 
F.  Any requirements of the state minimum standard building code adopted pursuant to state law requiring sprinkler systems in aircraft hangar spaces for facilities over ten thousand (10,000) square feet shall yield to and be superseded by the aircraft hanger sprinkler requirements contained in National Fire Code No. 409 adopted pursuant to Section 15.12.010(D) of this code. 
(Ord. dated 4/6/04 §§ 1, 2; prior code § 6-1) 
15.04.020 - Administrative procedures for enforcement of state minimum standards codes. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for the administration and enforcement of the Georgia minimum standard codes as heretofore adopted. All such codes are referred to in this section as the "technical codes". 
B.  Code Remedial. 
1.  General. Minimum standard codes are declared to be remedial, and shall be construed to secure the beneficial interests and purposes thereof, which are public safety, health, and general welfare, through structural strength, stability, sanitation, adequate lighting and ventilation, and safety to life and property from fire and other hazards attributed to the built environment, including alteration, repair, removal, demolition, use and occupancy of buildings, structures, or premises, and by regulating the installation and maintenance of all electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems, which are hereinafter sometimes referred to as service systems. 
2.  Quality Control. Quality control of materials and workmanship is not within the purview of this code except as it relates to the purposes stated herein. 
3.  Permitting and Inspection. The inspection or permitting of buildings, systems or plans under the requirements of this section shall not be construed in any court as a warranty of the condition or adequacy of any such building, system or plan. Neither the city nor any of its employees shall accept liability in tort for damages for any defect or hazardous or illegal condition or inadequacy in such buildings, systems, or plans, nor for any failure of any component thereof which may occur subsequent to such inspection or permitting. 
C.  Scope. 
1.  Applicability. 
a.  General. Where, in any specific case, different sections of these codes contain conflicting specifications for materials, methods of construction or other requirements, the most restrictive shall govern. Where there is a conflict between a general requirement and a specific requirement, the specific requirement shall be applicable. 
b.  Building. The provisions of the International Building Code shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use, occupancy, location, maintenance, removal and demolition of every building or structure in the city or any appurtenance connected or attached to such buildings or structures, except one- and two-family dwellings. 
c.  Electrical. The provisions of the National Electrical Code shall apply to the installation of electrical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacements, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances thereto. 
d.  Gas. The provisions of the International Gas Code shall apply to the installation of consumers' gas piping, gas appliances and related accessories and shall be applicable to gas piping systems extending from the point of delivery to the inlet connections of appliances, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
e.  Mechanical. The provisions of the International Mechanical Code shall apply to the installation of mechanical systems, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings, and or appurtenances, including ventilating, heating, cooling, air conditioning and refrigeration systems, incinerators, and other energy-related systems, except in one- and two-family dwellings. 
f.  Plumbing. The provisions of the International Plumbing Code shall apply to every plumbing installation, including alterations, repairs, replacement, equipment, appliances, fixtures, fittings and appurtenances, when connected to a water or sewerage system. 
g.  Energy. The provisions of the Georgia Model Energy Code shall regulate the design of building envelopes for adequate thermal resistance and low air leakage and the design and selection of mechanical, electrical, service, water heating and illumination systems and equipment that will enable the effective use of energy in new building construction. 
h.  International Existing Building Code. The provisions of the International Existing Building Code, as amended, shall apply to the construction, alteration, repair, equipment, use, occupancy, location, and maintenance of every one- and two-family dwelling or any appurtenance connected or attached to such dwellings. 
i.  The Unsafe Building Abatement Code. The provisions of this code provide enforcement personnel with the necessary procedures to have dangerous and unsafe buildings repaired or demolished. 
j.  Standard Amusement Device Code. This code provides minimum requirements to safeguard the public health, safety and general welfare of citizens through regulation of the installation, construction, alteration, repair, removal, operation and use of amusement rides and devices. 
k.  Excavation and Grading Code. This code regulates and controls excavation, grading, and earthwork construction including earth fills and embankments on private property. 
l.  Standard Swimming Pool Code. This code provides for the protection of the public health, welfare and safety by prescribing minimum standards for the design, construction, installation, repair and alteration of public and private swimming pools and equipment related thereto. 
m.  International Existing Building Code. This code provides a systems approach to evaluating the overall safety of buildings. 
2.  Appendices. Appendices referenced in text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. 
3.  Referenced Standards. Standards referenced in the text of the technical codes shall be considered an integral part of the codes. If specific portions of a standard are cited in code text, only those portions of such standard shall be enforced. Where code provisions conflict with a standard, the code provisions shall be enforced. Permissive and advisory provisions in a standard shall not be construed as mandatory. 
D.  Reserved. 
E.  Existing Buildings. 
1.  General. Alterations, repairs or rehabilitation work may be made to any existing structure, building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system without compliance with all the requirements of the technical codes; provided that the alteration, repair, or rehabilitation work conforms to the requirements of the technical codes for new construction. The building official shall determine the extent to which existing systems shall be made to conform to the requirements of the technical codes for the new construction. 
F.  Special Historic Buildings. The provisions of the technical codes relating to the construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration, relocation or moving of buildings or structures shall not be mandatory for structures identified and classified by the state or local jurisdiction as historic buildings when such buildings are judged by the building official to be safe for public or private use after completion of any proposed construction, alteration, repair, enlargement, restoration or relocation of such buildings. 
G.  Powers and Duties of the Building Official. 
1.  General. The building official is authorized and directed to enforce the provisions of the technical codes and to render initial interpretations of the technical codes which are consistent with the purpose of same as set forth herein. 
2.  Right of Entry. 
a.  Whenever necessary to make an inspection to enforce any of the provisions of this code, or whenever the building official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any condition or code violation which makes such building, or premises or the electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing systems therein unsafe, dangerous or hazardous, the building official may enter such building or premises at all reasonable times to inspect the same or to perform any duty imposed upon the building official by the technical codes, provided that if such building or premises is occupied, proper credentials shall be presented prior to a request for entry. If such building or premises is unoccupied, the building official shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or other person having charge or control of same and request entry. If entry is refused, the building official shall have recourse to every remedy provided by law to secure entry, including issuance of inspection warrant by the municipal court. 
b.  When the building official shall have first obtained a proper inspection warrant or other remedy provided by law to secure entry, no owner or occupant or any other person in charge, care or control of any building, structure or premises shall fail or neglect, after proper request is made, to promptly permit entry therein for the purpose of inspection and examination. 
3.  Stop Work Orders. Upon written notice from the building official, work on any building or structure or the electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system therein that is being done contrary to the provisions of the technical codes or in a dangerous or unsafe manner, shall immediately cease. Such notice shall be given to the owner of the property, or to his agent, or person performing the work and shall state the conditions under which the work may be resumed. Where, in the opinion of the building official, an emergency exists, the building official shall not be required to give a written notice prior to stopping the work, but written notice shall be given as hereinabove provided as soon as practicable after such emergency stoppage. 
4.  Revocation of Permits. 
a.  Misrepresentation in Application. Whenever there has been any false statement or misrepresentation as to any material fact in the application or plans on which a permit or approval was based the building official may revoke such permit or approval. 
b.  Violation of Code Provisions. The building official may also revoke a permit upon determination by the building official that the construction, erection, alteration, repair, moving, demolition, installation or replacement of the building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system for which the permit was issued is in violation of, or nor in conformity with, the provisions of this chapter. 
5.  Unsafe Buildings or Systems. All buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing systems which are unsafe, unsanitary, or do not provide adequate egress, or which constitute a fire hazard, or are otherwise dangerous to human life, or which, in relation to existing use, constitute a hazard to safety or health, are considered unsafe buildings or service systems and are hereby declared to be illegal and shall be abated in accordance with the provisions of the International Property Maintenance Code for Abatement. 
6.  Requirements Not Covered by Code. Any requirements not specifically covered by this code, or other technical codes, shall be determined by the building official to insure construction strength, stability or proper operation of an existing or proposed building, or service system, or for the public safety, health and welfare. 
7.  Alternate Materials and Methods. The provisions of the technical codes are not intended to prevent the use of any material or method of construction not specifically prescribed by them, provided any such alternate has been reviewed and approved by the building official. The building official shall approve any such alternate for the purpose intended if the alternate is at least the equivalent of that prescribed in the technical codes in quality, strength, effectiveness, fire resistance, durability and safety. The building official shall require that sufficient evidence or proof be submitted to substantiate any claim made regarding the alternate. 
H.  Permits. 
1.  Permit Application. 
a.  When required, any owner, authorized agent, or contractor who desires to construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish or change the occupancy of a building or structure, or to make any changes in the current building service systems which are regulated by the technical codes, or to cause any such work to be done, shall first make application to the building official and obtain a required permit for the work, except for work pertaining to any of the following: 
i.  Any portable heating appliance; 
ii.  Any portable ventilation equipment; 
iii.  Any portable cooling unit; 
iv.  Any steam, not chilled, water piping within any heating or cooling equipment not regulated by this code; 
v.  Replacement of any part of a building, structure or system which does not alter its function, or make it unsafe; 
vi.  Any portable evaporative cooler; 
vii.  Any self-contained refrigeration system containing ten (10) pounds (4.54 kg) or less of refrigerant and activated by motors of one horsepower (746W) or less. 
b.  Work Authorized. A building, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing permit shall grant the applicant the right to construct or install the work, provided such work is shown on the drawings and set forth in the specifications filed with the application for the permit. Where such work is not so shown, a separate permit shall be required for each element of the work not so shown. 
c.  Minor Repairs. Ordinary minor repairs may be made without a permit, provided that such repairs shall not violate any of the provisions of the technical codes. 
d.  Information Required. Each application for a building permit, along with the required fee, shall be filed with the building official on a form furnished by the city for that purpose, and shall contain a general description of the proposed work and its location. The application shall be signed by the owner, or his authorized agent. The permit application shall indicate the proposed occupancy of all parts of the building and of that portion of the site or lot, if any, not covered by the building or structure and shall contain any other information as may be reasonably required by the building official. 
e.  Time Limitations. A permit application for any proposed work shall be deemed to have been abandoned six months after the date of filing, unless the proper permit has been issued and the work has commenced. One or more extensions of not more than ninety (90) days each may be allowed for each application, provided the extension is requested in writing and justifiable cause is demonstrated. 
2.  Drawings and Specifications. 
a.  Requirements. Two or more copies of specifications and/or drawings, drawn to scale on twenty-four (24) inch by thirty-six (36) inch paper or larger with sufficient clarity and detail to indicate the nature and character of the work, and an electronic copy of same shall accompany the application for a permit. Such drawings and specifications shall contain information, in the form of notes or otherwise as to the quality of materials, where quality is essential to conformity with the technical codes. Such information shall be specific, and the technical codes shall not be cited as a whole or in part, nor shall the term "legal" or its equivalent be used, as a substitute for specific information. All information, drawings, specifications and accompanying data shall bear the name and signature of the person responsible for the design. 
b.  Additional Data. The building official may require details, computations, stress diagrams, and other data necessary to describe the construction or installation and the basis of calculations. All drawings, specifications and accompanying data required for the following types of projects shall be prepared by a Georgia registered architect or engineer and shall have their professional seal affixed thereon: 
i.  All educational, institutional, industrial, assembly, mixed use and other group occupancies; 
ii.  Buildings and structures three stories or more in height; and 
iii.  Buildings and structures three thousand (3,000) square feet or more in floor area. 
    An application for a single family detached house is exempt from these requirements. For all other buildings and structures, the submittal shall bear the certification of the applicant that some specific Georgia law exception allows its preparation by a person not so registered. 
c.  Application of Utilities Handbook. The city of Covington's Utilities Specification Handbook (hereinafter called Utilities Handbook), shall apply to all buildings, structures, and improvements made or maintained within the jurisdiction of the city. In the event of any direct conflicts between the Utilities Handbook and any other applicable code, regulations or statutes, the latter shall control. 
d.  Structural and Fire-Resistance Integrity. Plans shall indicate how structural and fire-resistance integrity will be maintained where penetration of a required fire-resistant wall, floor or partition will be made for electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, or communication conduits, pipes and systems. Plans shall also indicate in detail how the fire-resistance integrity will be maintained where a required fire-resistant floor intersects with the exterior walls. 
e.  Site Drawings. Drawings shall show the location of every proposed and existing building or structure on the site or lot. The building official may also require a boundary line survey prepared by a Georgia registered land surveyor. 
f.  Hazardous Occupancies. For applications pertaining to occupancies involving a high risk of fire, the building official may require the following; 
i.  General Site Plan. A general site plan drawing at a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, the location of all buildings, exterior storage facilities, permanent access ways, evacuation routes, parking lots, internal roads, chemical loading areas, equipment cleaning areas, storm and sanitary sewer accesses, emergency equipment and adjacent property uses. The exterior storage areas shall be identified with the hazard classes and the maximum quantities per hazard class of hazardous material to be stored; and 
ii.  Building Floor Plan. A building floor plan drawn to a legible scale which shall include, but not be limited to, all hazardous materials storage facilities within the building and shall indicate rooms, doorways, corridors, exits, fire rated assemblies with their hourly rating, location of liquid-tight rooms, and evacuation routes. Each hazardous materials storage facility shall be identified on the plan with the hazard classes and quantity range per hazard class or the hazardous materials stored. 
g.  Examination of Documents. 
i.  Plan Review. The building official shall examine or cause to be examined each application for a permit and the accompanying documents, consisting of drawings, specifications, computations, and additional data, and shall ascertain by such examinations whether the construction indicated and described therein is in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes and all other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
ii.  Affidavits. The building official may accept a sworn affidavit from a Georgia registered architect or engineer stating that the plans submitted conform to the technical codes. For buildings and structures and affidavit shall state that the plans submitted conform to the provisions of law as to egress, type of construction and general arrangements, and shall be accompanied by drawings showing structural design. The affidavit shall also contain a statement that the plans and design conform to the requirements of the technical codes as to the strength, stress, strains, loads and stability of the structural components. The building official may, without any examination or inspection, accept such affidavit, provided the affiant submits to the building official copies of all inspection reports as inspections are performed and, upon completion of the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system also provides the affiant's certificate that the structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system has been erected in accordance with the requirements of the technical codes. Where the building official relies upon such affidavit, the architect or engineer shall assume full responsibility for the compliance with all provisions of the technical codes and other pertinent laws or ordinances. 
3.  Issuance of Permits. 
a.  Fire Marshal Approval. If the proposed construction, moving or alteration of any building or structure is subject to the provisions of Title 15 of this code, the application for a building permit shall be accompanied by a detailed set of plans and specifications for such activity, which shall be submitted by the building official to the fire marshal so that the fire marshal may ensure conformity of the proposed plans and specifications with the provisions of Title 15 as required by Section 15.12.030 of this code. The building official shall not issue a permit for any activity covered by Title 15 of this code until the fire marshal has approved such issuance. 
b.  Action on Permit. The building official shall act upon an application for a permit without unreasonable or unnecessary delay. If the building official is satisfied that the work described in an application or contract document conforms to the technical codes and other pertinent laws and ordinances, he shall issue a permit. 
c.  Refusal to Issue Permit. If the application for a permit and the accompanying contract documents describing the work do not conform to the requirements of the technical codes or other pertinent laws or ordinances, the building official shall not issue a permit but shall return the contract documents to the applicant with his refusal to issue such permit. Such refusal shall, when requested, be in writing and shall contain the reasons for refusal. 
d.  Special Foundation Permit. When an application for a permit to erect or enlarge a building has been filed and pending issuance of such permit, the building official may, at his discretion, issue a special permit for the foundation only. The holder of such permit may proceed with the foundation work at his own risk and without assurance that a permit for the remainder of the work will be granted or that corrections will not be required in order to meet provisions of the technical codes. 
e.  Public Right-of-Way. A permit shall not be given by the building official for the construction or alteration of any building where the building is to be changed so as to affect the exterior walls, bays, balconies, or other appendices or projections fronting on any street, alley or public lane, or for the placing on any lot or premises of any building or structure removed from another location unless the building official shall have determined that the proposed construction or alteration will not encroach upon the public road right-of-way except as may be permitted pursuant to Chapter 32 of the International Building Code. 
4.  Contractor's Responsibilities. Contractors for the construction or repair of buildings or structures or repair or installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, sprinkler or plumbing systems shall, prior to issuance of a permit, furnish the building official with satisfactory evidence of any license that may be required under Georgia law. 
5.  Conditions of the Permit. 
a.  Terms of Permit. A permit issued under this chapter shall be construed to be a license to proceed with the work and not as authority to violate, cancel, alter, or set aside any of the provisions of the technical codes, nor shall issuance of a permit prevent the building official from requiring a correction of errors in plans, construction or violations of the code. Every permit issued shall expire and become invalid unless the work authorized by such a permit is commenced within six months after its issuance and the permittee requests and passes a required inspection during such six months. Following the initial six-month period after issuance, every permit shall expire if the permittee fails to request and pass a required inspection during any four-month period. The building official is authorized to grant no more than two permit extensions, not to exceed three months each, during which time the permittee shall request and pass a required inspection. A request for a permit extension shall be made prior to the permit expiration, shall be in writing and shall demonstrate by the applicant justifiable cause for an extension. Required inspections are those identified in subsection H.8. through 13. 
b.  Permits Issued in Reliance Upon an Affidavit. Whenever a permit is issued in reliance upon an architect's or engineer's affidavit or whenever the work to be covered by a permit involves installation under conditions which, in the opinion of the building official, are hazardous or complex, the building official shall require that such architect's or engineer's computations for the work be furnished along with the affidavit. In addition, such architect or engineer shall be responsible for conformity with the permit, provide copies of inspection reports as inspections are performed, and, upon completion, file with the building official an affidavit that the work has been completed in conformity with the reviewed plans and with the structural provisions of the technical codes. 
c.  Plans. When the building official issues a permit, he shall endorse, in writing or by stamp, all sets of plans, "reviewed for code compliance." One set of drawings shall be retained by the building official and one set shall be returned to the applicant. The permitted drawings shall be kept at the work site and shall be open to inspection by the building official or his authorized representative. 
6.  Fees. 
a.  Prescribed Fees. No permit shall be issued until the fees prescribed by the governing body have been paid, and no amendment to a permit shall be released until the additional fee, if any, due to an increase in the estimated cost of the permitted work has been paid. 
b.  Commencing Work Before Permit Issuance. Any person who commences work on a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system prior to obtaining a permit as provided in this chapter shall be subject to a penalty of one hundred (100) percent of the usual permit fee in addition to the required permit fee. 
c.  Accounting. The building official shall keep a permanent and accurate accounting of all permit fees and other money collected, the names of all persons upon whose account the same was paid, and the date and amount of each such collection. 
d.  Schedule of Permit Fees. The permit fee for all buildings, structures, electrical, plumbing, mechanical and gas systems, or alterations requiring a permit, shall be paid at the time of filing an application and in such amount as provided in the fee schedules promulgated by the building official with the consent of the mayor and council of the city, maintained as a public record in the building and zoning office of the city at 2116 Stallings Street, Covington, Georgia. 
e.  Building Permit Valuations. If, in the opinion of the building official, the valuation of a building structure, alteration or an electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system appears to be underestimated on the application, the application shall be denied unless the applicant can provide detailed estimates which meet the approval of the building official. Permit valuations shall include total cost, such as electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing equipment and other systems, including materials and labor. The city of Covington building valuation data representing the current average construction costs per square foot is supplied by the Standard Building Code Congress. 
7.  Inspections. 
a.  Existing Building Inspections. Before issuing a permit, the building official may examine or cause to be examined any building, electrical, gas, mechanical, or plumbing system for which an application for a permit to enlarge, alter, repair, move, demolish, install, or for a change of occupancy has been received. He shall inspect all buildings, structures, electrical, gas, mechanical, and plumbing systems, during and upon completion of the work and shall make a record of every such examination and inspection and of any violation of the technical codes such examination discloses. 
b.  Manufacturers and Fabricators. When deemed necessary by the building official, he shall make or cause to be made, an inspection of materials or assemblies at the point of manufacture or fabrication and shall make a record of each such examination and inspection and of any violation of the technical codes such examination discloses. 
c.  Inspection Services. The building official may make, or cause to be made, the inspections required herein by recognized inspection services, provided that after investigation he is satisfied as to the qualifications and reliability of such services. A certificate called for by any provision of the technical codes shall not be based on reports from such services unless the same are in writing and certified by a duly authorized officer of such service. 
d.  Inspections Prior to Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy or Completion. The building official shall inspect, or cause to be inspected at appropriate intervals, all construction or work for which a permit is required, and a final inspection shall be made of every building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system upon completion, prior to the issuance of the certificate of occupancy or completion. 
e.  Posting of Permits. Work requiring a permit shall not commence until the permit holder or his agent posts the permit card in a conspicuous place at the worksite. The permit shall be protected from the weather and maintained in such a position as to permit the building official to conveniently make the required entries thereon until the certificate of occupancy or completion is issued by the building official. 
f.  Required Inspections. The building official, upon notification from the permit holder or his agent, shall make the inspections described in subsections H.8. through 13. of this section, permits, and such other inspections as the building official may deem necessary, and shall either release the inspected portion of the construction or notify the permit holder or his agent of any violations which must be corrected in order to comply with the technical code. 
8.  Building. 
a.  Foundation Inspection. To be made after trenches are excavated and forms erected. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
b.  Frame Inspection. To be made after the roof, all framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place, and all concealed wiring, pipes, chimneys, ducts and vents are complete. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
c.  Final Inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
    An additional fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for each building inspection trip to the jobsite after the first trip in each of the foregoing categories. 
9.  Electrical. 
a.  Underground Inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, conduit or cable installed and before any backfill is put in place. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
b.  Rough-In Inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
c.  Final Inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all required electrical fixtures are in place and properly connected or protected and the structure is ready for occupancy. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
    An additional fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for each building inspection trip to the jobsite after the first trip in each of the foregoing categories. 
10.  Plumbing. 
a.  Underground Inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
b.  Rough-In Inspection. To be made after the roof, framing, fire blocking and bracing is in place and all solid waste and vent piping are complete and prior to this installation of wall or ceiling membranes. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
c.  Final Inspection. To be made after the building is complete, all plumbing fixtures are in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
d.  Test on Drainage and Vent System. All openings in the piping shall be tightly closed, except the highest opening, and the system shall be filled with water to point of overflow and tested with no less than ten (10) feet head of water. The water shall be kept in the system for at least fifteen (15) minutes before inspection starts; the system shall then be watertight at all points. An air test shall be made by attaching an air compressor or testing apparatus to any suitable opening and, after closing all other inlets and outlets to the system, forcing air into the system until there is a uniform gage pressure of five PSI or sufficient to balance a column of mercury ten (10) inches in height. This pressure shall be held without introduction of additional air for a period of at least fifteen (15) minutes. 
    An additional fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for each plumbing inspection trip to the jobsite after the first trip in each of the foregoing categories. 
e.  Exemption from State Law. Pursuant to the provisions of Ga. L. 1996, p. 1632, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26(d), relating to alternative self inspection of water or sewer line installations on private individual single-family residential property, shall not be applicable for any such installation within the corporate limits of the city. 
11.  Mechanical. 
a.  Underground Inspection. To be made after trenches or ditches are excavated, underground duct and fuel piping installed, and before any backfill is put in place. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
b.  Rough-In Inspection. To be made after the roofing, framing, fire blocking and bracing are in place and all ducting and other concealed components are complete, and prior to the installation of wall or ceiling membranes. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
c.  Final Inspection. To be made after the building is complete, the mechanical system is in place and properly connected and the structure is ready for occupancy. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
    An additional fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for each mechanical inspection trip to the jobsite after the first trip in each of the foregoing categories. 
12.  Gas installations. 
a.  Rough Piping Inspection. To be made after all new piping authorized by the permit has been installed, and before any piping has been covered or concealed or any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
b.  Final Piping Inspection. To be made after all piping authorized by the permit has been installed and after all portions which are to be concealed by plastering or otherwise have been so concealed, and before any fixtures or gas appliances have been connected. This inspection shall include a pressure test under which low pressure gas piping shall withstand a pressure of at least three PSI or six inches of mercury for a period of not less than ten (10) minutes without showing any drop in pressure and higher pressure piping shall stand a pressure of at least ten (10) PSI, but never less than twice the maximum pressure to which the piping will be subjected in operation, for a period of not less than ten (10) minutes without showing any drop in pressure. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
    An additional fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for each gas inspection trip to the jobsite after the first trip in each of the foregoing categories. 
c.  Final Inspection. To be made on all new gas work authorized by the permit and such portions of existing systems as may be affected by new work or any other changes, to insure compliance with all requirements of this code and to assure that the installation and construction of the gas system is in accordance with reviewed plans. A fee in an amount established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be assessed for this inspection. 
13.  Energy. 
a.  Frame Inspection. To be made before exterior wall insulation is concealed by wall board and to check installation of exterior wall insulation to be sure that all holes and cracks through the structure envelope have been sealed in an appropriate manner so as to restrict air passage. 
b.  Final Inspection. To be made after the building is completed and ready for occupancy to verify installation and R-value of ceiling and floor insulation and to verify correct SEER (seasonal energy efficiency ratio) ratings on appliances. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) is accessed for this inspection. 
    An additional fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) shall be assessed for each energy inspection trip to the job site after the first trip in each of the foregoing categories. 
14.  Written Release. Work shall not be done on any part of a building, structure, or electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system beyond the point indicated in each successive inspection without first obtaining a written release from the building official. Such written release shall be given only after an inspection has been made on each successive step in the construction or installation as indicated by each of the inspections described in subsections H.8. through 13. of this section. 
15.  Reinforcing Steel, Structural Frame, Insulation, Plumbing, Mechanical or Electrical Systems. No reinforcing steel, structural frame, insulation, plumbing, mechanical or electrical system work in any part of any building or structure shall be covered or concealed prior to obtaining a release from the building official. 
16.  Plaster Fire Protection. In all buildings where plaster is used for fire protection purposes, the permit holder or his agent shall notify the building official after all lathing and backing are in place. Plaster shall not be applied until the release from the building official has been received. 
17.  Certificates. 
a.  Certificate of Occupancy. 
i.  Building Official Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. No new building shall be occupied until the building official has issued a certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical and plumbing systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans, and specifications, and after final inspection, the building official shall issue a certificate of occupancy. The building certificate of occupancy issued by the building official in accordance with this subsection shall be valid for the life of the building. 
ii.  Fire Marshal Issuance of Certificate of Occupancy. 
(A)  No new building shall be occupied nor shall any change be made in the occupancy, nature or use of a building or part of a building until the fire marshal has issued a certificate of occupancy. Upon satisfactory completion of construction of a building or structure and installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and life safety systems in accordance with the technical codes, reviewed plans, and specifications, and after final inspection, the fire marshal shall issue a certificate of occupancy. Certificate of occupancy stating the nature of the occupancy permitted the number of persons for each floor when limited by law, and the allowable load per square foot for each floor in accordance with the technical codes. The certificate of occupancy issued by the fire marshal in accordance with this subsection shall be valid for the duration of the permitted occupancy. 
(B)  Certificate of Occupancy Change. The permitted occupancy, nature, or use of a building or part of a building shall not be changed until the fire marshal has issued a certificate of occupancy. Such certificate shall not be issued by the fire marshal until all required installation of electrical, gas, mechanical, plumbing, and life safety systems have been inspected for compliance with the technical codes and other applicable laws and ordinances, and have completion of same has been approved by the building official. 
b.  Certificate of Completion. Upon satisfactory completion of a building, structure, electrical, gas, mechanical or plumbing system, a certificate of completion may be issued. This certificate is proof that a structure or system is complete, is released for use and such system may be connected to a utility system. This certificate does not grant authority to occupy or connect a building, such as a shell building, prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy. 
c.  Service Utilities. 
i.  Connection of Service Utilities. No person shall make a connection from a utility, source of energy, fuel or power to any building or system which is regulated by the technical codes and for which a permit is required, until such building or system is released by the building official and a certificate of occupancy or completion is issued. 
ii.  Temporary Connection. The building official may authorize the temporary connection of a building or system to the utility source of energy, fuel or power for the purpose of testing building service systems or for use under a temporary certificate of occupancy. 
iii.  Authority to Disconnect Service Utilities. The building official shall have the power to authorize disconnection of utility services to the building, structure or systems regulated by the technical codes in case of emergency when necessary to eliminate an immediate hazard to life or property. The building official shall notify the service utility and, whenever possible, the owner and occupant of the building, structure or service system of his decision to disconnect utility services prior to taking such action. If not notified prior to disconnecting, the owner or occupant of the building, structure or service system shall be notified in writing, as soon as practicable thereafter. 
18.  Posting Floor Loads. 
a.  Occupancy. No existing or new building shall be occupied for any purpose which would cause the floors thereof to be located beyond their safe capacity. 
b.  Storage and Factory or Industrial Occupancies. It shall be the responsibility of the owner, agent, proprietor or occupant of storage, factory or industrial occupancies where excessive floor loading is likely to occur, to employ a Georgia licensed architect or engineer to compute the safe load capacity of each floor of such occupancy. All such computations, together with an affidavit from the architect or engineer stating the safe allowable floor load in pounds per square foot uniformly distributed, for each floor shall be filed as a permanent record in the building department. 
c.  Signs Required. In every building or part of a building used for storage, industrial or hazardous purposes, the safe floor loads, as reviewed by the building official on the plan, shall be marked on plates of approved design which shall be supplied and securely affixed by the owner of the building in a conspicuous place in each story to which they relate. Such plates shall not be removed or defaced, and, if lost, removed or defaced, shall be forthwith replaced by the owner of the building. 
I.  Tests. The building official may require tests or test reports as proof of compliance with the technical codes. Such tests should be made at the expense of the owner, or his agent, by a testing laboratory or other agent approved in advance by the building official. 
J.  Appeals. 
1.  Decision of the Building Official. The owner of a building, structure or service system, or his duly authorized agent, may appeal a decision of the building official to the board of appeals and adjustments whenever any one of the following conditions is claimed to exist: 
a.  The building official has rejected or refused to approve the mode or manner of construction proposed to be followed or materials to be used in the installation or alteration of a building, structure or service system; 
b.  The provisions of this code do not apply to any specific case; 
c.  An equally good or more desirable form of installation can be employed in any specific case; or 
d.  This code or any of the technical codes or regulations under either have been misconstrued or incorrectly interpreted. 
2.  Variances. The board of appeals and adjustments may, upon appeal and after a hearing, vary the application of any provision of the code to any particular case when, in its opinion, the enforcement thereof would do manifest injustice and would be contrary to the spirit and purpose of the technical codes or public interest, and also finds all of the following: 
a.  That special conditions and circumstances exist which are peculiar to the building, structure or service system included and which are not applicable to others; 
b.  That special conditions and circumstances do not result from the action or inaction of the applicant; 
c.  That the variance requested is the minimum variance that will make possible the reasonable use of the building, structure or service system; 
d.  That granting the variance will not confer on the applicant any special privilege that is denied by this code to other buildings, structures or service systems; and 
e.  That granting the variance will be in harmony with the general intent and purpose of this code and will not be detrimental to the public health, safety and general welfare. 
    In granting the variance, the board may prescribe a reasonable time limit within which the action for which the variance is required shall be commenced or completed or both. In addition, the board may prescribe appropriate conditions and safeguards in conformity with this code. Violation of the conditions of a variance shall be deemed a violation of this code. 
3.  Notice of Appeal. A notice of appeal shall be in writing and filed with city clerk within thirty (30) calendar days after the decision appealed from is rendered by the building official. A fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) shall accompany such notice of appeal. 
4.  Unsafe or Dangerous Buildings or Service Systems. In the case of a building, structure, or service system which, in the opinion of the building official, is unsafe, unsanitary or dangerous, the building official may, in his order, limit the time for filing such notice of appeal to a shorter period, but not less than seven calendar days. 
K.  Severability. If any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this section for any reason is held to be unconstitutional, such decision shall not affect the validity of the remaining portions thereof. 
L.  Violations and Penalties. Any person, firm, corporation or agent who violates or fails to comply with a provision of this chapter or any technical code, or who causes such violation or noncompliance to exist, shall, upon conviction, be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 4/7/08 § 1; Ord. dated 4/6/04 §§ 3-12; prior code § 6-2) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 15; Ord. of 6-5-17(1), §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 8/6/18(1), § 1) 
15.04.030 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. dated March 20, 2017(1), repealed 15.04.030 in its entirety. Former 15.04.030 pertained to building inspector-salary, tenure of office, removal, disability of absence and derived from the prior code § 6-4. 
Chapter 15.08 - INTERNATIONAL PROPERTY AND MAINTENANCE CODE* 

15.08.010 - International Property and Maintenance Code adopted in part. 
A.  Statement of Purpose. There are or may be dwellings, dwelling units and accessory structures which are unfit for human habitation and use due to inadequate maintenance, obsolescence or abandonment, containing defects which increase the hazards of fire, accident or other calamities, and which, by reason of lack of maintenance, inadequate ventilation, light and sanitary facilities or other conditions, render such dwellings and accessory structures unsafe, unsanitary and dangerous or detrimental to the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the community. The city council is desirous of alleviating such unsafe, unsanitary and dangerous conditions presently existing within housing located within the city by adopting planned and properly enforced minimum housing standards that will result in the upgrading of living conditions and overall enhancement of the general health, safety and welfare of all residents of the city. It is the belief of the mayor and council of the city that the adoption and timely implementation of the International Property and Maintenance Code, as promulgated by the International Code Council, Inc., Birmingham, Alabama (but with certain exceptions and implementation phasing on the enforcement thereof), will accomplish the foregoing. 
B.  International Property and Maintenance Code Adopted. Except as otherwise provided in this chapter, that certain housing code known as the International Property Maintenance Code as promulgated and copyrighted by the International Code Council Inc., 900 Montclair Road, Birmingham, Alabama 35213 (hereinafter called the International Property and Maintenance Code, together with such future revisions and amendments thereto as may be adopted by the Georgia Department of Community Affairs pursuant to state law, is herein adopted as the housing code applicable to buildings and structures for residential and commercial occupancy in the city as fully and completely as if set out verbatim herein. A current copy of the International Property and Maintenance Code shall be maintained in the office of the city clerk and the office of the building official and shall be made available for public inspection or copying during regular business hours. 
(Ord. dated 9-7-12, § 1; Ord. dated 4/6/04 §§ 13-15) 
15.08.020 - Exceptions to and/or modifications of the International Property and Maintenance Code. 
    Anything contained in the International Property and Maintenance Code adopted under Section 15.08.010 of this chapter to the contrary notwithstanding, in the implementation and enforcement of the International Property and Maintenance Code in the city of Covington, Georgia, same shall be amended to the extent necessary to effect the following: 
A.  The enforcement officer for the International Property and Maintenance Code will be the building official and/or his designee serving and appointed from time to time in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.04.020 of this title, and, accordingly, at any place in the International Property and Maintenance Code the term "housing official" shall be mentioned, it shall be deemed to refer to the "building official" and/or the "building official's designee." 
B.  The provisions of Section 107.2.4 of the International Property and Maintenance Code require the person or persons responsible for correcting alleged violations to correct such violations in a timely manner. Such responsible person or persons shall have thirty (30) days to correct major violations and forty-five (45) days to correct minor violations. 
    A person responsible for the elimination of International Property and Maintenance Code violations may petition the mayor and council for an extension, not to exceed one hundred eighty (180) days; provided, however, no such extension shall be granted unless the reasonably estimated cost of such elimination will exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the applicant's projected disposable earnings (as defined at Section 302 of the Federal Consumer Protection Act (Public Law 90-321) and the mayor and council determine that the applicant has proceeded in good faith and used due diligence in accordance with the applicant's financial resources to eliminate the violations. 
C.  The provisions of Section 111.1 of the International Property and Maintenance Code dealing with the duty of the housing board of adjustments and appeals are amended by the adoption of an additional power and duty for the housing board of adjustments and appeals to be designated as subparagraph 3 of Section 111.8 as follows: 
"3. To permit, upon appeal in specific cases, such temporary or permanent variance from the terms of application of the International Property and Maintenance Code as will not be contrary to public interests, where, owing to specific conditions, a literal enforcement of the provisions of the International Property and Maintenance Code will, in an individual case, result in unnecessary hardship, so that the spirit of the provisions of the International Property and Maintenance Code shall be observed, public safety and welfare secured, and substantial justice done. Such variance may be granted in such individual case of unnecessary hardship only upon a finding by the Housing Board of Adjustments and Appeals of the city that: 
(a) There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the dwelling unit or the building in question because of its size, shape or construction; 
(b) The application of the provisions of the International Property and Maintenance Code to the particular dwelling unit or the building would create an unnecessary hardship; 
(c) Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the occupant(s) of the dwelling unit in question or impair the purposes and intent of the provisions of the International Property and Maintenance Code." 
(Ord. dated 5/21/07 § 18; Ord. dated 4/6/04 §§ 16-18) 
15.08.050 - Limitation of evidence gathered by inspections. 
    Anything contained in the International Property and Maintenance Code to the contrary notwithstanding, any evidence obtained in the course of any inspection of a dwelling unit pursuant to this chapter of the code shall not be admissible in any administrative or judicial proceeding not related to the enforcement of the provisions of this chapter of the code without the consent of the owner, occupant or other person in charge of the dwelling unit or room so inspected. 
(Ord. dated 4/6/04 § 20 (part)) 
15.08.060 - Continuation of existing housing board of adjustments and appeals. 
    The housing board of adjustments and appeals established and created under the code previously in effect under the city's former minimum housing code enacted in 1980 and each of the members serving thereunder shall continue to serve as the housing board of adjustments and appeals established and created under the International Property and Maintenance Code created by the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter is derived. 
(Ord. dated 4/6/04 § 20 (part)) 
Chapter 15.12 - FIRE AND SAFETY CODES 

15.12.010 - Adoption of International Fire and Life Safety Codes and state rules and regulations. 
    For the purposes of prescribing rules and regulations governing hazardous conditions to life and property due to fire and explosion, and the risks incidental thereto, and the purpose of establishing further standards, rules and regulations relative to the construction, alteration, removal, demolition, use, and occupancy and maintenance of the buildings and structures of every character within the corporate limits of the city of Covington, Georgia, except as herein expressly provided, there is adopted as fully and completely as if set out verbatim herein, the following: 
A.  The Georgia Safety Fire Rules and Regulations, promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner, pursuant to the provisions of Chapter 2 of Title 25, Official Code of Georgia Annotated (formerly known as the Georgia Safety Fire Act), whether now or hereafter adopted by the Georgia Fire Safety Commissioner, expressly including all future amendments thereto as and when the same become effective, copies of which will be on file in the office of the fire marshal of the Covington Fire Department Headquarters, 2101 Pace Street, Covington, Georgia, are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein (said rules and regulations are hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "state rules and regulations"); and 
B.  Appendices B, C and D to the International Fire Code, as heretofore adopted under former subparagraph A. of this section, are hereby expressly retained and such adoption continued uninterrupted. The following sub-codes of the National Fire Codes, as published by the National Fire Protection Association, a complete copy of which is now on file in the office of the fire marshal at the Covington Fire Department Headquarters, 2101 Pace Street, Covington, Georgia, are adopted and by this reference incorporated into this subsection as fully as if set out verbatim herein (said sub-codes as above described and hereinafter enumerated are hereinafter sometimes referred to as the "National Fire Codes"): 
C.  Title 8, Chapter 2, Article 3, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, entitled "Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings" and known as "The Uniform Act for the Application of Building and Fire Related Codes to Existing Buildings," including all future amendments thereto as and when the same become effective, copies of which will be on file in the office of the fire marshal of the Covington Fire Department Headquarters, 2101 Pace Street, Covington, Georgia, is hereby adopted and by this reference made a part hereof as fully as if set forth verbatim herein. 
Listing of National Fire Codes Adopted 
10 Portable Fire Extinguishers 11 Low, Medium, High Expansion Foam 12 Carbon Dioxide Extinguishing Systems 12A Halon 1301 Fire Extinguishing Systems 13 Installations of Sprinkler Systems 13D Sprinkler Systems in One- and Two-Family Dwellings 13R Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies 14 Standpipe and Hose Systems 15 Water Spray Fixed Systems 16 Deluge Foam Water Sprinkler Systems 17 Dry Chemical Extinguishing Systems 17A Wet Chemical Extinguishing Systems 18 Wetting Agent 18A Wetting Agents 36 Solvent Extraction Plants 37 Stationary Combustion Engines and Gas Turbines 45 Fire Protection for Laboratories Using Chemicals 51B Welding, Cutting and Other Hot Work 53 Recommended Practice Oxygen Enriched Atmospheres 54 National Fuel Gas Codes 59 Storage and Handling of Liquefied Petroleum Gases and Utility Plants 68 Guides for Venting of Deflagrations 70B Recommended Practice for Electrical Equipment Maintenance 70E Electrical Safety Requirements for Employee Workplaces 75 Protection of Electronic Computer/Data Processing Equipment 76 Telecommunications Facilities 77 Standard for Static Electricity 79 Electrical Standard for Industrial Machinery 88A Parking Structures 90A Installation of Air Conditioning and Ventilating Systems 90B Installation of Warm Air Heating and Air Conditioning Systems 91 Exhaust Systems for Air Conveying of Vapors, Gases, Mists, and Noncombustible Particulate Solids 96 Ventilation Control and Fire Protection of Commercial Cooking Operations 99B Hypobaric Facilities 101A Guide on Alternative Approaches to Life Safety 102 Grandstands, Folding and Telescoping Seating, Tents, and Membrane Structures 115 Recommended Practice on Laser Fire Protection 122 Fire Prevention and Control in Underground Metal and Nonmetal Mines 130 Transit and Passenger Rail Systems 140 Motion Picture and TV Production Facilities 150 Fire and Life Safety in Animal Housing Facilities 214 Water Cooling Towers 220 Types of Building Construction 221 High Challenge Fire Walls, Fire Walls, Fire Barriers Walls 232 Protection of Records 252 Fire Test of Door Assemblies 257 Fire Test for Window and Glass Block Assemblies 259 Test Method for Potential Heat of Building Materials 262 Method of Test for Flame Travel and Smoke of Wires and Cables 268 Exterior Wall Assembles, Test for Ignitability 269 Toxic Potency Data, Test for Developing 270 Measurement of Smoke Obscuration Using a Conical Radiant Source 274 Pipe Insulation Test to Evaluate Fire Performance Characteristics 285 Evaluation of Flame Propagation Characteristics of exterior Non-Load-Bearing Wall Assemblies 287 Flammability of Materials Clean Rooms 288 Floor Fire Door Assemblies, Fire Tests 290 Passive Protection Materials for Use on LP Gas Containers, Fire Testing 291 Recommended Practice for Fire Flow Testing and Marking of Hydrants 301 Merchant Vessels 302 Pleasure and Commercial Motor Craft 306 Control of Gas Hazards on Vessels 307 Marine Terminals Piers and Wharves 312 Fire Protection of Vessels During Construction, Conversion, Repair, and Lay-up 326 Safeguarding Tanks and Containers 329 Handling Releases of Flammable and Combustible Liquids and Gases 408 Aircraft Hand Portable Fire Extinguishers 410 Aircraft Maintenance 415 Airport Terminal Buildings, Fueling Ramp Drainage and Loading Walkways 418 Heliports 423 Construction and Protection of Aircraft Engine Test Facilities 424 Guide for Airport/Community Emergency Planning 496 Purged and Pressurized Enclosures for Electrical Equipment 497 Recommended Practice for the Classification of Flammable Liquids, Gases, or Vapors and of Hazardous Locations for Electrical Installations in Chemical Process Areas 499 Classifications of Combustible Dusts and of Hazardous Locations Electrical Installations in Chemical Process Areas 501A Fire Safety Criteria for Manufactured Home Installations, Sites, and Communities 502 Road Tunnels, Bridges, and Other Limited Access Highways 520 Subterranean Spaces 550 Fire Safety Concepts Tree 555 Evaluating Potential for Room Flashover Guide 600 Industrial Fire Brigades 610 Motor Sports Venues 705 Recommended Practice for Field Flame Text for Textiles and Films 780 Installation of Lighting Protection Systems 801 Fire Protection for Facilities Handling Radioactive Materials 804 Fire Protection for Advanced Light Water Reactor Electric Generating Plants 805 Fire Protection Light Water Reactor Electric Generating Plants 820 Fire Protection in Wastewater Treatment and Collection Facilities 850 Recommended Practice for Electric Generating Plants 851 Recommended Practice for Fire Protection for Hydroelectric Generating Plants 853 Stationary Fuel Cell Power Systems 909 Protection of Cultural Resources 914 Fire Protection in Historic Structures 1141 Planned Building Groups 1192 Recreational Vehicles 1194 Recreational Vehicle Parks and Campgrounds 1961 Fire Hose 1962 Inspection, Care, Use of Fire Hose, Couplings, and Nozzles 1963 Fire Hose Connections 2010 Fixed Aerosol Fire-Extinguishing Systems  
as the same may be hereafter duly amended from time to time. 
(Ord. dated 8/16/08 §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 3/17/03 §§ 3, 4; prior code § 10-2; Ord. dated 8/18/14(2), §§ 1-3) 
15.12.020 - Application of International Fire Code, Life Safety Code, state rules and regulations, and National Fire Codes. 
A.  Except as provided in subsection B of this section or in other provisions of this chapter of the code, the International Fire Code, Life Safety Code, state rules and regulations, and the National Fire Codes, as adopted by the city under Section 15.12.010, and the other provisions of this chapter, shall apply to buildings, structures, premises, facilities, occupancies, conditions and regulated activities as herein specified within the corporate limits of the city. 
B.  The International Fire Code, Life Safety Code, state rules and regulations, National Fire Codes and the other provisions of this chapter shall not apply to one- and two-family dwellings, wherever they may be located within the municipal limits of Covington, Georgia. As used herein, "one- and two-family dwellings" shall have the same meaning as set forth in Section 16.04.020 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 3/17/03 § 4; prior code § 10-3) 
15.12.030 - Building permits and certificates of occupancy subject to review by fire marshal. 
    The fire marshal shall review the plans and specifications for proposed construction for which application building permits are made in accordance with Section 15.04.020H. of this code to ensure that all proposed buildings and structures and modifications thereof are in compliance with the provisions of this chapter. No building permit shall be issued by the building inspector in accordance with said section unless and until the fire marshal concurs therein showing the compliance of such proposed construction with the provisions of this chapter. 
    No building or structure subject to the provisions of this chapter shall be used or occupied until the fire marshal has issued a certificate of occupancy therefore. Upon completion of any new building or structure or the conversion of any existing building or structure so as to make same subject to this chapter, application shall be made to the proposed tenant or the owner of such building or structure for a certificate of occupancy. The application shall be on such form as specified by the fire marshal and shall be accompanied by an application fee established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution. The fire marshal shall proceed to inspect the subject building or structure to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Within ten (10) days after said application, the fire marshal shall either issue the certificate of occupancy to the applicant or notify the applicant in writing of the reasons for denial of the certificate of occupancy. A certificate of occupancy, when issued, shall run for the life of the building, provided that the internal or external features are not materially altered and the type of occupancy remains unchanged and there has been no fire of serious consequence or other hazard discovered. In existing buildings when substandard conditions are found, temporary occupancy may be permitted. A permit for temporary occupancy shall carry a time limit being necessary to make proper corrections in order to bring the subject building or structure into compliance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 18; prior code § 10-4) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 16) 
15.12.040 - Definitions used in International Fire Code. 
    As used in the International Fire Code, enumerated as a state minimum standard code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a), the phrase "fire official" shall mean the fire marshal serving in accordance with the provisions of Section 2.36.020B. of this code. 
(Ord. dated 3/17/03 § 4; prior code § 10-5; Ord. dated 8/18/14(2), § 4) 
15.12.050 - Exception to the adoption of International Fire Code. 
    The International Fire Code, enumerated as a state minimum standard code pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25(a), is amended and modified by the complete deletion of Chapter 106, Board of Appeals and Adjustments, as though said chapter had never been so enumerated. The provisions of Section 15.12.070 of this code shall govern any and all appeals arising due to the application of the International Fire Code. Any reference in the International Fire Code to the board of appeals and adjustments shall be construed to mean and refer to the mayor and council of the city. 
(Ord. dated 3/17/03 §§ 4, 5; prior code § 10-6; Ord. dated 8/18/14(2), § 5) 
15.12.060 - Modifications of codes, generally. 
    The fire marshal shall have the power to modify any of the provisions of the International Fire Code and Life Safety Code upon application in writing by the owner, lessee or his duly authorized agent, when there are practical difficulties in the way of carrying out the strict letter of this chapter, provided that the intent of the chapter and the applicable code shall be observed, public safety secured, and substantial justice done. The particulars of such modifications, when granted or allowed, and the decision of the fire marshal, shall be entered upon the records of the said bureau and a signed copy shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(Ord. dated 3/17/03 § 4; prior code § 10-12) 
15.12.070 - Appeals. 
    Whenever the fire marshal has disapproved an application or refused to grant a permit applied for, or when it is claimed that a provision of this chapter does not apply or that the true intent and meaning of the within mentioned codes have been misconstrued or wrongly interpreted, the applicant shall be entitled to appeal from the decision of the said fire marshal to the mayor and council by filing written notice of appeal within thirty (30) days from the day of the decision appealed. 
(Prior code § 10-13) 
15.12.080 - Penalties. 
    Any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this chapter adopted including the codes, rules and regulations adopted under Section 15.12.010, or who should fail to comply therewith or who should fail to comply with or who should violate any order made thereunder, or who should build in violation of any detailed statement of specifications or plans submitted and approved thereunder and from which no appeal has been taken, or who should fail to comply with such an order as affirmed or modified by the governing body, or by any other court of competent jurisdiction, within the time fixed therein, shall be in violation of this chapter and upon conviction thereof shall be punished in accordance with Section 1.12.010 of this code. The imposition of one penalty for any violation shall not excuse the violation or permit it to continue, and all such persons shall be required to correct or remedy such violations or defects within a reasonable time. The application of the above penalty shall not be held to prevent the enforced removal of prohibited conditions. 
(Prior code § 10-14) 
15.12.090 - Nonliability of persons enforcing chapter. 
    Any public employee, officers or other person responsible for the enforcement of this chapter, including the fire marshal, acting for the governing body in the discharge of its duties, shall not therefore render himself liable personally, and each person is relieved from all personal liability from any damage that may occur to persons and/or property as a result of any act required or permitted in the discharge of his duties. 
(Prior code § 10-15) 
Chapter 15.16 - FIRE WALLS AND FIRE PARTITIONS 

15.16.010 - Scope. 
    This section shall apply to all two-family dwelling units and multiple-family dwelling units constructed within the confines of the city of Covington, Georgia, after the effective date of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 6-50) 
15.16.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter: 
    "Fire partition" means a wall or common floor/ceiling which serves to resist the spread of fire, but does not qualify as a fire wall; however, a fire wall does qualify as a fire partition. The continuity of the fire partition shall extend from the top of the foundation to the roof/ceiling assembly or through the floor/ceiling assembly to the underside of the roof deck. If any areas are not continuous, then fire blocking meeting the then-current International Building Code specifications shall be installed. 
    "Fire resistance rating" means the aggregate of the fire-resistance ratings of construction material used in a fire wall or fire partition, all as established by the National Fire Protection Association Standard 220. 
    "Fire wall" means a wall of noncombustible construction having protected openings, which subdivides a building into separate areas and into separate buildings to restrict the spread of fire and which extends from the foundation of any such building continuously through all stories to and above the roof of any said building, except where the roof is of fire-resistant construction and the wall extends tightly against the underside of the roof slab thereof. In residential units protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.20.050 of this code, a fire wall shall extend from the foundation of such building through all stories and shall fit tight against the underside of the roof slab. 
(Ord. dated 4/2/12, §§ 1, 2; Prior code § 6-51) 
15.16.030 - Requirements for two-family dwelling units and townhomes. 
    There shall be a fire wall having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours separating each individual dwelling unit in all two-family dwelling units. The foregoing provision shall apply to all common walls and common floors/ceilings separating attached dwelling units. Provided however, if the dwelling units are protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 15.24.050 of this code, the fire wall separating each individual dwelling unit shall have a fire-resistance rating of not less than one hour. 
(Ord. dated 4/2/12, § 3; Prior code § 6-52) 
15.16.040 - Requirements for multiple-family dwelling units. 
A.  In addition to the fire wall requirements of subsections B and C of this section, there shall be a fire partition having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours separating each individual dwelling unit. This includes horizontal walls and floor/ceiling assemblies. If the complete building is sprinkled according to Section 15.24.50, then the rating may be reduced to one hour. 
B.  In all multiple-family dwelling units of more than one story, there shall be a fire wall having a fire-resistance rating of not less than four hours so that the dwelling unit will be separated into areas not to exceed four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area between end walls and fire walls or between fire walls. Thus, a multistory apartment building containing more than four thousand (4,000) square feet of floor area, but less than eight thousand (8,000) square feet would need at least one fire wall. 
C.  In multiple-family dwelling units of one story, there shall be a fire wall having a fire-resistance rating of not less than four hours so that the dwelling unit will be separated into areas not to exceed three thousand (3,000) square feet of floor area between end walls and fire walls or between fire walls. 
D.  If the multiple-family dwelling unit referred to in subsection B of this section is protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 15.24.050 of this code, there shall be a fire wall having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours so that the dwelling unit will be separated into areas not to exceed eight thousand (8,000) square feet of floor area between end walls and fire walls or between fire walls. 
E.  In multiple-family dwelling units of one story protected by an automatic sprinkler system in accordance with Section 15.24.050 of this code, there shall be a firewall having a fire-resistance rating of not less than two hours so that the dwelling units will be separated into areas not to exceed six thousand (6,000) square feet of floor area between end walls and fire walls or between fire walls. 
(Ord. dated 4/2/12, § 4; Prior code § 6-53) 
15.16.050 - Authority for enforcement. 
    The fire marshal in charge of the fire prevention bureau, as established and created under the provisions of Section 2.36.020 of this code shall have authority to direct the placement of fire walls and fire partitions required by this chapter so as to ensure compliance herewith. 
(Prior code § 6-54) 
Chapter 15.20 - FIRE STANDARDS APPLICABLE TO CERTAIN BUILDINGS 

15.20.010 - Application of chapter. 
    The provisions of this chapter have been adopted pursuant to the 1982 amendments by the Georgia General Assembly to the Georgia Fire Safety Act. Pursuant to the provisions of Section 25-2-12(b), Official Code of Georgia Annotated (formerly Section 92A-706[b] Georgia Code Annotated, the city of Covington does adopt the "State Minimum Fire Safety Standards," adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated pursuant to Chapter 2 of Title 25, Official Code of Georgia Annotated, to apply only to those buildings and structures listed in Section 25-2-13, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. As used in this chapter, the term "state rules and regulations" shall mean the State Minimum Fire Safety Standards adopted in the rules and regulations promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to the aforesaid Official Code of Georgia Annotated from time to time including all subsequent revisions thereof as fully as if same were set out herein in their entirety. The provisions of this chapter and the state rules and regulations shall apply only to those buildings and structures listed in Section 25-2-13, Official Code of Georgia Annotated. Without limiting the foregoing, the provisions of Section 25-2-12(a), Official Code of Georgia Annotated, are specifically adopted for application to buildings and structures located within the city of Covington, Georgia. 
(Prior code § 10-30) 
15.20.020 - Plans and specifications for proposed buildings-Certificate of occupancy-Fees. 
A.  Plans and specifications for all proposed buildings and structures which come under the classification of Section 15.20.010 of the code shall be submitted to and receive approval by the fire marshal in charge of the fire prevention bureau of the city (hereinafter called the "fire marshal") before any building permit may be issued or construction started thereon. All such plans and specifications submitted as required herein shall be accompanied by the required plan review fee payable to the city and shall bear the seal and Georgia registration number of the drafting architect or engineer or otherwise have the approval of the fire marshal. A complete set of the approved plans and specifications shall be maintained on the construction site and construction shall proceed in compliance with the minimum fire safety standards under which such plans and specifications were approved. The owner of any such building or structure, or his authorized representative, shall notify the fire marshal upon completion of approximately eighty (80) percent of the construction thereof and shall apply for a certificate of occupancy when construction of such building or structure is completed. Payment of the plan review fee established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution, which may vary depending upon the square footage of the building, shall be required. 
B.  Every building or structure which comes under the classification in Section 15.20.010 shall have a certificate of occupancy issued by the fire marshal before such building or structure may be occupied. Such certificates of occupancy shall be issued for each business establishment within a building or structure, shall carry a charge per business establishment as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution, shall state the occupant load for such business establishment or building, shall be posted in a prominent location within such business establishment or building, and shall run for the life of the building, except as provided in subsection C. of this section. 
(Prior code § 10-31) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 17) 
15.20.030 - Temporary occupancy permits. 
    In existing buildings or structures under the classification of Section 15.20.010 when substandard conditions are found, a temporary occupancy permit may be issued, such permit carrying a time limit for a time adjusted to meet the amount of time being necessary to make the proper corrections in order to bring the building up to standard. All certificates of occupancy shall be issued against the building and shall not require renewal because of change of ownership. The same set of fees for certificates of occupancy as applicable to proposed buildings covered under Section 15.20.020 shall apply. The fire marshal shall determine the time limit in complying with any of provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-32) 
15.20.040 - Buildings and structures to comply with state rules and regulations. 
A.  Every existing building and structure which comes under the classification of Section 15.20.010 of the code shall comply with the minimum fire safety standards specified in the state rules and regulations. 
B.  Every proposed building and structure which comes under the classification of Section 15.20.010 shall comply with the adopted minimum fire safety standards under the state rules and regulations that were in effect on the date that the plans and specifications therefor were received by the fire marshal for review and approval in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.20.020. 
(Prior code § 10-33) 
15.20.050 - Right of entry to inspect premises. 
    The fire marshal shall have the authority at all times of day or night to enter in or upon and examine all buildings or premises where a fire is in progress or has occurred and other buildings or premises adjacent or near the same. Likewise, the fire marshal shall have the right to enter in and upon all buildings and premises subject to this article at all reasonable times for the purpose of examination or inspection. Upon complaint submitted in writing, the fire marshal may enter in or upon any building or premises between the hours of sunrise and sunset for the purpose of investigating such complaint. The fire marshal, upon the complaint of any person whenever he deems it necessary, may inspect or cause to be inspected all buildings and premises covered by this chapter. Anything contained herein to the contrary notwithstanding, any inspections of buildings and premises by the fire marshal not otherwise open to the public shall be made only upon securing the consent of the owner or occupant of said premises or upon securing of a search warrant for the inspection of said premises issued by the city recorder upon the showing of probable cause of a violation of this code. 
(Prior code § 10-34) 
15.20.060 - Notice to correct conditions. 
    Whenever the fire marshal shall find any building or other structure which for want of repair, or by reason of age or dilapidated condition or from any other cause, is especially hazardous from fire or which is so situated as to endanger other property or the safety of the public, whenever such officer shall find in or around any building, combustible or explosive matter or inflammables or other conditions dangerous to the safety of such buildings, notice may be given to the owner or agent and occupant of any building coming under the provisions of this section to correct such unsafe condition as may be found. 
(Prior code § 10-35) 
15.20.070 - Court order to correct conditions. 
    If any owner, agent or occupant fails to comply with the notice specified in the preceding section, the fire marshal, upon approval of the governing authority of the city, may petition the court for a rule nisi to show cause why an order should not be issued by the court that the same be removed or remedied, and such court order, in vacation or regular term, shall forthwith be complied with by the owner or occupant of such building or structure. If such order is made by the court, such owner shall comply with same within such time that may be fixed in said court order. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall be deemed to be a waiver of the city's right to cause citation to be issued to the owner or occupant of any building or structure and the penalties specified in Section 15.12.080. Section 15.12.080 of this code is expressly made applicable to any violations of the provisions of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 10-36) 
15.20.080 - Failure to comply with court order-Effect. 
    If any person fails to comply with the order of the court within the time fixed, then the city shall cause such building or premises to be forthwith repaired, torn down or demolished, and such materials removed and all dangerous conditions remedied, as the case may be, at the expense of the city; and if the owner thereof, within thirty (30) days after notice in writing of the amount of such expense, fails, neglects or refuses to repay the city the expense thereby incurred, the city shall issue fi.fa. against the owner of the property for the expense actually incurred. 
(Prior code § 10-37) 
15.20.090 - Final authority for ordering enforcement. 
    The final authority for ordering the carrying out and enforcement of the preceding sections to ensure compliance with this chapter shall be by order of the court and not by the fire marshal. 
(Prior code § 10-38) 
15.20.100 - Exemption from fees. 
    All federal, state and county or city publicly owned buildings covered by this article are exempt from any fee or license which may be herein specified. Such fees or licenses may be waived by a resolution of the governing authority where such fees are chargeable to churches and other charitable organizations. 
(Prior code § 10-39) 
15.20.110 - Sovereign immunity. 
    Nothing contained in this chapter or this title shall be construed to constitute a waiver of the sovereign immunity of the city or any officer or employee thereof in carrying out the provisions of this chapter. No action shall be maintained against the city or any officer, elected officer, or employee thereof for damages sustained as a result of any fire or related hazard covered by this chapter by reason of any inspection or other action taken or not taken pursuant to this chapter. Nothing in this chapter shall be construed to relieve any property owner or lessee thereof from any legal duty, obligation or liability incidental to the ownership, maintenance and use of such property. 
(Prior code § 10-40) 
Chapter 15.24 - FIRE PREVENTION GENERALLY 

15.24.010 - Clearing property of debris and refuse where a building is burned. 
A.  Where a building or structure has burned, the premises must be cleared of all debris and refuse within ninety (90) days thereafter. If such premises are not cleared within the period, the same shall constitute a violation of Section 8.04.130 of this code and may be treated accordingly. 
B.  Provided, however, that if the remains of a building mentioned under subsection A of this section constitute a safety hazard, the building inspector or any other official or citizen of this city may at any time file a complaint with the police department as provided by Chapter 8.12 of this code to have such condition declared to be a nuisance and for the abatement of same as therein provided. 
C.  The provisions of this section are and shall be construed to be cumulative of all other provisions of this code regarding the condition of property within the city, and shall not be construed to alter, amend or repeal any other such provision. 
(Prior code § 10-9) 
15.24.020 - Inspection of buildings and premises and authority to enter premises. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the fire marshal or other representatives of the bureau or the city fire department to inspect all buildings and premises except the interiors of dwellings expressly exempted from the application of this chapter, as often as may be necessary for the purpose of ascertaining and causing to be corrected any conditions liable to cause fire, endanger life from fire, or any violations of the provisions or intent of this chapter dealing with fire hazards and life safety. 
B.  The chief of the fire department, fire marshal or any inspector therefor may, at all reasonable hours, enter any building or premises covered by the application of this chapter for the purpose of making any inspection or investigation which, under the provisions of this chapter, he or they may deem necessary to be made. The chief of the fire department, fire marshal or any inspectors thereof shall be permitted by the owner, lessee, manager or operator of any building or premises to enter and inspect their building or premises at the time and for the purpose stated in this section. 
C.  Any inspections by the chief of the fire department, fire marshal or any inspectors thereof of buildings and premises not otherwise open to the public shall be made only upon securing the consent of the owner or occupant thereof or upon securing of a search warrant for the inspection of the premises issued by the city recorder upon the showing of probable cause of a violation of this code. 
(Prior code § 10-16) 
15.24.030 - Prohibition on use of inverting-type fire extinguishers. 
    Due to the discontinuance of the listing by Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc., of inverting types of fire extinguishers and difficulties encountered in finding suitable replacement parts and recharge materials, notwithstanding any provision contained in the Fire Safety Code, the Life Safety Code and the Georgia State Rules and Regulations, as same apply to Covington, Georgia, inverting types of fire extinguishers shall not qualify as an approved fire extinguisher that may be required under any of the aforesaid provisions. 
(Prior code § 10-17) 
15.24.040 - Discharge of combustible/ flammable liquids or other hazardous substances. 
    It is unlawful to place, deposit, discharge or to permit to be placed, deposited or discharged on or into any public or private street or roadway, public or private property, natural outlet, drainage ditch, storm sewer or sanitary sewer combustible or flammable liquids or vapors or any other hazardous substance which may create a safety hazard to persons or property. Nothing contained in this section, however, shall prohibit the proper storage and/or transportation of such combustible or flammable liquids or other hazardous substances otherwise in accordance with the various codes and regulations adopted pursuant to Section 15.12.010. It shall be the responsibility of the person or persons responsible for the discharge of combustible or flammable liquids or other hazardous substances to bear the costs of the removal and proper disposition of the discharged liquid or hazardous substance. 
(Prior code § 10-18) 
15.24.050 - Buildings and structures required to have approved automatic sprinkler systems. 
A.  General Requirements and Specifications. Except to the extent hereinafter provided, from and after the effective date of this section, all buildings or structures enumerated under subsection (C) of this section on which construction or renovation is commenced within the city shall be required to have an approved automatic sprinkler system. 
    As used in this chapter, an approved automatic sprinkler system shall be one meeting the specifications of and installed in accordance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Associations, National Fire Codes, and the various sub codes thereof dealing with "Installation of Sprinkler Systems" (now NFPA 13), "Sprinkler Systems, One- and Two-Family Dwellings," (now NFPA 13 D) and "Sprinkler Systems in Residential Occupancies up to and Including Four Stories in Height" (now NFPA 13 R), as may be in effect from time to time within the city in accordance with the provisions of Section 15.12.010(D) of this code. All references in this section to "NFPA" or National Fire Protection Association or National Fire Codes means the then-current national fire codes as adopted by the National Fire Protection Association and otherwise adopted by the city under the provisions of Section 15.12.010(D) of this code. Anything contained in this section to the contrary notwithstanding, the provisions of this section shall not apply to any single-family residence or duplex occupancy. All such sprinkler systems shall have an approved fire alarm system installed in accordance with NFPA 72, shall be electronically supervised and monitored at all times and shall be required to include the installation of horns, strobes and manual pull stations. 
B.  Definitions. The following words and terms shall, for the purpose of this section of the code, have the following meanings in addition to the words and terms defined elsewhere in this chapter except as otherwise expressly provided or unless the context otherwise requires: 
    "Ambulatory health care" means buildings or portions thereof used to provide services or treatment simultaneously to one or more patients that provide, on an outpatient basis, treatment for patients who are incapable of undertaking self-preservation under emergency conditions without the assistance of others or which provide, on an outpatient basis, anesthesia for patients who are incapable of undertaking action for self-preservation under emergency conditions without the assistance of others. 
    "Apartment" means buildings containing three or more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities whether designated as apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, or by any other name, and more than two stories in height. In determining whether or not an apartment is more than two stories in height, basement areas below grade not normally occupied and unfinished attic areas not normally occupied shall be excluded from such determination. 
    "Assembly" means buildings or portions of buildings used for gathering together fifty (50) or more people for such purposes as deliberation, worship, entertainment, amusement, or awaiting transportation or dining (restaurant). 
    "Business" means buildings or structures used for the keeping of accounts and records and similar purposes. 
    "Community living arrangement" shall mean, for the purpose of this chapter, any residence or building, whether operated for profit or not, which is subject to being licensed by the State of Georgia, that undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of daily personal services, supports, care or treatment exclusively for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or manager by blood or marriage and whose residential services are financially supported, in whole or in part, by funds designated through the department of human services, division of mental health, developmental disabilities, and addictive diseases. 
    "Condominium" means individual ownership units in a multifamily structure, combined with joint ownership of common areas of the building and grounds in accordance with all applicable provisions of this title and the Georgia Condominium Act. 
    "Daycare center" means a daycare facility, subject to licensure or commission by the Georgia Department of Human Resources, where at least seven, but not more than twelve (12) clients receive care. 
    "Detention and correctional facilities" means buildings providing sleeping facilities for four or more residents and are occupied by persons who are generally prevented from taking self-preservation actions because of security measures not under the occupants' control. 
    "Dormitories" means buildings or spaces in buildings where group sleeping accommodations are provided for persons not members of the same family group in one room or in a series of closely associated rooms under joint occupancy and single management, as in college dormitories, fraternity houses, military barracks, with or without meals, but without separate cooking facilities. 
    "Fire hazard" means an activity, circumstance, condition, situation, combination of materials, material process, use or improper use of heat sources, or that on the basis of applicable documentation, data, or sources deemed reliable by the authority having jurisdiction, which can cause an unwanted fire, a fire out of control, an explosion, or a related condition such as panic from a fear of smoke, fire, or explosion, that the authority having jurisdiction determines to be a risk to persons, property, or the health, safety and/or welfare of the jurisdiction. 
    "Group daycare home" means a daycare facility subject to licensure or commission by the Georgia Department of Human Resources where at least seven but not more than twelve (12) clients receive care. A group daycare home is within the definition of a dwelling unit. 
    "Health care facility" means hospitals; other health care units, including but not limited to podiatric facilities; skilled nursing facilities; intermediate care facilities; personal care homes; ambulatory surgical or obstetrical facilities; health maintenance organizations; home health agencies; diagnostic, treatment or rehabilitation centers; and facilities which are devoted to the provision of treatment and rehabilitative care for periods continuing twenty-four (24) hours or longer for persons who have traumatic brain injury, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 37-3-1. 
    "High hazard" means and includes buildings having high hazard materials, processes or contents. 
    "Hotel," "motel" means buildings or group of buildings under the same management in which there are more than fifteen (15) sleeping accommodations for hire, primarily used by transients who are lodged with or without meals, whether designated as a hotel, inn, club, motel or by any other name. So-called apartment hotels shall be classified as hotels because they are potentially subject to transient occupancy like that of hotels. 
    "Industrial" means factories and manufacturing facilities making products of all kinds and properties used for operations such as processing, assembling, mixing, packaging, finishing or decorating, repairing and similar operations. 
    "Limited care (custodial care) facility" means a residence or building, or part thereof, used on a 24-hour basis for the housing, lodging or boarding of persons who are incapable of self-preservation because of age, physical limitations due to accident or illness, or mental limitations such as mental illness or chemical dependency. This occupancy classification also includes traumatic brain injury facilities. 
    "Lodging or rooming houses" means buildings in which separate sleeping rooms are rented providing sleeping accommodations for a total of fifteen (15) or less persons on either a transient or permanent basis, with or without meals, but without separate cooking facilities for individual occupants. 
    "Mercantile" means stores, markets and other rooms, buildings or structures for the display and sale of merchandise. 
    "Mixed occupancy" means the use of a building or structure in which two or more classes of occupancy or occupants exist concurrently in the same building or structure. 
    "Multi-family dwelling unit" means a building containing three or more living units with independent cooking and bathroom facilities, whether designated as apartment house, tenement, garden apartment, quad-plex, condo or by any other name, and shares a common wall or walls or floor/ceiling assembly. (Exception would be townhomes, see definition.) 
    "Nursing home" means building or part thereof used for the lodging, boarding and nursing care, on a twenty-four (24) hour basis, of four or more persons who, because of mental or physical incapacity, may be unable to provide for their own needs and safety without the assistance of another person. 
    "Personal care home/assisted living facility" means any building or part thereof that is used for the lodging or boarding of residents, not related by blood or marriage to the owners or operators, for the purpose of providing personal care services and licensed as a personal care home or assisted living facility. 
    "Renovation" means the altering or improving of a building or structure that: 
a.  Results in the change of the occupancy of the building or structure to an occupancy that requires the installation of an approved automatic sprinkler system hereunder no matter how large the building or structure is; or 
b.  Involves an estimated expenditure for the changes, alterations or improvements of an amount greater than the fair market value for ad valorem tax purposes for Newton County, Georgia, for the building or structure being altered or improved (exclusive of land) in accordance with the most recent Newton County tax digest that has been approved by the revenue commissioner of the Georgia Department of Revenue. 
    "Residential-custodial care facility" means a personal care home, assisted living facility, limited custodial care facility, or community living arrangement used for the lodging or boarding of unrelated persons who are incapable of self-preservation because of age or physical or mental limitations, sometimes known as, "home for the aged", "facility for social rehabilitation", or "mentally retarded care facility". 
    "Storage" means all buildings and structures used primarily for the storage or sheltering of goods, merchandise, products, vehicles or animals. 
    "Supervisory care facility" means a residence or building or part thereof used for the lodging or boarding of mental health patients who are capable of self-preservation, but who require supervision and who are receiving training or other health-related care and who may have imposed upon them security measures not under their control. 
    "Townhouse" or "townhome" means a single-family dwelling unit which is erected in a row as a part of a single building, on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by a fire wall or walls and have egress from front and rear to grade. 
    "Twenty-four (24) hour day care" means buildings or structures in which at least seven children receive care, maintenance and supervision by other than their parents or legal guardian for twenty-four (24) hours per day. 
C.  Requirements for Initial Construction and Renovations. Except for single-family residences or duplex occupancies, the following buildings or structures located within the city on which initial construction or renovation commences after the effective date of this section shall have an approved automatic sprinkler system in accordance with the provisions of this code, to wit: 
1.  Buildings or structures two or more stories in height regardless of occupancy (other than single-family residence or duplex occupancy). 
2.  Buildings or structures for residential occupancy that fall within the following classifications or definitions: condominiums, townhomes, townhouses, personal care homes, assisted living facilities, daycare centers, group daycare homes, hotels, motels, apartments, dormitories, lodging or boardinghouses and multifamily dwellings, residential-custodial care, supervisory care facilities, community living arrangement. 
3.  Buildings or structures occupied for mercantile purposes with five thousand (5,000) square feet total gross area throughout stories below the level of discharge where such stories have an area exceeding two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet where used for the sale, storage or handling of combustible goods and merchandise. 
4.  Buildings and structures occupied for health care purposes, which shall include, but are not limited to, hospitals, nursing homes, residential-custodial care and supervisory care facilities, limited care facilities, ambulatory health care facilities and hospices. 
5.  Buildings or structures occupied for detentional and/or correctional facilities including, but not limited to, penal institutions, reformatories, jails, detention facilities and correctional facilities. 
6.  Buildings or structures to be occupied for assembly purposes, dance halls, discotheques, nightclubs, assembly occupancies with festival seating and buildings with a rated occupancy load of three hundred (300) or more persons or a rated occupancy of one hundred (100) or more persons if alcoholic beverages are served in the building or structure. Examples of such assembly occupancies (assuming the occupancy load aforementioned) shall include, but are not limited to, theaters, motion picture theaters, auditoriums, exhibition halls, libraries, skating rinks, bowling alleys, restaurants, churches, dance halls, drinking establishments, courtrooms, conference rooms and multi-purpose facilities. 
7.  Buildings or structures used for a business occupancy that are either two stories or more in height, having a story with an area of over ten thousand (10,000) square feet, or having a gross area of twenty thousand (20,000) square feet or more within the building. Business occupancy shall include, but is not limited to, doctors, dentists, lawyers, insurance and other professional offices, city halls, town halls, courthouses, colleges and university instructional buildings, general offices and governmental offices. 
8.  Buildings and structures for industrial occupancy if the building or structure exceeds ten thousand (10,000) square feet of space or if the industrial occupancy is classified as high hazard or fire hazard, regardless of the size. 
9.  Storage buildings or structures occupied for storage if the building or structure exceeds fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet of space or if the storage occupancy is classified as high hazard regardless of the size. 
10.  All buildings or structures occupied by a twenty-four (24) hour daycare facility, daycare center or group daycare home. 
11.  Buildings or structures occupied as mixed occupancies or occupants. 
D.  Determination of Building Height. In determining whether or not a building or structure is over two stories in height, basement areas below grade and unfinished attic areas not generally open to the public or occupied by employees of the business occupying such building or structure shall be excluded from such determination. 
E.  Section Provisions in Addition to Other Code Provisions. The provisions of this section are in addition to any provisions of this code requiring an approved automatic sprinkler system for building structures and/or occupancies within the city including, but not limited to, the National Fire Code adopted by Section 15.12.010 as then in effect within the city. 
(Ord. dated 10-15-12(1), § 1; Ord. dated 4/2/12, §§ 5-17; Ord. dated 6/16/08, §§ 5-14; Ord. dated 3/17/03, §§ 6, 7; prior code § 10-19) 
15.24.060 - Required fire prevention equipment for certain locations. 
A.  Any building located within the corporate limits of the city having an automatic fire detection or fire suppression system shall be equipped with a rapid-entry key lock box of a type approved by the Covington Fire Department and mounted at or near the main entrance to the building or property at a height of six feet above final grade. Such lock box shall at all times contain clearly labeled keys providing access to any locked area in the building and/or the property on which the building is located. 
B.  The required fire department connection for any commercial building located within the corporate limits of the city having an automatic fire suppression system shall be equipped with a rapid-entry key locking cap of a type approved by the Covington fire department. 
C.  Any commercial or industrial property located within the corporate limits of the city and which is protected by fences, gates, walls or other control circuits shall be equipped with a high-security padlock or key switch of a type approved by the Covington Fire Department. 
D.  Owner occupied one- or two-family dwellings shall be exempt from the requirements of this section. 
E.  No certificate of occupancy shall be issued for a newly constructed building unless such building is in full compliance with this section. 
F.  When toilet facilities are required under Section 403 of the International Plumbing Code, emergency lighting as set forth in Section 7.9 of the National Fire Protection Association Life Safety Code shall be provided. 
(Ord. dated 12/4/17(1), § 1; Ord. dated 3/20/17(2), § 1; Ord. dated 3/17/03, § 8) 
15.24.070 - Alarm systems. 
A.  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
    "Alarm system" means an assembly of equipment and devices designed and installed in accordance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Alarm Code (now NFPA 72), as adopted pursuant to the state rules and regulations, at any premises other than a single-family residence or duplex to detect a fire and signal the occupants of premises and/or the city fire department. 
    "Auxiliary alarm system" means a system connected in accordance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Alarm Code (now NFPA 72) to a fire alarm system for transmitting a fire alarm to the city 911 communications center. 
    "Central station" means a system or group of systems in which the operations of circuits and devices are signaled automatically to, recorded in, maintained by, and supervised from a listed central station staffed by competent and experienced servers and operators in accordance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Alarm Code (now NFPA 72). 
    "Emergency forces notification" means an emergency alarm system that is arranged to transmit a fire alarm automatically to alert the fire department of fire via any of the following means which are in accordance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Alarm Code (now NFPA 72): 
(1)  Auxiliary alarm systems; 
(2)  Central station connection; 
(3)  Proprietary system; or 
(4)  Remote station connection. 
    "False alarm" means activating an alarm system, otherwise causing an alarm system to be activated, or operating or maintaining an alarm system which is activated at a time when no fire is in progress at a premises, whereby the occupants are signaled and/or public safety officers are dispatched to such premises. 
    "Fire alarm action plan" means a plan of action approved by the fire marshal detailing actions to be taken by trained personnel at a premises in the event of a fire alarm. 
    "Licensed alarm contractor" means a person and/or company engaged in selling, leasing, installing, testing, inspecting, repairing, servicing or monitoring alarm systems; this person and/or company shall be licensed in compliance with city ordinances and Georgia law. This shall not apply to building inspectors, fire inspectors, or insurance inspectors when acting in their official capacity. 
    "Proprietary system" means an installation of fire alarm systems that serves contiguous or noncontiguous properties under one ownership from a proprietary supervising station located at the protected property, where trained, competent personnel are in constant attendance in accordance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Alarm Code (now NFPA 72). 
    "Public safety officer" means a firefighter or other sworn fire official. 
    "Remote station" means a system installed to transmit alarm, supervisory, and trouble signals from one or more protected premises to a remote supervising station location at which appropriate action is taken in accordance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Alarm Code (now NFPA 72). 
    "Response" means the dispatch of a public safety officer to the premises where an alarm system has been activated indicating that a fire is in progress in or on the premises. 
    "Supervised sprinkler system" means an automatic sprinkler system with supervisory attachments installed and monitored for integrity in accordance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Alarm Code (now NFPA 72), and which provides a distinctive supervisory signal to indicate a condition that would impair the satisfactory operation of the sprinkler system. Required monitoring of such system includes, but is not limited to, monitoring of control valves, fire pump power supplies and running conditions, water tank levels and temperatures, tank pressure, and air pressure on dry-pipe valves. Supervisory signals are required to sound and to be displayed either at a location within the protected building that is constantly attended by qualified personnel or at an approved remotely located receiving facility. 
B.  Fire Alarm Requirements. 
1.  All fire alarm systems and monitoring stations shall be in compliance with the provisions of the National Fire Protection Association National Fire Alarm Code (now NFPA 72). 
2.  With the exception of premises covered by a fire alarm action plan, fire alarm systems shall automatically call the city 911 communications center upon activation of a fire alarm (prior to the investigation of the cause of any fire alarm) when any fire safety standard adopted requires emergency forces notification and/or a supervised sprinkler system for said premises. 
3.  In the event of any conflict between this code and the state rules and regulations, the most stringent code shall apply. 
4.  Only a licensed alarm contractor shall work on a fire alarm system. Each licensed alarm contractor shall have at least one individual on each jobsite certified by NICET (National Institute for Certification in Engineering Technologies) in fire alarm systems or equivalent as accepted by Georgia Automatic Fire Alarm Association (AFAA), Georgia Electronic Life Safety and Systems Association, and the fire marshal. Proof of certification shall be kept on the person of the certified individual. 
5.  All work performed on a fire alarm system shall require plans to be submitted to and approved by the fire marshal prior to any work being performed. 
C.  Prohibited Acts. 
1.  With the exception of premises covered by a fire alarm action plan, when the city 911 communications center has been called requesting fire department response, it shall be unlawful for any person to silence and/or reset an activated fire alarm prior to the arrival of the fire department. No fire alarm shall be silenced and/or reset unless a means is provided for the responding fire crews to be able to verify the cause of the alarm. 
2.  With the exception of an alarm which can reasonably be determined to have been caused or activated by unusually violent conditions of nature or by extraordinary circumstances not reasonably subject to control by the alarm user, it shall be unlawful for any person to cause or allow a false alarm. 
D.  Enforcement. Effective September 1, 2017, any person who shall violate any of the provisions of this section shall, upon conviction thereof in the municipal court, be fined in accordance herewith: 
1.  Fines for Silencing or Resetting an Alarm, Without Prior Approval. 
a.  For the first violation of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be no fine. 
b.  For the second violation of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00); 
c.  For the third violation of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00); 
d.  For the fourth violation of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a minimum fine of one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
e.  For the fifth violation and subsequent violations of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a fine of not more than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
2.  Fines for False Alarms. 
a.  For the first three violations of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be no fine. 
b.  For the fourth violation of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a minimum fine of fifty dollars ($50.00). 
c.  For the fifth violation of this section at any premises in a calendar year consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a minimum fine of one hundred dollars ($100.00). 
d.  For the sixth violation of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a fine of not less than one hundred fifty dollars ($150.00). 
e.  For the seventh violation of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a fine of not less than two hundred dollars ($200.00). 
f.  For the eighth violation of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a fine of not less than two hundred fifty dollars ($250.00). 
g.  For the ninth violation and subsequent violations of this section at any premises in a consecutive twelve-month period, there shall be a fine of not less than five hundred dollars ($500.00). 
(Ord. of 7-3-17(1), § 1) 
15.24.080 - Outdoor burning. 
A.  Applicability. 
1.  This section applies to all outdoor burning within the corporate limits of the city. 
2.  The requirements of this section are supplemental to Georgia laws and regulations governing outdoor burning restrictions and restrictions governing the disposal of construction waste. To the extent any federal, Georgia or Newton County law, ordinance, rule, regulation or other adopted code is more stringent than the requirements contained in this section, such law, ordinance, rule, regulation or other code shall be controlling. 
B.  Definitions. 
1.  "Clean wood" means natural wood which has not been painted, varnished, or coated with a similar material; has not been pressure treated with preservatives; and does not contain resins or glues as in plywood or other composite wood products. 
2.  "Bonfire" means an outdoor fire larger than a recreational fire in which only logs or clean wood are being burned for ceremonial purposes. 
3.  "Fire chief" means the chief of Covington Fire Department or his or her designee. 
4.  "Garbage" means waste that includes, but is not limited to, plastic products, Styrofoam, fiberglass, recycled wire (burned to access metal), tires, painted/varnished wood, clothing, furniture, mattresses, boxes, paper, and yard waste. 
5.  "Logs" mean pieces of wood cut from trees that are dried and clean of soil so as not to produce large amounts of smoke when burning. 
6.  "Outdoor burning" means kindling or maintaining a fire where the products of combustion are emitted directly into the ambient air without passing through a stack or a chimney. 
7.  "Recreational fire" means an outdoor fire in which only logs or clean wood are being burned where the fuel is not contained in an incinerator, outdoor fireplace, or barbeque pit and has a total fuel area of three feet or less in diameter and two feet or less in height for pleasure, religious, ceremonial, cooking, warmth or similar purposes, and which is not used to dispose of refuse or yard waste. 
8.  "Refuse" means any material other than charcoal, logs or clean wood. 
9.  "Yard waste" means limited yard debris: leaves, pine straw, and limbs no more than six inches in diameter that have fallen or been cut from growth on one's own property. 
C.  Exceptions to Outdoor Burning Restrictions. Except to the extent the following are banned by the fire chief due to atmospheric or local conditions in accordance with subsection A.4. of this Section 15.24.080, restrictions on outdoor burning do not apply to the following: 
1.  Grilling or cooking using charcoal, wood, propane or natural gas. 
2.  Burning in a stove, furnace, fireplace or other heating device within a building used for human or animal habitation, unless refuse is being burned. 
3.  Burning in a chimenea, fire bowl or other similar device or outdoor fireplace, unless refuse is being burned. 
4.  The use of propane, acetylene, natural gas, gasoline or kerosene in a device intended for heating, construction, or maintenance activities such as asphalt kettles, road flares or smudge pots. 
5.  Incinerators installed in accordance with all federal, state and local codes. 
6.  Fire department practice burns that comply with all state and local codes. 
D.  Burning Prohibitions. 
1.  Burning of petroleum-based products, such as tires, plastics, and roof shingles, which produce black smoke, is prohibited. 
2.  Burning of garbage of any kind is prohibited. 
3.  No burning is allowed on windy days (ten (10) mph or higher sustained wind) or on days when the atmospheric conditions (cloudy, overcast, or raining) would cause the smoke to remain low to the ground or when a red flag warning or other warning is issued by the National Weather Service or Georgia Forestry Commission that would prohibit open burning. 
4.  The fire chief shall be authorized to ban any or all forms of outdoor burning when atmospheric or local conditions make outdoor fires hazardous. 
5.  The fire chief shall be authorized to require the extinguishment of any fire if it adversely interferes with the enjoyment of life or use of property. 
6.  The fire chief shall be authorized to ban outdoor burning in a limited geographical area upon receipt of medical documentation from a resident that the resident has a medical condition(s) adversely affected by smoke. 
E.  Exceptions to Burning Prohibitions. The fire chief/fire marshal or his or her designee may issue an open burning permit when special circumstances warrant exceptions to prohibitions against burning. Special circumstances may include: 
1.  Carrying out recognized agricultural procedures necessary for production or harvesting of crops; 
2.  Disposal of vegetative debris from storm damage; and 
3.  Any other special circumstances as determined by the fire chief. 
F.  Safeguards and Limitations for Outdoor Burning. 
1.  Recreational Fires. Recreational fires shall not be conducted within twenty-five (25) feet of a structure or other combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within twenty-five (25) feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Burning shall only be allowed between ten a.m. and ten-thirty p.m. daily. 
2.  Recreational fires must be attended by an adult who must be watching the fire at all times. A water hose that can reach the fire or fire extinguisher must be on hand and ready for use if needed to limit or extinguish the fire. 
3.  When extinguishing a recreational fire, no smoldering or hot coals shall remain. 
G.  Outdoor Burning Requiring a Permit. No person shall start or maintain any outdoor burning listed in this section without first obtaining a permit issued by city of Covington Fire Department. 
1.  Bonfire. A bonfire shall not be conducted within a minimum of fifty (50) feet of a structure or other combustible material, and shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from property lines. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within fifty (50) feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Distances may be increased by the fire chief depending on atmospheric conditions and the size of the bonfire. Burning shall only be allowed between ten a.m. and ten-thirty p.m. daily. 
2.  Open Burning for Purposes of Land Clearing. The following conditions shall govern open burning for the purposes of land clearing: 
a.  Open burning for the purpose of land clearing shall only be permitted from October 1 through April 30 annually. 
b.  After the burn site is prepared, the owner shall contact the Covington Fire Department to schedule a site inspection and obtain a permit prior to any burning. 
c.  An air curtain destructor, which is constructed, installed, and operating in a manner consistent with good air pollution control practices for minimizing emissions of fly ash and smoke, shall be required for open burning for the purposes of land clearing. 
d.  The location of an air curtain destructor shall be at least three hundred (300) feet from any occupied structure or public road. An air curtain destructor used solely for utility or road clearing may be located at a lesser distance with the prior approval of the city fire chief/fire marshal. 
e.  No more than one air curtain destructor shall be operated within a ten-acre area at one time, unless there is a minimum of one thousand (1,000) feet between any two air curtain destructors. 
f.  A pit shall be excavated to the following dimensions: Eight feet wide by twelve (12) to fifteen (15) feet deep by fifteen (15) to thirty (30) feet long (the length is dependent upon the length of the air curtain destructor manifold). In no case shall the eight-foot width be exceeded. The pit must be excavated so as to have at least three vertical sides in soil capable of maintaining vertical walls fifteen (15) feet in depth without failure. Walls shall not be undercut during excavation. If a front-end loader is used for the excavation, the end of the pit used for ingress and egress, as well as the ramp, shall be filled with dirt prior to the start of the burn. Any accumulation of water in the pit shall be removed prior to loading the pit. 
g.  The manifold shall be placed and properly supported on a berm of soil twelve (12) to eighteen (18) inches high, and the space between the manifold and ground shall be sealed. The manifold shall be positioned so as to direct the air curtain at an imaginary line twenty-four (24) to thirty-six (36) inches below the top of the opposite wall. 
h.  A stop guide or restraint shall be provided at the loading site of the pit to keep the loader from getting too close to the pit during operation. If spalling or cave-off of the pit walls occurs during operation, a new pit shall be constructed and the existing pit filled with soil. 
i.  Burning shall occur in the pit, with the pit initially being loaded half full. Only wood waste consisting of trees, logs, large brush and stumps which are relatively free of soil shall be burned. Leaves, sawdust, other densely packed wood wastes, paper, and chemically treated, coated or impregnated wood shall not be burned. 
j.  In igniting the wood, up to one-half gallon of fuel oil may be utilized. Tires or other rubber products, plastic, heavy oils, highly volatile solvents such as mineral spirits or gasoline, and asphaltic based or impregnated materials shall not be used for ignition or to maintain the operation of the air curtain destructor. 
k.  The fire must be at full intensity prior to intermittent charging. With respect to intermittent charging, the pit shall not be overloaded so as to protrude above the air curtain. 
l.  Ash shall be removed to maintain efficient and proper combustion in the pit and shall not be allowed to build up in the pit to higher than one-third of the pit's depth or to the point that ash impedes combustion and is blown out of the pit, whichever occurs first. 
m.  The cleaning out of the air curtain destructor pit shall be performed in a manner so as to prevent dispersal of fugitive dust. 
n.  The air curtain destructor shall not be fired before ten a.m. daily, Monday through Friday, and the fire must be completely extinguished, using water, covering with dirt or using another acceptable method, at least one hour before sunset daily. 
o.  No open burning for the purposes of land clearing shall be allowed at night, on weekends, or on holidays. 
3.  Yard Waste. When burning yard waste, fires shall not be conducted within fifty (50) feet of a structure or other combustible material. Conditions which could cause a fire to spread within fifty (50) feet of a structure shall be eliminated prior to ignition. Burning yard waste shall only be allowed between ten a.m. to one hour before sunset daily from October 1 through April 30 annually. Yard waste fires shall not have a total fuel area in excess of four feet in diameter or more than two feet in height. Yard waste fires must be attended by an adult who must be watching the fire at all times. A water hose that can reach the fire or fire extinguisher must be on hand and ready for use if needed to limit or extinguish the fire. When extinguishing a yard waste fire, no smoldering or hot coals shall remain. 
H.  Penalties. The following shall be assessed to individuals who do not obtain required permits or who engage in permitted burning or knowingly allow such burning to occur on property owned or occupied by them in violation of this section: 
1.  First Violation. For the first violation, a citation shall be issued and a fine of five hundred dollars ($500.00) may be assessed upon conviction thereof in a municipal court. 
2.  Second Violation. For a second or any subsequent violation, a citation shall be issued and a fine of one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) may be assessed upon conviction thereof in a municipal court. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08, § 3; Ord. dated 11/15/10, § 1; Ord. dated 1/4/17(1), § I) 
15.24.090 - Fire lane marking. 
A.  The Covington fire department is authorized to direct installation of approved signs or other approved notices for the identification of fire lines. "Fire lane" as used herein means a vehicle access roadway or driveway at least twenty (20) feet wide officially designated by the Covington fire department as a required means of fire department emergency access. 
B.  Roadways, driveways or access ways shall not be marked as fire lanes without the prior approval of the Covington fire department. Red curb markings, signage or roadway surface marking shall identify fire lanes as specified in this section and the International Fire Code. The Covington fire department may require detailed plans showing the location of proposed fire lanes as a condition to approval of same. 
C.  Fire lane curb tops and sides shall be painted red, with contrasting lettering, "FIRE LANE-NO PARKING" stenciled in letters not less than four inches high with a minimum three-fourths inch spacing. 
D.  "FIRE LANE-NO PARKING (O.C.G.A. § 40-6-203(a)(3)(B))" signs measuring eighteen (18) inches wide by twelve (12) inches high shall be installed every fifty (50) feet along the full length of any fire lane. 
(Ord. dated 6/16/08, § 4) 
Chapter 15.28 - GAS REGULATIONS 

15.28.010 - Gas inspector, power and duties. 
A.  The governing body shall appoint a competent person as "gas inspector." The gas inspector shall obtain certification as a mechanical gas inspector from Southern Building Code Congress within a reasonable time after his or her appointment. 
B.  The gas inspector and his assistants are hereby authorized, empowered and directed to inspect and supervise the installation, construction, reconstruction and repair of all house gas piping, gas appliances, fixtures and apparatus now or hereafter to be placed in or in any manner directly attached to any building or structure within the city and its gas service territory. The gas inspector and his assistants shall be subject to the orders and directions of the governing body and they are vested with full authority to enter any building or premises at any reasonable time in the discharge of their duties herein imposed. 
C.  He shall inspect as often as necessary all houses in the course of erection, alteration or repair and to inspect any gas plumbing of any character already in use which he may have reason to believe is out of repair or is imperfect. 
D.  The inspector shall give the owner or agent in charge of any building written notice of any defects in his gas plumbing or fixtures or changes or repairs necessary and such owner or agent shall within five days after such notice make necessary changes or repairs. If the owner or agent fails to comply with this notice, the gas inspector may order the gas service department to turn off the gas and it shall not thereafter turn the gas on again until the gas inspector has certified that such defects have been repaired or removed. 
E.  The gas inspector shall furnish the gas service department with a copy of each certificate of inspection. Said department shall not turn gas into any new or altered or repaired system of gas until such certificate has been received. 
F.  It shall also be the duty of the inspector to investigate all alleged violations of the provisions of this chapter and to file complaints when necessary. 
    No one except the municipal natural gas system shall at any time turn on any valve or cock or in any way tamper or make any connection with any gas main, meter, meter connection or gas service pipe between the main and the meter. User however may turn off gas at main jet valve in case of an emergency. 
(Prior code § 6-16) 
15.28.020 - Drips and supports. 
    All house piping shall be graded to a drip located at meter location. The diameter of drips shall not be less than that of the pipe to which attached and of a length at least six times said diameter. No drip less than four inches long shall be installed. 
(Prior code § 6-21) 
15.28.030 - Meter location and appliances. 
A.  The house piping shall be extended to the meter location designated by the distributor of gas and a swing joint provided for connecting house piping to the meter outlet. 
B.  No gas meter shall be installed or maintained under the floor of any building or structure unless there is suitable ventilation, and in any such installation and opening at least two feet square in the foundation or skirting within two feet of the meter shall be provided and maintained. 
C.  No gas meter shall be installed and maintained in a small unvented or confined space. 
D.  When more than one meter is required to serve consumers in one building or structure, the gas system may set as many meters as there are separate consumers, connecting such meters to one service line. When this is done, the riser pipes serving the several consumers shall be extended to within eighteen (18) inches and within the same enclosure as the meter location and shall not be scattered, but shall drop together in alignment and at least three inches apart to the place where the meters are to be set. 
E.  When the system of piping and all extensions thereto have been completed and all openings firmly closed, the person installing such piping shall make the test above provided, and if the piping is found tight, shall make application for test to the gas inspector. Upon such application the inspector or one of his assistants will inspect the piping and shall witness the test, and if the piping is found tight and the work done is in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, then such inspector or assistant shall issue and deliver a certificate in substantially the following form: 
No._______ 
    This is to certify that I have inspected and witnessed the test of the gas piping in _______ Building No._______ Street, and certify that the same is installed in compliance with the Municipal Natural Gas System rules and regulations. 
Gas Inspector 
By ___________ 
F.  Any additional gas piping or outlets installed, after the above certificate has been issued, must be reported for inspection and tested in the same manner as pipe originally installed. 
(Prior code § 6-24) 
15.28.040 - Penalty. 
    Any person failing to comply with the provisions of this chapter or failing to comply with an order of the gas inspector made pursuant to the powers herein granted to him shall, upon conviction before the city recorder, be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code or shall have his city gas plumbing license revoked or both. 
(Prior code § 6-26) 
15.28.050 - Installation of gas service lines. 
A.  No more than one gas service line shall be run to a single building without the prior written approval of the gas inspector. 
B.  The city shall extend service lines up to a distance of seventy-five (75) feet on private property six feet beyond the front wall of the house or building without charge other than the deposit. Any extension beyond this on private property shall be performed at cost. 
(Prior code § 6-29) 
15.28.060 - Standards adopted for the storing and handling of liquefied petroleum gases. 
    The storing and handling of liquefied petroleum gases shall be in accordance with the Georgia Safety Fire Rules and Regulations, promulgated by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner pursuant to the 1949 Georgia Safety Fire Act as amended, Georgia Laws 1949, page 1057 (Georgia Code Annotated Title 92A, Chapter 7) and being particularly the rules and regulations adopted by the Georgia Safety Fire Commissioner on February 7, 1979, to become effective on March 1, 1979, copies of which have been and now are filed in the office of the fire marshal of the city at City Hall, Covington, Georgia, and the same are adopted and incorporated as fully as if set out at length herein. 
(Prior code § 6-30) 
Chapter 15.32 - WATER CONSERVATION 

15.32.010 - Purposes. 
    The purposes of this chapter are as follows: 
A.  To promote greater efficiency in residential and commercial water use and preserve the natural resources of the city; 
B.  To reduce consumer water and energy costs by reducing indoor water use, reducing the need for new water supplies and treatment facilities, lowering operation and maintenance costs for water and sewer utilities, and reducing the amount of energy used to heat, treat and transport water; and 
C.  To generate consumer awareness of the need to save water and of the savings that can result from the use of efficient plumbing products. 
(Prior code § 6-76) 
15.32.020 - Definitions. 
    As used in this chapter the term: 
    "Commercial" means any type of building other than residential. 
    "Construction" means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
    "Residential" means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Prior code § 6-77) 
15.32.030 - Restrictions on residential construction. 
    After July 1, 1991, there shall not be initiated within the city the construction of any residential building of any type which: 
A.  Employs a gravity tank-type, flushometer-valve or flushometer-tank toilet that uses more than an average of one and six-tenths gallons of water per flush; provided, however, this paragraph shall not be applicable to one-piece toilets until July 1, 1992; 
B.  Employs a shower head that allows a flow of more than an average of two and one-half gallons of water per minute at sixty (60) pounds per square inch of pressure; 
C.  Employs a urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
D.  Employs a lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
E.  Employs a kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two and one-half gallons of water per minute. 
(Prior code § 6-78) 
15.32.040 - Restrictions on commercial construction. 
    On and after July 1, 1992, there shall not be initiated within the city the construction of any commercial building of any type which does not meet the requirements of subsections A through E of Section 15.32.030. 
(Prior code § 6-79) 
15.32.050 - Restrictions on repair, renovation, or addition. 
    The requirements of subsections A through E of Section 15.32.030 of this chapter shall apply to any residential construction initiated after July 1, 1991, and to any commercial construction initiated after July 1, 1992, which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes the replacement of toilets or showers or both. 
(Prior code § 6-80) 
15.32.060 - Exemptions. 
    The requirements of Sections 15.32.030, 15.32.040 and 15.32.050 of this chapter relative to new construction and to the repair or renovation of an existing building shall not be applicable under the following conditions: 
A.  When the repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or shower heads within such existing building; 
B.  When such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its design, capacity or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or shower heads required by this article were installed; 
C.  When such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
D.  When units to be installed are specifically designed for use by the handicapped, specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution or are toilets for juveniles. 
(Prior code § 6-81) 
15.32.070 - Application for authorized exemption fee. 
    The owner of a building under new construction, repair or renovation under conditions qualifying for an exemption as provided in Section 15.32.060 of this chapter shall obtain a certificate of such exemption by making application for same at the office of building and zoning of the city. A fee as established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution shall be paid for each such application to defray the expense of inspection and issuance of such certificate. 
(Prior code § 6-82) 
(Ord. dated 4/20/15(1), § 18) 
15.32.080 - Remedies and penalties. 
A.  In the event of construction, alteration or renovation of a building in violation of this article, the building official of the city or any person who would be damaged by such violation may, in addition to other remedies provided by law, seek an injunction to prevent the initiation or continuation of such violation. 
B.  Any person who installs any toilet, faucet, urinal or shower head in violation of this article shall be in violation of a city ordinance and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punishable as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 6-83) 
Chapter 15.36 - SOIL EROSION, SEDIMENTATION AND POLLUTION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Dec. 20, 2010, amended the title of Ch. 15.36, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control, to read as herein set out. 

15.36.010 - Title. 
    This chapter shall be known as the "City of Covington Soil Erosion, Sedimentation and Pollution Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10, § 2; prior code § 6-41) 
15.36.020 - Definitions. 
    The following definitions shall apply in the interpretation and enforcement of this chapter unless otherwise specifically stated: 
    "Best management practices (BMPs)" means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term, "properly designed," means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January first of the year in which the land-disturbing activity is permitted. These include sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with and no less stringent than, those contained in the said publication. 
    "Board" means the board of natural resources. 
    "Buffer" means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
    "CPESC" means certified professional in erosion and sediment control with current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., which is also referred to as CPESC or CPESC, Inc. 
    "Certified personnel" means a person who has successfully completed the appropriate certification course approved by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    "Conservation commission" means the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission. 
    "Cut" means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as "excavation." 
    "Department" means the department of natural resources. 
    "Design professional" means professional licensed by the State of Georgia in the field of: engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, forestry, geology or land surveying; or a person that is a certified professional in erosion and sediment control (CPESC) with a current certification by EnviroCert, Inc., Design Professionals that shall practice in a manner that complies with applicable Georgia law governing professional licensure. 
    "Director" means the director of the environmental protection division. 
    "District" means the Upper Ocmulgee soil and water conservation district. 
    "Division" means the Environmental Protection Division (EPD) of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
    "Drainage structure" means a device composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
    "Erosion" means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    "Erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan" means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sediment resulting from land-disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
    "Fill" means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
    "Final stabilization" means all soil-disturbing activities at the site have been completed, and that for unpaved areas and areas not covered by permanent structures and areas located outside the waste disposal limits of a landfill cell that has been certified by EPD for waste disposal, one hundred (100) percent of the soil surface is uniformly covered in permanent vegetation with a density of seventy (70) percent or greater or landscaped according to the plan (uniformly covered with landscaping materials in planned landscape areas, or equivalent permanent stabilization measures as defined in the manual (excluding a crop of annual vegetation and seeding of target crop perennials appropriate for the region). Final stabilization applies to each phase of construction. 
    "Finished grade" means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    "Grading" means altering ground surfaces to specified elevations, dimensions and/or slopes; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping, or any combination thereof, and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
    "Ground elevation" means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting and filling. 
    "Land-disturbing activity" means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in Section 15.36.030(E). 
    "Larger common plan of development or sale" means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this section, "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
    "Local issuing authority" means the city, which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
    "Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA)" means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basin. 
    "Natural ground surface" means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
    "Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU)" means numerical units of measure based on photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
    "NOI" means a notice of intent form provided by the division for coverage under the state general permit. 
    "NOT" means a notice of termination form provided by the division to terminate coverage under the state general permit. 
    "One hundred (100) year floodplain" means land in the floodplain subject to a one percent or greater statistical occurrence probability of flooding in any given year. 
    "Operator" means the party or parties that have: 
1.  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
2.  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
    "Outfall" means the location where stormwater in a discernible, confined and discrete conveyance, leaves a facility or site or, if there is a receiving water on site, becomes a point source discharging into that receiving water. 
    "Permit" means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity under the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    "Phase" or "Phased" means sub-parts or segments of construction projects where the sub-part or segment is constructed and stabilized prior to completing construction activities on the entire construction site. 
    "Project" means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    "Properly designed" means designed in accordance with the design requirements and specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" (Manual) published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January first of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted and amendments to the Manual as approved by said commission to the date of NOI submittal. 
    "Qualified personnel" means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
    "Roadway drainage structure" means a device, such as a bridge, culvert or ditch composed of a virtually nonerodible material such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
    "Sediment" means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice or gravity as a product of erosion. 
    "Sedimentation" means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of the water, wind, ice or gravity. 
    "Soil and water conservation district approved plan" means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Upper Ocmulgee soil and water conservation district. 
    "Stabilization" means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation and/or mulch or other ground cover and/or in combination with installing temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
    "State general permit" means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit or permits for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 U.S.C. Section 1251, et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 15-5-30(f). 
    "State waters" means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural and artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership or corporation. 
    "Structural erosion, sedimentation and pollution control practices" means measures for the stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversion, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps, land grading, etc. Such matters can be found in the publication, Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia. 
    "Trout streams" means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the Game and Fish Division of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources ( www.epd.georgia.gov ) under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 15-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
    "Vegetative erosion and sediment control practices" means measures for the stabilization of erosive or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
1.  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
2.  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
3.  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
    "Watercourse" means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
    "Wetlands" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or ground water at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10, §§ 3-8; Ord. dated 11/2/09, § 1; Ord. dated 4/6/04, §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 1; prior code § 6-42; Ord. dated 10/3/16(1), §§ 1, 2) 
15.36.030 - Exemptions. 
    This chapter shall apply to any land-disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
A.  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, the Georgia Surface Mining Act of 1968; 
B.  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
C.  Such minor land-disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home fencing, landscaping, repairs, maintenance work and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(a)  The following land-disturbing activities are examples of projects not specifically listed in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(3) that would be considered minor land-disturbing activities and, therefore, exempt from the provisions of this chapter and the applicable buffer requirements for state waters: 
1.  Elevated structures such as decks, gazebos, patios, walkways, viewing platforms and/or open picnic shelters, provided: 
i.  No more than one hundred (100) square feet of footprint of the elevated structure extends into or over the buffer, with an exception for structures compliant with the Americans with Disability Act (ADA); 
ii.  No grading, cutting, filling or similar land-disturbing activities occurring as a part of the site preparation, construction or subsequent development; 
iii.  The structure is built on posts, concrete blocks and/or similar supports; 
iv.  Permanent protective vegetative cover remains or protective measures (e.g., mulch, gravel) are installed within the footprint of the elevated structure to prevent post-construction soil erosion; 
v.  A natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; and 
vi.  No concrete and/or asphalt slabs, pads or foundations constructed or placed as a part of the site preparation, construction or subsequent development. 
2.  A pervious ground level walkway approach to a dock and/or similar structure, provided: 
i.  No more than one hundred (100) square feet of the constructed walkway extends into the buffer, with an exception for structures compliant with the Americans with Disability Act (ADA); 
ii.  No grading, cutting, filling or similar land-disturbing activities occurring as a part of the site preparation, construction or subsequent development; 
iii.  No concrete and/or asphalt slabs, pads, supports or foundations constructed or placed as a part of the site preparation, construction or subsequent development; and 
iv.  All ground preparation and walkway material placement is completed with the use of hand-held equipment. 
3.  Restoration of buffer area after the removal of an existing structure, provided: 
i.  No more than one hundred (100) square feet of the structure footprint is in the buffer; and 
ii.  The buffer area must be replanted with native vegetation. 
4.  Maintenance or repair of existing structures, the failure of which would result in a threat to human health or state waters, such as sewer lines, water lines, dams, or gas lines. Total disturbance must be less than one hundred (100) square feet. 
5.  Placement of rock rip-rap within the buffer not to exceed one hundred (100) square feet on any one property, provided: 
i.  The placement of the rip-rap does not result in soil disturbance outside the placement area; and 
ii.  No grading, cutting, filling or similar land-disturbing activities occurring as part of the site preparation, construction or subsequent development. 
(b)  The following land-disturbing activities are examples of projects that are not considered minor land-disturbing activities and, therefore, not exempt from the provisions of this chapter and the applicable buffer requirements for state waters: 
1.  Any land-disturbing activity utilizing wheeled or tracked machinery and equipment resulting in soil erosion within the buffer; 
2.  Paving with poured or prefab concrete and/or asphalt; 
3.  Any project or combination of projects occurring within the same calendar year on the same property resulting in more than one hundred (100) square feet of any elevated structures and/or pervious ground level walkways within or extending into the buffer; 
4.  Construction of a barbeque pit on a concrete and/or asphalt slab or pad within the buffer; 
5.  Construction of a ground level patio within the buffer; 
6.  Construction of a swimming pool within the buffer; 
7.  Construction of a structural or decorative retaining wall within the buffer; 
8.  Construction of a new seawall with land-disturbing activities occurring within the buffer; and 
9.  Backfilling any new seawall construction within the buffer. 
(c)  For common development construction projects, stand alone and infrastructure construction projects the exemption provided under this subsection C. within the buffer for state waters shall not be applicable for individual lots until such time as a NOT for the common development has been submitted in accordance with the permit. However, for infrastructure projects only, the installation of mandatory fences within the buffer for state waters shall be allowed prior to submitting a NOT and shall be subject to the exemption provided under this subsection C. 
D.  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this section; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in Section 15.36.040 of this chapter and this section. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to Article 2 of Chapter 5 of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act. In any such buffer zone, no land-distributing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where the vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout water, the buffer zone shall be at least fifty (50) horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than twenty-five (25) feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least twenty-five (25) horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of Section 15.36.040 of this chapter and the buffer zones provided by this section shall be enforced by the issuing authority. 
E.  Agricultural operations as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3 to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding; breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chicken, hens, turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; forestry land management practices, including harvesting and farm buildings and farm ponds. 
F.  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land-disturbing or other activities prohibited in a buffer as hereinafter set forth in Section 15.36.040(C)(15) and (16) of this chapter, no other land-disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed in the entire property upon which such exempt forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such exempt forestry practices; 
G.  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Soil Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
H.  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land-disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within two hundred (200) feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them year-round; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land-disturbing activity, and which is within two hundred (200) feet of any such secluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (A), (B), (C), (D), (E), (F), (G), (I) or (J) of this section; 
I.  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the Georgia Highway Authority, or the State Tollway Authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however that construction or maintenance projects of department of transportation or State Tollway Authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the State Highway Authority, or the State Road and Tollway Authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
J.  Any land-disturbing activities conducted by any electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electric membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders. 
K.  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10, § 9; Ord. dated 3/15/10, § 1; Ord. dated 4/6/04, §§ 3-7; Ord. dated 10/1/01, §§ 2, 3; prior code § 6-43) 
15.36.040 - Minimum requirements for erosion, sedimentation and pollution control. 
A.  General Provisions. Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land-disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land-disturbing activities which are not excluded by this chapter shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sediment control measures. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sediment control plans. Soil erosion and sediment control measures shall conform to the requirements of this chapter. The application of measures shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sediment pollution during all stages of any land-disturbing activity. 
B.  Minimum requirements, BMPs. 
1.  Best management practices as set forth in this section shall be required for all land-disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director, or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (B)(2) of this section, or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to Section 15.36.070(D). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the Manual for Sediment and Erosion Control in Georgia published by the State Water and Soil Conservation Commission as of January first of the year in which the land-disturbing activity is permitted. 
2.  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to Section 15.36.070(D) for each day on which such discharge results in turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than twenty-five (25) nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten (10) nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not a part of a common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
3.  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land-disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or by the division, or of any general permit for construction activities issued by the division pursuant to Section 15.36.070(D) for each day on which such failure occurs. 
4.  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land-disturbing activities occur. 
5.  The city may set more stringent buffer requirements than stated in subparagraphs 15. and 16. of subsection (C) of this Section 15.36.040, in light of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(c). 
C.  Requirements. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this chapter for the purpose of governing land-disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as January first of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
1.  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion. 
2.  Cut-fill operation must be kept to a minimum. 
3.  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential. 
4.  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented. 
5.  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum. 
6.  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable. 
7.  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development. 
8.  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control measures shall be installed as soon as practicable. 
9.  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought into a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of this chapter. 
10.  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping surface of fills. 
11.  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property. 
12.  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners. 
13.  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible and provided, in any such case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum. 
14.  Land-disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for control or treatment of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent streams beyond the levels specified in subsection (B)(2) of this section. 
15.  Except as provided in subsection (C)(16) of this section, there is established a twenty-five (25) foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8 or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; or along any ephemeral stream. As used in this provision, the term, "ephemeral stream" means a stream: that under normal circumstances has water flowing only during and for a short duration after precipitation events; that has the channel located above the ground water table year round; for which ground water is not a source of water; and for which runoff from precipitation is the primary source of water flow. Unless exempted as along an ephemeral stream, provided, however, the buffers of at least twenty-five (25) feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-453(a)(1) shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this paragraph. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land-disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land-disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. 
b.  Once land-disturbing activity is initiated and continuing until final stabilization of the site is achieved, the boundary of the buffer shall be designated by four foot orange safety fencing. 
c.  Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy may thin or trim in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the stream bed. 
d.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
16.  There is established a fifty-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any trout streams, as defined in Section 15.36.020 of this chapter, except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of twenty-five (25) gallons per minute or less shall have a twenty-five-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land-disturbing activity provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented. The requirements set forth in subsection (C)(15) shall also apply to such buffer. The buffer shall not apply to the following land-disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within twenty-five (25) degrees of perpendicular to the stream; cause a width of disturbance of not more than fifty (50) feet within the buffer; and adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: (i) Stream crossings for water lines; or (ii) Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
D.  Right to Exceed Minimum Requirements. Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the local issuing authority from adopting rules, regulations, ordinances or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements set forth in subsections (B) and (C) of this section. 
E.  No Presumption of Violation. The fact that land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to property of another shall neither constitute proof nor create a presumption of violation of the standards provided for in this section or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10, § 10; Ord dated 11/2/09, § 2; Ord. dated 4/6/04, §§ 8-13; Ord. dated 2/17/03, § 1; Ord. dated 10/1/01, § 4; prior code § 6-44) 
15.36.050 - Application/permit process. 
A.  Generally. The landowner, developer and designated planners and engineer shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the issuing authority (if any have been previously submitted and approved) that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, subdivision ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the boundaries of the issuing authority. However, the owner and/or operator are the only parties who may obtain a permit. 
B.  Application Requirements. 
1.  No person shall conduct any land-disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city engineering department to perform such activity and providing a copy of the notice of intent submitted to EPD if applicable. 
2.  The application for a permit shall be submitted by the property owner to the local issuing authority (through the engineering department) and must include the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection C of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of Section 15.36.040 of this chapter. Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by three copies of the applicant's erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with the rules and regulations established by the board. 
3.  A fee, in an amount set by the city council, shall be charged for each acre and/or fraction of an acre in the project area. 
4.  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 112-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed eighty dollars ($80.00) per acre of land-disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land-disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. Half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. The local issuing authority with plan review authority shall approve or disapprove a revised plan submittal within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the local issuing authority with plan review authority to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the revised plan submittal. 
5.  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the Upper Ocmulgee Soil and Water Conservation for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sediment control plan. The district shall approve or disapprove a plan within thirty-five (35) days of receipt. Failure of the district to act within thirty-five (35) days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district and any variances required by Section 15.36.040(C)(16) and (17) and bonding, if required as per subsection (B)(6) of this section have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
6.  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this article, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
7.  The city may require the permit applicant to furnish security for satisfactory completion of any land-disturbing activity in the form of a cash deposit, a performance bond issued by a surety approved by the city or an irrevocable letter of credit issued by a financial institution approved by the city, or any combination thereof within the city's sole discretion, in the minimum amount of three thousand dollars ($3,000.00) per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land-disturbing activity, prior to issuance of the permit. Such security will not be released until a notice of termination has been submitted to the Georgia Environmental Protection Division and/or a certificate of occupancy for the project has been issued by the city. Simultaneously with submission of a notice of intent or notice of termination to the Georgia Environmental Protection Division a copy of same shall be filed in the engineering department office of the city. If the applicant does not comply with the provisions of this chapter or with the conditions of the permit, the city may make appropriate demand on the security and may use the proceeds of such security to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of such activity, including removal of any silt fence remaining on said site, and bring the site into compliance with the provisions of this chapter and any applicable state or federal regulations. For developments requiring the filing of a notice of intent for compliance with a Georgia National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) permit, the city may require the sampling of additional 0.5-inch and greater rain events and the filing of the results of such sampling in the engineering department office of the city. All land-disturbing permits issued under the provisions of this chapter shall expire on the first anniversary of the date of issuance, and must be renewed on or before each anniversary date thereafter to remain effective. Land-disturbing permits issued for developments in which land-disturbing activity has been dormant for six months or longer will thereupon become null, void and of no effect. 
C.  Plan Requirements. 
1.  Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements contained in Section 15.36.040. Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, revised in 1989, published by the State Soil and Water Conservation Commission as a guide or through the use of alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia is incorporated by reference into this chapter. 
    The plan for the land-disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types; geological and hydrological characteristics; topography; watershed; vegetation; proposed permanent structures including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities; local ordinances and state laws. 
2.  Data Required for Site Plan. Data required for the site plan shall include all the information required from the appropriate erosion, sedimentation and pollution control plan review checklist established by the commission as of January first of the year in which the land-disturbing activity was permitted. 
3.  Supportive Data. Maps, drawings and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a Georgia-registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and certification requirements as developed by the conservation commission pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
a.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
b.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
c.  Boundary line survey. 
d.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
e.  Existing and planned contours, with contour lines drawn with an interval in accordance with the following: 
Map Scale Ground Slope Contour Interval 
(ft.) 1 inch = 100 feet or larger scale Flat, 1-2% 0.5 or 1 Rolling, 2%-8% 1 or 2 Steep 8%+ 2.5 or 10  
f.  Adjacent areas and features areas such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
g.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
h.  Delineate the twenty-five (25) foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
i.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
j.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. 
k.  Location of erosion and sediment control practices, preferably using uniform coding symbols from the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia, Chapter 6. Practices may include, but are not limited to: 
i.  Construction exit; 
ii.  Sediment barrier; 
iii.  Sediment basin; 
iv.  Grassed waterway (open swale); and 
v.  Storm drain outlet protection. 
4.  Maintenance. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the owner. 
D.  Permits. 
1.  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable, but in any event not later than forty-five (45) days after receipt by the issuing authority of a completed application, providing variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
2.  No permit shall be issued by the issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this chapter, any variances required by Section 15.36.040(B)(16) of this chapter are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (B)(6) of this section are met and all ordinances, rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
3.  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
4.  The permit may be suspended, revoked or modified by the issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or is in violation of this chapter. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10, §§ 11-16; Ord. dated 3/1/10, § 2; Ord. dated 8/5/08, § 1; Ord. dated 4/6/04, §§ 14-20; Ord. dated 2/17/03, §§ 2, 3; prior code § 6-45) 
15.36.060 - Inspection and enforcement. 
A.  The city's engineering department technician, the building and zoning department and the environmental protection division will periodically inspect the sites of land-disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees, as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Secondary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. Tertiary permittees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance where the tertiary permittee is conducting land-disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities, as defined herein, has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions or with the provisions of this chapter, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to timely comply with the terms of such notice, he shall be deemed to be in violation of this chapter. 
B.  The city's engineering department, engineering technician and the building and zoning department shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land-disturbing activities. 
C.  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the conservation commission, the district or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10, § 17; Ord. dated 4/6/04, § 21; prior code § 6-46) 
15.36.070 - Penalties and incentives. 
A.  Failure to Obtain a Permit for Land-Disturbing Activity. If any person commences any land-disturbing activity requiring a land-disturbing permit as prescribed in this chapter without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
B.  Work Orders. The following procedures shall apply to the issuance of stop work orders: 
1.  For the first violation of the provisions of this chapter, the issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have three consecutive calendar days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within three consecutive calendar days, the issuing authority shall issue a stop work order requiring that land-disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land-disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning. 
2.  For each subsequent violation, the director or the city shall issue an immediate stop work order; and 
3.  All stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall remain in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
4.  If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities is not in compliance with BMPs, the deposit of any silt or sediment into state waters is an automatic violation subject to a stop-work order and citation. 
5.  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop work orders shall apply to all land-disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
C.  Bond Forfeiture. If, though inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land-disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land-disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of Section 15.36.050(B)(6). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land-disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
D.  Monetary Penalties. 
1.  For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-15, the municipal court shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which a violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
2.  Any person who violates any provisions of the ordinance codified in this chapter, or any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this chapter, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this chapter shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this chapter, notwithstanding any provisions in the city charter or this code to the contrary, the municipal court of the city shall be authorized to impose a penalty not to exceed two thousand five hundred dollars ($2,500.00) for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. dated 4/6/04, §§ 22, 23; Ord. dated 2/17/03, § 4; Ord. dated 10/1/01, § 4; prior code § 6-47) 
15.36.080 - Education and certification. 
A.  Persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land-disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
B.  For each site on which land-disturbing activity occurs, each entity or person acting as either a primary, secondary, or tertiary permittee, as defined in the state general permit, shall have as a minimum one person who is in responsible charge of erosion and sedimentation control activities on behalf of said entity or person and meets the applicable education or training certification requirements developed by the commission present on site whenever land-disturbing activities are conducted on that site. A project site shall herein be defined as any land-disturbance site or multiple sites within a larger common plan of development or sale permitted by an owner or operator for compliance with the state general permit. 
C.  Persons or entities involved in projects not requiring a state general permit but otherwise requiring certified personnel onsite may contract with certified persons to meet the requirements of this ordinance. 
D.  If a state general permittee who has operational control of land-disturbing activities for a site has met the certification requirements of paragraph (1) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, then any person or entity involved in land-disturbing activity at that site and operating in a subcontractor capacity for such permittee shall meet those educational requirements specified in paragraph (4) of subsection (b) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19, and shall not be required to meet any educational requirements that exceed those specified in said paragraph. 
(Ord. dated 12/20/10, § 18; Ord. dated 4/6/04, § 24) 
15.36.090 - Administrative appeal, judicial review. 
A.  Administrative Remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan, or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions, or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the floodplain board of appeals established under Chapter 15.48 of this code within thirty (30) days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
B.  Judicial Review. Any person aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after his administrative remedies, shall have the right to appeal de novo to the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia. 
(Ord. dated 4/6/04, § 24; prior code § 6-48) 
15.36.100 - Validity and liability. 
A.  Validity. If any section, paragraph, clause, phrase or provision of this chapter shall be adjudged invalid or held unconstitutional, such decisions shall not affect the remaining portions of this chapter. 
B.  Liability. 
1.  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this chapter nor the compliance with provisions of this chapter shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the city for damage to any person or property. 
2.  The fact that a land-disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this chapter or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. dated 4/6/04, § 24; Ord. dated 10/1/01, § 5; prior code § 6-49) 
Chapter 15.40 - BUILDING NUMBERING 

15.40.010 - System and map adopted. 
    A uniform system for numbering properties and principal buildings as shown on the map identified by the title property numbering map, Covington, Georgia, which is filed in the office of the city clerk, is adopted for use in the city. This map and all explanatory matter thereon is adopted and made a part of this chapter. 
(Prior code § 17-21) 
15.40.020 - Assignment of numbers. 
A.  All properties or parcels of land within the corporate limits of the city is hereafter identified by reference to the uniform numbering system adopted herein, provided all existing numbers of property and buildings not now in conformity with provisions of this chapter shall be changed to conform with and to the system herein adopted six months from December 5, 1966. 
B.  A separate number shall be assigned for each twenty (20) feet of frontage. 
C.  Each principal building shall bear the number to the frontage on which the front entrance is located. In case the principal building is occupied by more than one business or family dwelling unit, each separate front of such principal building shall bear a separate number. 
D.  Numerals indicating the official numbers for each principal building or each front entrance to each building shall be posted in a manner as to be clearly visible building and distinguishable from the street on which the property is located. Such numerals may be obtained without charge from the city clerk as provided in Section 15.40.030. 
(Prior code § 17-22) 
15.40.030 - Administration. 
A.  The city clerk shall be responsible for maintaining the numbering system and in the performance of this responsibility he shall be guided by the provisions of Section 15.40.020 of this chapter. 
B.  The city clerk shall duly record all numbers under this chapter. 
C.  The city clerk shall issue to any property owner in the city or its agent upon request and without charge a set of numerals for each principal building or separate front entrances to such buildings. In so doing he shall issue only the numerals for the number assigned to such building under the provisions of this chapter provided however that the city clerk may issue additional numerals in accord with the official numbering system whenever a property has been subdivided, a new front entrance opened or undue hardship has been worked on any property owner. 
(Prior code § 17-23) 
Chapter 15.44 - MOBILE HOMES AND TRAVEL TRAILERS 
Article 1 - In General 

15.44.010 - Short title, statement of intent. 
A.  Short title. This chapter shall be known and may be cited as "the mobile home ordinance of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia." 
B.  Statement of Intent. 
1.  The purpose of this chapter is to provide areas within the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia for the development of, and continued development of established mobile home parks and travel trailer parks. These home parks and travel trailer parks shall be developed and so located to provide safe and sanitary living conditions for the occupants; to be convenient to employment, shopping centers, schools and other community facilities. The regulations set forth in this chapter are designed to provide for planned mobile home parks and travel trailer park developments and to make these parks a wholesome and attractive place to live and an asset to the community. 
2.  This chapter is further intended to supplement the zoning ordinance of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. It shall hereafter be considered as separate and apart from any ordinance previously used in connection with motels, tourist courts, and facilities of like nature. This chapter shall be used exclusively as the regulation governing individual mobile homes and travel trailers; existing mobile home parks and travel trailer parks; and prospective mobile home parks and travel trailer park developments in the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
(Prior code § 21.1) 
15.44.020 - Definitions of specific terms and grammatical usage in this chapter. 
    Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in the chapter have their customary dictionary definitions. 
A.  Definitions pertaining to grammatical usage. 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. 
2.  Words used in the singular include the plural, and words used in the plural include the singular. 
3.  The word "shall" is always mandatory. 
4.  The word "may" is always permissive. 
5.  The word "person" includes a firm, association, organization, partnership, trust, company or corporation as well as an individual. 
6.  The word "temporary" means a period of time not exceeding one hundred and eighty (180) days. 
7.  The word "permanent" means a period of time exceeding one hundred eighty (180) days. 
8.  The word "unit" when used means an individual mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit. 
B.  Definitions of Specific Terms. 
    "Building inspector" means the building inspector of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
    "City clerk" means the city clerk of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
    "Health officer" means the health officer of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
    "Planning commission" means the planning commission of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
    "Accessory use" means a use customarily incidental a subordinate to the principal use or building located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
    "Building" means any structure having a roof support by columns or by walls and intended for the shelter housing or enclosure of persons, animals, or chattel, including, for the purposes of this chapter, mobile homes and travel trailers. 
    "Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used exclusively for residential use providing permanent living quarters for one or more families, including mobile homes, but not including travel trailers. 
    "Dwelling unit" means a building or portion thereof, providing complete permanent living facilities for one or more families. 
    "Entry side" means the side of a mobile home or travel trailer where the principal entrance doorway is located. 
    "Licensee" means any person licensed to operate and maintain a mobile home or travel trailer park under the provisions of this chapter. 
    "Lot" means a portion or parcel of land devoted to or capable of being devoted to a single principal use, or occupied by a building, group of buildings, or structures; devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same, including the word "plot" or "space." 
    "Map or zoning district map" means the "comprehensive zoning map of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia." 
    "Mobile home" means a detached single-family dwelling unit or a dwelling unit for use as a component in a two-family or multi-family structure with all of the following characteristics: 
a.  Designed for long-term occupancy, and containing sleeping accommodations, a flush toilet, a tub or shower bath, and kitchen facilities, with plumbing and electrical connections provided for attachment to outside systems; 
b.  Designed to be transported after fabrication on its own wheels or on flatbed or other trailers or detachable wheels; 
c.  Arriving at the site where it is to be occupied as a dwelling complete, including major appliances, and ready for occupancy except for minor or incidental unpacking and assembly operations, location on foundation supports, connection to utilities, integration into a prepared structure, or other minor installation requirements. 
    "Mobile home lot" means a parcel of land located in a mobile home park for the exclusive use of the occupants of a single mobile home. 
    "Mobile home lot area" means the total area reserved for exclusive use of a mobile home and its occupants. 
    "Mobile home lot line" means a line bounding a mobile home lot as shown on the accepted mobile home park plan. 
    "Mobile home park" means a parcel of land under single or joint ownership which has been planned and/or improved for the placement of mobile homes or travel trailers for residential use. 
    "Mobile home stand" means that part of an individual mobile home lot which has been reserved for the placement of a mobile home or travel trailer appurtenant structures or additions. 
    "Non-entry side" means that side of a mobile home travel trailer opposite the principal entry side. 
    "Premise" means a lot together with all buildings structures thereon. 
    "Public street" means a public way which affords principal means of access to abutting properties. 
    "Recreational unit" means a travel trailer, pickup camper, converted bus, tent-trailer, tent, or similar device used for temporary portable housing. 
    "Travel trailer" means any vehicular or similar portable structure mounted on wheels, designed and intended primarily for short term occupancy, dwelling or sleeping or other purposes such as travel and recreation, and not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in length. 
    "Travel trailer park" means a parcel of land under a single or joint ownership that has been planned and improved for the temporary placement of travel trailers for short-term residential use. 
(Prior code§ 21.2) 
15.44.030 - Use of mobile homes for residential or business purposes; procedure for securing certificate of occupancy. 
A.  No person shall be permitted to occupy a mobile home for residential, business or sleeping purposes outside a duly established mobile home park, except in accordance with provisions of this section. 
B.  Any person wishing to occupy a mobile home for residential, business or sleeping purposes, outside a duly established mobile home park, must apply to the planning commission for a certificate of occupancy, and for a building permit if any electrical, plumbing, grading or building work of any nature is to be done on the property. 
C.  The application must show that the applicant is the owner of the land on which the mobile home is to be situated, otherwise the applicant shall not be permitted to use a mobile home on the premises in question for residential, business or sleeping purposes. 
D.  The application must comply with the provisions of Section 15.04.020(H) of this code and must show specifically the position of such mobile home on the premises and all electrical, plumbing, gas, water and sewer facilities available to the trailer at the site shown. 
E.  The clerk of the planning commission, on receipt of the application, shall schedule the matter for public hearing, and shall give at least fifteen (15) days advance notice of the time and place of the hearing as follows: 
1.  Notice shall be sent by first-class United States Mail to the applicant and to all owners of property within three hundred (300) feet of the property in question; and 
2.  Notice shall be published in a newspaper with general circulation in Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
F.  The planning commission shall, after the hearing on such application, either approve or disapprove the same and, in the event of disapproval, the reasons therefor shall be stated in its decision and shall become a part of the record of the planning commission. 
G.  If the application is for a building permit as well as for a certificate of occupancy, and the application is approved the certificate of occupancy shall not be issued until after the work to be performed under the building permit has been completed and approved by the building inspector. 
H.  The certificate of occupancy, if issued, shall be for not more than two (2) years; and at the expiration of the period of time stated in the certificate, the same shall no longer be effective, except as provided in subsection (J) of this section. 
I.  The applicant may, at the expiration of the period of time set forth in the certificate of occupancy, apply for a certificate of occupancy for an additional period of time. In this event, the procedure to be followed shall be the same as hereinabove outlined for the first application. 
J.  Upon the expiration of the time set forth in any certificate of occupancy issued pursuant to this section, the use of the premises as set forth in the application to the planning commission must thereupon cease, except that if the occupant shall, within five days thereafter, file an application for an additional certificate, the occupant shall be permitted to continue such use of such premises until the application is either approved or disapproved by the planning commission, and if disapproved, such use of such premises shall thereupon cease. 
K.  Each such application filed with the planning commission must be accompanied by the payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) to defray the administration costs of such proceeding, including costs of postage and publication. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 29; prior code 21-3) 
15.44.040 - License and temporary permits for mobile home parks and travel trailer parks. 
A.  In general. 
1.  No person shall construct, maintain, alter or operate a mobile home park or travel trailer park within the City of Covington, Newton County, Georgia unless the plans and specifications for such work have been submitted to and approved by the planning commission. Existing parks operating without a license shall be considered as new parks under provisions of this chapter and upon application for a license shall furnish with said application such plans and specifications a provided by this chapter. All applications for renewal or reinstatement of license to operate a mobile home park or travel trailer park shall furnish up-to-date plans and specifications with said application as provided by this chapter. 
2.  No person shall park a mobile home on a lot where it conflicts with the zoning ordinance of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia or any other code, ordinance or statute of this state or the City of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. No person shall park a mobile home on a lot unless land area, sewerage, and garbage disposal meets the requirements established under this chapter for a single mobile home located within a mobile home park. No person shall park a travel trailer for residential use within the city limits of Covington, Newton County, Georgia except when said travel trailer is parked within a duly licensed mobile home park or travel trailer park. 
3.  Storage and parking of trailers and commercial vehicle shall be in accordance with the following provisions. Commercial vehicles and trailers of all types, including travel, boat, camping and hauling, shall not be parked or stored on any lot occupied by a dwelling or any lot in any residential district except in accordance with all the following requirements: 
a.  No more than one commercial vehicle or commercial trailer per dwelling shall be permitted and in no case shall a commercial vehicle used for hauling explosives, gasoline or liquefied petroleum products be permitted; 
b.  Travel trailers, hauling trailers or boat trailers or one commercial vehicle shall be permitted only if parked or stored behind the front yard building line; and 
c.  A travel trailer shall not be occupied for a period exceeding fourteen (14) continuous days while it is parked or stored in any area except in a travel trailer or mobile home park authorized under this section. 
B.  Special Permit. A special permit shall be issued to a developer of a proposed mobile home park or travel park site only after a plat or park plan and specifications for such construction have been submitted and approved by the planning commission, and in the absence of such commission, by the duly authorized officials of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
C.  Temporary Permit. A temporary permit shall be issued to a developer having a special permit and desiring to maintain and operate a segment of the mobile home park before final construction of the mobile home park is completed, as provided in subsection (B) of this section. A temporary permit shall not exceed one hundred and eighty (180) days if: (1) the permittee can demonstrate sound financial responsibility and the park plans and specifications accompanying the application for license comply with all provisions of this chapter and all other applicable ordinances and statutes; (2) the permittee shall have diligently endeavored to make the existing park conform fully to the plans and specifications submitted with the applications; and (3) the permittee can demonstrate that failure to make the existing park conform fully to such plans and specifications have been due to causes beyond the control of the permittee. 
(Prior code § 21-4) 
15.44.050 - Location of mobile home parks, applicability of regulations and general provisions. 
A.  Conformity with Use District. Upon the effective date of this chapter, no mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit, building, structure or premises shall hereafter be used; and no mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit, structure or part thereof shall be erected, removed, remodeled, extended, enlarged or altered, except in conformity with the regulations specified for the use district in which it is located. 
B.  Continued as a Nonconforming Use. Any single mobile home, travel trailer or recreational unit, building structure or use lawfully existing at the time of enactment of this chapter may be continued as a nonconforming use even though such mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit, building structure, or use does not conform with the provisions of this chapter for the use district in which it is located. Similarly whenever a use district shall be changed hereafter, uses existing and lawful at that time may be continued. 
C.  Expansion of Mobile Home Parks and Travel Trailer Parks. Upon adoption of this chapter any mobile home park or travel trailer park lawfully licensed as specified in Section 15.44.070 of this chapter may continue to operate, but any expansion or alteration shall be governed by developmental standards as specified in Section 15.44.110 of this chapter; and that any expansion or alteration shall be in conformity with the regulations specified for the use district in which it is located. 
D.  Continuance of Nonconforming Mobile home or Travel Trailer Park. Any mobile home park for either permanent or temporary residence and mobile home or travel trailer park for mixed permanent and temporary residence duly licensed at the present time, but contrary to these regulations, may be continued as a nonconforming mobile home park or travel trailer park, subject to the provisions hereinafter set out. 
E.  Nonconforming Uses. 
1.  No mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit, structure or premises containing a nonconforming use shall hereafter be extended, unless such extension or alteration shall conform to the provisions of the use district in which it is located. 
2.  Any nonconforming building or structure which has been damaged to the extent of not exceeding fifty (50) per cent of its replacement valuation by reason of fire, flood, explosion, earthquake, riot, war; or any other environmental phenomena, may be reconstructed and revised as before if done within twelve (12) months from the time such damage occurred. If such damage is greater than fifty (50) per cent of its replacement valuation, such building or structure shall only be reconstructed to conform with the provisions of district, as set forth in the zoning ordinance of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia in which it is located. 
F.  Discontinuance. Wherever a nonconforming use created by the provisions of this chapter is discontinued, such use shall not thereafter be reestablished and any future use shall be in conformity with the provisions of this chapter. 
G.  Change. No use shall be permitted to revert to a non-conforming use. 
H.  Unsafe Buildings. Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the building inspector, or from complying with his lawful requirements. 
(Prior code § 21-5) 
15.44.060 - Permit to operate a mobile home park or trailer park. 
A.  In General. Upon enactment of this chapter, any person desiring to obtain a license to operate a mobile home or travel trailer park referred to in Section 15.44.070 of this chapter must petition the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia for the establishment of a use district in accordance with the procedure set forth in this section. 
B.  Procedures. The applicant must file with the city clerk an application containing the following, to wit: 
1.  The name and address of the applicant. 
2.  The name and address of the owner, if other than the applicant. 
3.  The location and legal description of the proposed mobile home park or travel trailer park. 
4.  Plans and specifications of all buildings and other improvements constructed or to be constructed within the mobile home park or travel trailer park. 
5.  Detailed plans showing the layout of the mobile park or travel trailer park, including: 
a.  The location and maximum size of each mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit to be allowed to occupy the park. 
b.  The location, width and type of surface of all roads passing through or abutting the park. 
c.  The distance between mobile homes, travel trailers, or other recreational units and boundary lines of the park. 
d.  The minimum distance between mobile home travel trailer or other recreational unit and any building, structure or premises within the park. 
e.  The location of all garbage containers furnished to each mobile home, travel trailer, or other recreational unit lot park and the location and size of any garbage container to be used for the purpose of central collection of garbage within the park. 
f.  The location, size and function of all offices and other buildings and structures within the park. 
g.  The location of all sewerage outlets, toilets, s and any other service facilities. 
h.  The type, size and location of all drainage facilities. 
i.  The location, size of all recreational play areas, or common controlled recreational areas, indicating provisions for separating the play area from any and all potential hazards and further specifying if said play area will be provided with lighting; and 
j.  Any and all other pertinent information that may lend itself to describing the type, size and design of the proposed park. 
6.  At least three references affirming the financial responsibility of the applicant. 
C.  Conformance to Standards: All plans submitted with the application shall be drawn in conformance with American Institute of Planners (A.I.P.), American Institute of Architects (A.I.A.) or other equivalent professional standards; 
1.  The plans shall be drawn at a scale of one inch per twenty feet (1?:20'). 
2.  The size of the drawing shall not be less than eight and one-half inches by eleven inches (8 1/2? x 11?), and shall not exceed thirty-six inches by forty-two inches (36? × 42?), and 
3.  Copies of the plans shall be filed in quadruplicate. 
D.  Application Submittance. Each application filed with the city clerk must be accompanied by the payment of fifty dollars ($50.00) to defray the administrative costs of the proceeding, including the costs of postage and publication. 
E.  City Clerk. The city clerk, upon receipt of the complete application and required drawing, shall deliver them to the chairman of the planning commission at least forty-five (45) days in advance of any public hearing in which the application and/or plans are to be discussed. 
F.  Review of Application and Plans. The planning commission, with such assistance from the building inspector, the city engineer's department, the city police department, the city fire department and the health official as may be required to render a decision, shall investigate the application and inspect the application and proposed plans and specifications. If the applicant has demonstrated sound financial responsibility and the proposed mobile home park will, when constructed or altered in accordance with such plans and specifications, be in compliance with all provisions and statutes, the chairman of the planning commission shall schedule the matter for public hearing, and shall give at least fifteen (15) days' advance notice of the time and place as follows: 
1.  Notice shall be sent by certified mail, return receipt requested, to the applicant and by first class mail to all owners whose property either abuts or is within hundred (300) feet of the property in question. 
2.  Notice shall be published in the official organ of Newton County, Georgia; and 
3.  The building inspector shall, at that time, cause erected in a conspicuous place on the property in question, a sign of not less than nine (9) square feet, with not less than three inches, black letters upon a white background, which shall read substantially as follows: 
    "A petition has been filed with the City of Covington, Newton County, Georgia for the change of this property from Zone (insert present Zone) to Zone (insert new Zone) for the purpose of (insert the word "erecting", "altering" or "expanding", as the case may be) a (insert the words "Mobile Home Park" or "Travel Trailer Park", as the case may be). A public hearing will be held at the Covington City Hall on (insert date) at (insert a time). All those desiring to make comments or to voice their opinions on said petition should be present or should transmit their comments or opinions by registered mail to the Chairman of the Covington Planning Commission so that it may be read aloud at the time of the public hearing." 
G.  Recommendation by the Planning Commission. The planning commission shall, after hearing of such application, either recommend approval or disapproval of the same and submit its findings in writing to the mayor and city council of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia for consideration and disposition. A copy of the recommendation for either approval or disapproval, along with consideration and disposition of the mayor and city council of the city of Covington, shall become part of the records of the planning commission. 
(Prior code § 21-6) 
15.44.070 - Permit to operate a mobile home park and certificate of occupancy. 
A.  In General. Upon approval for the erection, alteration, or expansion of mobile home park or travel trailer park in question, as provided for in Section 15.44.050(C) of this chapter, this section and articles therein shall apply. 
B.  Application for Initial License. 
1.  Application for initial mobile home park license shall be filed with the building inspector's department. 
2.  The application shall be in writing, signed by the applicant and shall include all information as required in Section 15.44.060(B) of this chapter, but excluding Section 15.44.060(B)(6) of this chapter. 
C.  Review of Completed Improvements. Upon completion and at reasonable intervals during construction, the building inspector shall inspect the same to assure that it has been constructed in accordance with the application and any other code, ordinance or statute that might apply; and the health officer shall inspect the same to assure that all sanitation and/or any other health requirements of the city of Covington, Newton County and the state of Georgia have been satisfied. 
D.  Certificate of Occupancy. If, after completion of construction of the erection, enlargement or alteration, all of the requirements of this chapter have been satisfied, the building inspector shall issue a certificate of occupancy to the applicant. 
E.  Business License to Operate. Upon receipt of the certificate of occupancy the applicant may then present same to the city clerk, pay the license fee required in Section 15.44.080(B) of this chapter, and receive a business license for the operation of a mobile home park or travel trailer park. 
F.  Renewal of Permit or License. License will automatically be renewed each year provided that the management continues to meet requirements set forth under this chapter. 
G.  Application for Transfer of License. Upon application in writing for transfer of a license and payment of the transfer fee the planning commission shall certify to the Covington city clerk of the transferee's compliance with Section 15.44.060(A) through (D) of this chapter and other applicable sections of this chapter, and his eligibility to operate a mobile home or trailer park within the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia: 
1.  Such licenses shall be issued as a temporary permit, defined by this chapter, for the period of time remaining until the expiration of the regular annual licensing period, as established by this chapter. 
2.  In the event more than one hundred eighty (180) days have elapsed, said temporary permit issued to the transferee must be renewed for the balance of the year remaining in the regular annual licensing period; 
3.  The requirements of Section 15.44.100 of this chapter, for an up-to-date plat or plan of the mobile home or trailer park, may be waived at the planning commission's recommendation, in the transferee's behalf until the next application for regular annual license is submitted for said transferee's premises. 
(Prior code § 21-7) 
15.44.080 - Licensing period, license, temporary permit and transfer fees. 
A.  Licensing Period. Licenses or permits to operate a mobile home park or travel trailer park shall be issued as prescribed by this chapter and shall apply for only one calendar year, beginning as of January first, and expiring as of twelve midnight EST December 31st of each year. The building inspector's department is herewith authorized to establish procedures for notification of licenses and processing initial permits and renewals. 
B.  The Annual License Fee. Every mobile home or travel trailer park operating within the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia must pay an annual license fee of twenty-five dollars ($25.00) for each mobile home stand existing whether occupied or unoccupied by a mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit each year. This sum shall be paid to the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia at the time the license is issued. 
C.  The Temporary Permit Fee. A fee based on two-thirds of the annual license fee, as provided in subsection B of this section shall be paid for each one hundred and eighty (180) day period. 
D.  The Transfer Fee. A fee of ten dollars ($10.00) shall be assessed for the transfer of an annual mobile home license. 
E.  Payment of Fees. All fees shall be presented with each application for annual license, temporary permit and/or transfer of license permit; and no employee or elected official of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia shall be empowered to waive, postpone or dismiss payment of any fee prescribed by this chapter. 
(Prior code § 21-8) 
Article 2 - Mobile Home Park Developmental Regulations and Criteria 

15.44.090 - Application of article. 
    Upon enactment of this chapter, the construction, enlargement, and/or alteration of all mobile home park and travel trailer park development shall be governed by the following developmental regulations and criteria. 
(Prior code § 21-11) 
15.44.100 - Location of mobile home parks. 
A.  General. Mobile home parks and travel trailer parks and temporary mobile home parks may be located only in MHP-mobile home park districts as designated on the comprehensive zoning map of the city of Covington, Newton County; provided that mobile home parks shall meet the requirements as established in Section 15.44.110 of this chapter. 
B.  Location Of Mobile Home Parks for Mixed, Permanent and Temporary Residential Uses. Any mobile home park providing spaces for both permanent and temporary occupation of either mobile homes, travel trailers and/or other recreational units, or a combination thereof, shall, for the purpose of this chapter, be considered in the same category as travel trailer parks and shall be permitted only in the MHP-mobile home park districts as designated on the comprehensive zoning map of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia, and otherwise in accordance with the site requirements as established in Section 15.44.110 of this chapter. 
C.  Separation of Mobile Home Parks from Abutting Uses. 
1.  Where any boundary of a mobile home park or travel trailer park directly or indirectly abuts property which is improved with a permanent residential building located within fifty (50) feet of such boundary, or directly or indirectly abuts property which may, under existing laws and regulations, be used for permanent residential construction, a fence, wall or hedge of a minimum height of six (6) feet shall be erected and/or planted along such boundary; provided that the building inspector shall approve the fence and wall material and design for such fence, wall or hedge. 
2.  Where any boundary of a mobile home park or travel trailer park directly or indirectly abuts property which is improved and permits motels, highway commercial uses, mobile home sales, and mobile home repair or building structures and/or premises, or directly c directly abuts property which may, under existing and regulations, be used for motels, and mobile repair or fabrication with either a permanent or temporary building, structure and/or premises, a fence, wall or hedge of a minimum height of six (6) feet shall be erected and/or planted along such boundary, provided that the building inspector shall approve the fence and wall material and design for such fence, wall or hedge. 
3.  A buffer strip of planted and maintained local grasses and foliage shall be required between the boundary of the mobile home lot or travel trailer lot in a mobile home park or travel trailer park and the buffer fence, wall or hedge demarking the park perimeter. The minimum width of the buffer strip shall be thirty (30) feet. 
(Prior code § 21-12) 
15.44.110 - Mobile home and travel trailer developmental standards. 
A.  Site Requirements. 
1.  A mobile home park or travel trailer park shall be located on well-drained soils, properly graded to insure adequate drainage that will provide freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
2.  A mobile home park or travel trailer park shall be so located that it shall not expose any resident, building, structure, mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit to hazard from subsidence, flood erosion, unstable subsurface movement or any other caused by physical and/or chemical limitation location of the site. 
3.  A site shall be so located that it does not expose any resident of the mobile home park or travel trailer to objectionable smoke, odors, other air pollutants, noise of a high decibel (db) limit, or probability of insect or rodent infestation or other adverse influence that will be detrimental to human health and safety. 
B.  Minimum Park Area Requirements. Each park shall have an area of not less than fifteen (15) acres nor less than sixty-four (64) lots; provided further that the minimum space requirements of this section shall be construed to apply to only contiguous acreages, undivided by any public thoroughfare, rail, utility easements or natural barriers to development. 
C.  Maximum Density. No mobile home park or trailer park shall be licensed to operate which contains or is designed to contain more than an overall average of seven mobile home lots per gross acre of said park. 
D.  Minimum Area of Mobile Home Lots. 
1.  Residential Parks. Lots within a mobile home designed for permanent occupancy shall average not less than five thousand-four hundred (5,400) square feet lots within a mobile home or travel trailer park designed for temporary occupancy shall average not less than three thousand-six hundred (3,600) square feet. 
2.  Travel Trailer Parks and Parks for Mixed Use. All lots within transient parks or parks for temporary occupancy shall be large enough to provide the minimum requirements of this chapter pertaining to design, buffering, yard space, setback and open areas for the size and type of unit the lot is designed to accommodate. 
3.  Yard Requirement. There shall be a minimum of thirty (30) feet clearance between all mobile home units; there shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet clearance between the ends of two mobile homes; and there shall be a minimum of forty (40) feet clearance between the rear end of one mobile home and either the entry side or non-entry side of another mobile home. 
4.  Park Structures. No mobile home or travel trailer shall be located closer than forty (40) feet to any permanent building within the park except that of a utility and/or tool house used in connection with a mobile home unit parked on the lot may be allowed in the yard. 
5.  Park Boundaries. No mobile home or travel trailer shall be parked closer than thirty (30) feet to any boundary line of a park. 
6.  Public Streets or Highways. No mobile home parked in permanent residential mobile home park shall be closer than thirty (30) feet to any public street or highway. 
7.  Designating "Front" Yard and Accessibility to a Driveway. Each mobile home or travel trailer shall be parked and secured to its pad with the mobile home hitch fronting on, or directly accessible to, any conforming interior driveway. 
(Prior code § 21-12) 
15.44.120 - Circulation and parking. 
A.  External Circulation. All mobile home parks or travel trailer parks shall abut, on at least one side for a distance of one hundred (100) feet or more in width, upon a major thoroughfare. All major thoroughfares shall be designated by the official zoning map and/or adopted major thoroughfare plan of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. All frontage roads servicing an interstate highway and/or expressway shall be considered, for the purposes of this chapter, as major thoroughfares. 
2.  Internal circulation. All interior streets shall be shown by name, width of easement and surfacing, and type of surfacing on the development plan or plat of each mobile home park; and shall conform to all the provisions of the subdivision regulations of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia pertaining to the function and standards for neighborhood streets. 
B.  Driveways. 
1.  External Public Driveways. The driveways of all mobile home parks and travel trailer parks connecting with and serving as ingress and egress systems to adjoining thoroughfares shall be shown by width of easement and type of surfacing material on the developing plan or plat of each such park. Such driveways shall conform to the adopted major thoroughfare plan street ordinance of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia provided that the minimum requirements of external driveway systems in any home or travel trailer park shall call for an unobstructed width of not less than thirty (30) feet and an all-weather surfacing material on all such driveways be used. There shall be at least two such driveways connecting any park with adjoining public thoroughfares. 
2.  Interior Drives. All mobile home lots or travel lots shall abut upon an interior driveway; they shall be shown by width of easement and surfacing on the development plan or plat of each park; and each driveway shall be a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet in width, except in mobile home parks designed to allow parking on interior drives, and such drives shall be in excess of twenty-five (25) feet, sufficient to allow for parking cars. 
C.  Off-Street Parking. Automobile parking within any mobile home park or travel trailer park shall be allowed only within areas designated on the development plan or plat. At least one off-street parking space of three hundred (300) square feet in area shall be provided in or within one hundred (100) feet of every mobile home lot; and off-street parking space for visitors, at a ratio of one three hundred (300) square foot parking space for every four mobile home lots will be provided in convenient locations by the park plan. 
D.  Lighting of Interior Drives. All mobile home parks or travel trailer parks duly licensed to operate and all new mobile home parks or travel trailer parks shall provide lighting on all interior drives from sunset to sunrise of the succeeding day. Incandescent lamps emitting light in a rant between four thousand (4,000) and six thousand (6,000 lumen shall be installed in a manner that will allow for adequate overlap of light beams at ground level so as to provide continuous lighting. All lighting facilities shall be subject to approval of the city engineer's department and the building inspector. 
(Prior code § 21-14) 
15.44.130 - Plumbing, heating and electrical standards. 
A.  Eligibility of Mobile Homes And Travel Trailers For Park Occupancy. No mobile home lot shall be rented for residential use in any mobile home park except for periods of one hundred and twenty (120) days or more. 
1.  No mobile home or travel trailer shall be admitted any park unless it can be demonstrated that it meets the requirements of American Standards Association Code Provision A-119.1, 1963, "American Standard for Installation in Mobile Homes of Electrical, Heating and Plumbing Systems"; or any state of Georgia administered code insuring equal or better plumbing, heating or electrical installations. 
2.  In addition to meeting the above requirements and conforming to other laws of the city of Covington, Newton County, or State of Georgia, mobile home parks or travel trailer parks shall also conform to the requirements set forth in sections or chapters of "Minimum Property Standards for Mobile Home Courts (Federal Housing Administration, Government Printing Office, Washington 25, D. C.) as follows: Sections 2205, 2206, 2208-1 and 2, 2210, 2211, and Chapters 4, 5, 6, and 7 where approval of acceptance by FHS is required. Mobile home parks or travel trailer not having mortgages insured by FHA shall obtain written approval or acceptance from the planning commission and the building inspector; provided further that where provisions of such FHA regulation conflict, the most restrictive, or those imposing the higher standards, shall govern. 
(Prior code § 21-15) 
Article 3 - Park Health, Sanitation and Safety Regulations 

15.44.140 - Water supply. 
    An adequate supply of pure, potable water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and mobile home lots or travel trailer lots within a park. Each mobile home stand or travel trailer stand shall be provided an approved cold water connection and a tap (hydrant) constructed in accordance with the plumbing standards adopted by the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
(Prior code § 21-21) 
15.44.150 - Sanitation. 
A.  Environmental Control. The area around and underneath each mobile home or travel trailer shall be kept clean and free from collections of refuse, rubbish, glass bottles, or other unsightly material. 
B.  Garbage Receptacles and Collecting. Each mobile home lot or travel trailer lot shall be provided with a metal garbage container with a tight fitting lid. The size of each container shall be a minimum of twenty (20) gallons and maximum of thirty (30) gallons. The container shall be kept in sanitary condition and shall be stored at least three inches off the ground, preferably on a metal rack or hanger for such purpose. Waste shall be removed from the premises and disposed of often enough to prevent creating a nuisance or health hazard. If any park owner desires to install the required metal garbage container in a submerged casing he may do so providing (1) all lots within the park are provided with the same type of facility, and (2) that the installation of any such facility shall be approved by the building inspector and the health officer. 
C.  Sewerage Disposal. Each mobile home stand or travel trailer stand shall be provided with a sanitary sewer, of at least four inches in diameter, which shall be connected to receive waste from the shower, bath tub, flush toilet, lavatory, kitchen sink and garbage disposal unit of the mobile home or travel trailer. The stand shall be connected and sealed with a sealer adequately so as to allow the discharge of wastes into a sewerage system which meets the health requirements of the State of Georgia and the city of Covington, Georgia. The sealer used shall be provided residents by the park owner and shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector. 
1.  Mobile home or travel trailer sewage pipe connections shall be of approved semi-rigid and non-collapsible pipe, having smooth interior surfaces and no less than three inches outside diameter nor less in size than the mobile home or travel trailer outlet. Sewage pipe connections shall be equipped with a standard screw or clamp type fitting. While a mobile home stand or travel trailer stand is unoccupied or the drain not in use, the sewer opening shall be closed and sealed with an approved closure or cap. 
2.  Any travel trailer that is equipped with a self-contained sewerage system may waiver this section of the chapter; provided that a properly designed, installed and maintained travel trailer dumping station is available with the park. Said dumping station shall be approved by the building inspector and the health officer. 
D.  Privy or Cesspit. No privy or cesspit shall ever be allowed in any mobile home park or travel trailer park, or mobile home lot or travel trailer lot within the limits of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia; the State of Georgia, Department of Public Health, Standards and Regulations to the contrary notwithstanding. 
(Prior code § 21-22) 
15.44.160 - Fire protection. 
    Every mobile home park, or travel trailer park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order, of such type, size and number, so located as to satisfy applicable regulations of the fire department of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. No open fires or burning of trash leaves or other refuse shall be permitted at any place within the boundaries of any mobile home park or travel trailer park which may endanger life or property; provided further that no fires shall be left unattended at any time. 
(Prior code § 21-23) 
15.44.170 - Mobile home stand improvements. 
    Each mobile home or travel trailer parked on a mobile home lot in an approved mobile home park or travel trailer park shall be placed on a stand at least large enough to cover the entire area underneath the mobile home or travel trailer parked thereon. The stand shall be hard surfaced with asphaltic concrete of a minimum thickness of three inches. Each mobile home parked may be underpinned with a suitable material approved by the building inspector. Said underpinning when installed, shall be kept in a state of repair so as not to cause a detrimental appearance. 
(Prior code § 21-24) 
15.44.180 - Convenience establishment permitted. 
    A single convenience establishment of commercial nature including stores, coin-operated laundry, dry cleaning establishment, laundry and dry cleaning agencies, beauty and barber shops and/or neighborhood convenience stores may be permitted in a mobile home park or travel trailer park subject to the following restrictions: 
A.  Maximum Area. Any convenience establishment and the parking areas primarily related to said operations shall not be in excess of two acres or ten (10) percent of the total gross area of the park, which ever comes first. 
B.  Relationship of Convenience Establishment to Environs. A convenience establishment shall be subordinate to the residential use and character of the park. It shall be located, designed and intended to serve the frequent trade and/or service needs of the occupants of the park. Any convenience establishment shall present no visible evidence of its commercial character to any person from any portion of any district outside of the boundaries of the park. 
(Prior code § 21-25) 
15.44.190 - Common controlled recreation area. 
    Upon enactment of this chapter, any mobile home park or travel trailer park duly licensed to operate within the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia shall provide a commonly controlled recreation area 
A.  The minimum area provided for a commonly controlled recreation area shall not be less than ten (10) per cent of the total gross area of the park. 
B.  The recreation area shall be fenced, hedged, or other-wise protected from traffic or other outside hazards. Any fencing material or hedging shall be approved by the building inspector. 
C.  The recreation area shall be landscaped and planted with local grasses that are approved by the building inspector and/or city of Covington recreation department. 
D.  The installation of all equipment shall be subject to the approval of the building inspector and/or city of Covington recreation department. 
E.  The fencing and/or hedging, landscaping and equipment shall be kept in a constant state of repair so as to provide the park and its occupants with usable recreation area at all times. 
(Prior code § 21-26) 
Article 4 - Miscellaneous Administrative Responsibilities 

15.44.200 - Supervision. 
A.  Enforcement Officer. With the exception of health codes, this chapter shall be enforced by the building inspector and said officer shall be authorized and have the right in the performance of his duties to enter any premises during normal business hours and in emergencies whenever necessary to protect the public interest; provided, however, such entrance not be made if the purpose is to collect evidence to be used in a tort or criminal action at law against the occupant or operator of a mobile home or mobile home court, until and unless a proper search warrant shall have been issued for such purpose. 
B.  Park Operator. The licensee or permittee, or a duly authorized attendant or caretaker shall be in charge at all times to keep the mobile home park or travel trailer park, its facilities and equipment in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition. 
(Prior code § 21-31) 
15.44.210 - Responsibilities of permittee to the public. 
A.  Nuisances and Violations. The mobile home park or travel trailer park operator or his authorized agent is responsible for infractions to this chapter or any other local or state code of ordinances, or any common law nuisance occurring within the limits of a mobile home lot or travel trailer lot or any park structure or open area within said park. 
B.  Plot Plan. The operator of every mobile home park or travel trailer park containing park structures, mobile homes, travel trailers or other recreational units and accessory structures shall maintain in a conspicuous location a copy of an approved plot plan of the mobile home park or travel trailer park. The plot plan shall show in detail the site layout, the location and street or park location number of each mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit and park structure, the position of cabanas, accessory buildings, mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational units on each. 
C.  Registration of Occupants. It shall be the duty of each licensee and/or permittee to keep a register containing a record of all mobile home, travel trailer or other recreation unit owners and occupants located within the park. The park register shall contain: (a) the name and legal address of all occupants; (b) the name and address of the owner of each mobile home or travel trailer including the name and address of all mortgage and/or lien holders if any; (c) the make, type, model, year, and license number of each mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit and motor vehicle owned by the registered occupant, as well as the registration number of each mobile home and the state and year in which registered; (d) the number of occupants of each mobile home by name, age, and sex; and (e) the forwarding address (if available) of each occupant. The register shall be kept available for inspection by authorized officers of the state of Georgia and the city of Covington. The register record for each occupant registered shall not be destroyed for a period of three years following the date of departure of the registrant from the park. 
(Prior code § 21-32) 
15.44.220 - Structural additions. 
    All structural additions estimated at more than one hundred dollars ($100.00) in cost when completed to mobile home, travel trailers or other recreational units other than those which are built into the unit, shall be erected only after a building permit is obtained. Such additions shall conform to sections of the building code that are applicable to mobile homes, travel trailers or other recreational units or shall meet the standards of special regulations adopted with respect to such additions. The building permit shall specify whether such structural addition may remain permanently, must be removed when the unit is removed, or must be removed with-in a specified length of time after the unit is removed. Structural alterations existing at the time of passage of this chapter shall be removed within thirty (30) days after the unit which they serve is removed, unless they comply with applicable regulations. 
(Prior code § 21-33) 
15.44.230 - Animals and pets. 
    No owner or person in charge of any animal, reptile or fowl pet shall permit it to run at large, or commit any nuisance within the limits of any mobile home park or travel trailer park. Where pets ate kept on mobile home, travel trailer or other recreational unit plots or spaces, such areas shall be kept in a sanitary condition. 
(Prior code § 21-34) 
15.44.240 - Penalties. 
A.  Fine and/or Imprisonment. Any person who violates any of the provisions of this chapter is subject to trial and possible conviction, and shall upon conviction thereof be punished by a fine not exceeding five hundred dollars ($500.00) and/or imprisonment for a term not exceeding sixty (60) days; provided further that each day a violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
B.  Remedies. In case any building is erected, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter the building inspector, or any appropriate city authority or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action in proceeding to stop the violation in the case of each building or use of land. 
C.  Revocation of License or Permit. The licensing authority or agency may revoke any license or permit which it has issued to maintain or operate a mobile home park or travel trailer park when the licensee is convicted of a violation of any provision of this chapter After such revocation, the annual license may be reissued if the circumstances leading to revocation have been remedied. 
D.  Permit Suspension. In the event that any person holding a permit issued under the provisions of this chapter violates same, that the permit be subject to suspension as provided in subsection C of this section. 
(Prior code § 21-35) 
15.44.250 - Amendments. 
A.  Review by Planning Commission. This chapter may be amended from time to time by the city council of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia; but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by or shall have first been submitted to the planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission fails to submit a report within the thirty (30) day period, it shall be deemed to have recommended approval of the proposed amendment. 
B.  Public Hearing. Before enacting an amendment to this chapter, the city council of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia shall hold a public hearing. At least fifteen (15) days' notice of the time and place of which shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
(Prior code § 21-36) 
15.44.260 - Conflict with other regulations. 
    When the regulations of this chapter impose more restrictive standards than are required in or under any statute or other legal document, the requirements of this chapter shall govern. When the provisions of any other statute require more restrictive standards than are required by this chapter, the provisions of such statute shall govern. 
(Prior code § 21-37) 
Article 5 - Travel Trailer Park Regulations 

15.44.270 - Short title-Statement of intent. 
A.  Short Title. This article shall be known and may be cited as "the travel trailer park ordinance" of the city of Covington, Newton County, Georgia. 
B.  Statement of Intent. 
1.  The purpose of this article is to provide for the development of areas within the city as travel trailer parks. These parks shall be developed and located so as to provide safe and sanitary living conditions for the occupants. The regulations set forth in this article are designed to provide for planned travel trailer park developments and to make these parks wholesome and attractive places for the traveling public to visit and assets to the community. 
2.  This article is further intended to supplement the zoning ordinance of the city and shall be used exclusively as the regulations governing individual travel trailer parks. 
(Prior code § 21-48) 
15.44.280 - Definitions. 
    As used in this article, the following words and terms shall have the meaning ascribed there to: 
    "Licensee" means any person licensed to operate and maintain a travel trailer park under the provisions of this article. 
    "Recreational unit" means a travel trailer, pick-up camper, converted bus, tent trailer, tent or similar device used for temporary portable housing. 
    "Travel trailer" means any vehicle or similar portable structure mounted on wheels, designed and intended primarily for short term occupancy, for dwelling or sleeping or other purpose such as travel and recreation, and not exceeding thirty-five (35) feet in length. 
    "Travel trailer park" means a parcel of land that has been planned and/or improved for the temporary placement of travel trailers for short-term residential use. 
    "Travel trailer stand" means that portion of an individual travel trailer park which has been reserved for the placement of a travel trailer. 
(Prior code § 21-49) 
15.44.290 - License to operate a travel trailer park. 
A.  No person shall construct, maintain, alter or Operate a travel trailer park within the city unless the plans and specifications for such work have been submitted to and approved by the city building and zoning office and fire department. 
B.  A licensed park shall not expand without written approval of plans and specifications for such expansion by the building and zoning office. 
C.  Upon completion of a travel trailer park in conformity with approved plans and specifications the building and zoning office shall issue a certificate of occupancy for same. 
D.  The owner of the travel trailer park shall present the certificate of occupancy to the city clerk, and pay a license fee of fifteen dollars ($15.00) for each travel trailer stand existing, whether occupied or unoccupied. 
E.  The license will automatically be renewed each year provided that management of the travel trailer park continues to meet the requirements set forth in this article. 
F.  A license to operate a travel trailer park may be transferred upon written application for such transfer and payment of transfer fee of ten dollars ($10.00), provided that the building and zoning office has certified to the city license clerk that such travel trailer park is in compliance with this article. 
(Prior code § 21-50) 
15.44.300 - Travel trailer park development regulations and criteria. 
A.  Location of Travel Trailer Parks. All travel trailer parks shall be located either in a highway commercial (H-C), (M-1) light industrial, (M-2) heavy industrial or (MHP) mobile home park district, as designated on the comprehensive zoning map. 
B.  Separation of Travel Trailer Parks From Abutting Uses. All travel trailer parks shall be required to meet the buffer and screening requirements set forth in Section 16.32.160 of this code. 
C.  Site Requirements. 
1.  A travel trailer park shall be located on well drained soils, properly graded to insure adequate drainage that will provide freedom from stagnant pools of water. 
2.  The park shall be so located that it shall not expose any resident building structure, travel trailer or other recreational unit to hazards from flood erosion, unstable sub-surface movement or any other hazard caused by physical limitations of the site. 
3.  Each park shall have an area of not less than two acres. 
4.  No travel trailer park shall be licensed to operate which contains or is designed to contain more than an overall average of twelve (12) travel trailer stands per gross acre of the park site. 
5.  There shall be a minimum of thirty-five (35) feet clearance between all trailer stands. 
6.  No travel trailer stand shall be located closer than forty (40) feet from any permanent building. 
7.  All drives within the park area shall be a minimum width of twenty (20) feet, with no dead-end drives. 
8.  The electrical installation for a travel trailer park shall meet all requirements of Article 551, Recreational Vehicles and Recreational Vehicle Parks, 1996 National Electrical Code. 
9.  All travel trailer parks shall provide lighting of a type which has been approved by the city building and zoning office from sunset to sunrise on all drives. 
10.  An adequate supply of pure, potable water for drinking and domestic purposes shall be supplied by pipes to all buildings and travel trailer stands within the park. This water system shall be constructed in accordance with the plumbing standards adopted by the city. A back pressure back flow preventer shall be installed on the branch service line to each travel trailer stand. A shutoff valve shall be installed in each branch line on the supply of the back flow protective device. 
D.  Sanitation. 
1.  The area around and underneath each travel trailer stand shall be kept clean and free from collections of refuse, rubbish, glass bottles or other unsightly or unhealthy material. 
2.  Each travel trailer stand shall be provided with a metal or plastic garbage container with a tight-fitting lid. Each container shall be a minimum of twenty (20) gallons and maximum of thirty (30) gallons and installed in a metal frame three inches off the ground. 
3.  At least one-half of the travel trailer stands shall be equipped with a four-inch sewer tap with an approved closure or cap when not in use. A travel trailer dumping station approved by the city building and zoning office shall be installed in a convenient location in the park for trailers with self-contained sewerage systems. 
E.  Service Buildings. To provide necessary sanitation and laundry facilities each travel trailer park shall have at least one service building of permanent construction with interior finish of moisture resistant material which will withstand frequent cleaning. 
1.  The service buildings of travel trailer parks serving only independent trailers shall have a minimum of one laundry tray, one water closet, one lavatory, one shower for women and one water closet, one lavatory and one shower for men. 
2.  The service buildings of travel trailer parks serving dependent trailers shall, for each group of ten (10) or fewer trailers, have a minimum of one lavatory tray, two water closets, one lavatory one shower for women, and one water closet, one urinal, one shower for men and one slop water closet for emptying containers of human waste for a maximum of ten (10) dependent travel trailers. 
    Hot and cold water shall be provided for all fixtures except the water closet. Each water closet, slop water closet and shower shall be in separate compartments, with self-closing doors on all water closet compartments. 
    Showers shall be a minimum of three feet by three feet in area, with a dressing compartment with a stool or bench. Laundry trays and washing machines shall be contained in a room separate from the toilet room. 
    A minimum three-inch floor drain shall be installed in each toilet and laundry room. 
F.  Fire Protection. Every travel trailer park shall be equipped at all times with fire extinguishing equipment in good working order of such type, size and number and so located as to satisfy applicable regulations of the city fire department. 
G.  Convenience Establishment. A single convenience establishment of commercial nature which supplies the needs of the travel trailer park, along with the required parking facilities, not in excess of two acres or ten (10) percent of the total gross area of the park, shall be provided for each travel trailer park licensed under this article. 
H.  Common Recreation Area. A travel trailer park licensed under this article shall have a minimum area provided for common controlled recreation of not less than five percent of the total gross area of park, to be used only by residents of such park. 
I.  Park Operator. The owner of any travel trailer park licensed under this article shall provide a competent adult attendant or caretaker to be in charge of the travel trailer park and its facilities and equipment and to maintain the same in a clean, orderly and sanitary condition at all times. 
J.  Plot Plan. The park operator shall maintain at all times an approved plot plan of the travel trailer park for review by the city building and zoning office or fire department showing site layout, streets, number of each stand, accessory buildings and recreation area. 
K.  Registration of Occupants. Each licensee of a travel trailer park shall keep a register containing a record of all travel trailer or other recreation unit owners and occupants located within the park with at least the following information: 
1.  Name and address of all occupants; 
2.  Type of vehicle and its license tag and number; and 
3.  Type of trailer. 
L.  Duration of Occupancy. The maximum duration of occupancy of a stand in any travel trailer park licensed under this article by any one occupant shall be fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
(Prior code § 21-51) 
15.44.310 - Penalties. 
    Any person who is convicted of violation of any of the provisions of this article shall be punished in accordance with the provisions of Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Prior code § 21-52) 
Chapter 15.48 - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION[2] 
Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note- Ordinance dated November 19, 2012(5), amended Ch. 15.48, in its entirety, to read as herein out. Prior to inclusion of said ordinance, Ch. 15.48 pertained to similar subject matter. See also the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 

Article 1 - Statutory Authorization, Findings of Fact, Purpose and Objectives 

15.48.010 - Authorization. 
    Article IX, Section II of the Constitution of the State of Georgia and Section 36-1-20(a) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated have delegated the responsibility to local governments to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety and general welfare of its citizenry. Therefore, the Mayor and Council of the City of Covington, Georgia, do ordain as follows. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.020 - Findings of fact. 
A.  The flood hazard areas of the City of Covington, Georgia, are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life, property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood protection and relief, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in flood plains causing increases in flood height and velocities. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.030 - Statement of purpose. 
    It is the purpose of this chapter to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
A.  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
B.  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities or erosion; 
C.  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase erosion or flood damage; 
D.  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert flood waters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
E.  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.040 - Objectives. 
    The objectives of this chapter are: 
A.  To protect human life and health; 
B.  To minimize damage to public facilities and utilities such as water and gas mains, electric, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges located in floodplains; 
C.  To help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of flood-prone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
D.  To minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
E.  To minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
F.  To minimize prolonged business interruptions; 
G.  To ensure that potential home buyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
Article 2 - General Provisions 

15.48.050 - Definitions. 
    Unless specifically defined below, words or phrases used in this chapter shall be interpreted so as to give them the meaning they have in common usage and to give this chapter its most reasonable application: 
    "Accessory structure" means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
    "Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition which is connected by a fire wall or is separated by independent perimeter load-bearing walls shall be considered "new construction". 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review of the city engineering department's interpretation of any provision of this chapter or a request for a variance. 
    "Area of shallow flooding" means a designated AO or AH Zone on the city's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
    "Area of special flood hazard" is the land in the floodplain within the city subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, Areas of Special Flood Hazard shall be those designated by the city and referenced in Section 15.48.070. 
    "Base flood" means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
    "Base flood elevation (BFE)" means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A-30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30 and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
    "Basement" means that portion of a building having its flood sub grade (below ground level) on all sides. 
    "Building" see definition for structure. 
    "Critical facility" means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
1.  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
2.  Hospitals, nursing homes and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
3.  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
4.  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
    "Development" means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavation or drilling operations and permanent storage of materials or equipment. 
    "Elevated building" means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
    "Existing construction" means any for the purposes of determining rates, structures, for which the "start of construction" commenced before March 1, 1983. [i.e. the effective date of the initial FIRM for the city]. 
    "Existing manufactured park or subdivision" means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or pouring of concrete pads) is completed before March 1, 1983 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the city]. 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed, including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    "Flood or flooding: means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
1.  The overflow or inland or tidal waters; 
2.  The unusual and rapid accumulation of runoff or surface waters from any source. 
    "Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM)" means an official map of the city, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
    "Flood insurance rate map (FIRM)" means an official map of the city, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or the risk premium zones applicable to the city. 
    "Flood insurance study" is the official report by the Federal Emergency Management Agency evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
    "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
    "Floodproofing" means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes or adjustments to structures which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
    "Floodway" means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
    "Freeboard" means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for purposes of floodplain management. "Freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
    "Highest adjacent grade" means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface prior to construction adjacent to the proposed walls of a structure. 
    "Historic structure" means any structure that is: 
1.  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
2.  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
3.  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
4.  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
(a)  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
(b)  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
    "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including the basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor; provided, that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this chapter. 
    "Manufactured home" means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed for use with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term also includes park trailers, travel trailers and similar transportable structures placed on a site for one hundred eighty (180) days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
    "Manufactured home park or subdivision" means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
    "Mean sea level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum, to which flood elevations shown on the city's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
    "National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD)" as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
    "New construction" means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the start of construction commenced on or after March 1, 1983 [the effective date of the initial FIRM], and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after March 1, 1983 [the effective date of the first floodplain management chapter adopted by the city] and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. 
    "New manufactured home park or subdivision: means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed on or after March 1, 1983 [the effective date of the first floodplain management regulations adopted by the city]. 
    "North American Vertical Datum (NAVD)" has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA Flood Modernization Maps. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle which is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred (400) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling, but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel or seasonal use. 
    "Start of construction" means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction or improvements was within one hundred eighty (180) days of the permit date. The actual start means the first placement of permanent construction of a structure such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. Permanent construction does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for basements, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. Accessory structures are not exempt from any requirements of this chapter. For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
    "Structure" means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, a manufactured home, or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
    "Subdivision" means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
    "Substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. The market value of the structure should be (1) the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or (2) in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to occurrence of the damage. This term includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage" regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
    For the purposes of this definition, "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. The term does not, however, include: (1) those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to assure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or (2) any alteration of a "historic structure" provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a "historic structure". 
    "Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions" means the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equal to or exceeding fifty (50) percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
    "Variance" is a grant of relief from the requirements of this chapter, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this chapter. 
    "Violation" means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the city's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this chapter is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.060 - Lands to which this chapter applies. 
    This chapter shall apply to all areas of special floor hazard within the jurisdiction of Covington, Georgia. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.070 - Basis for establishing the areas of special flood hazard. 
    The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its Flood Insurance Study (FIS), City of Covington, Georgia, Newton County, Community Number 130144, dated September 2, 1982, with accompanying maps, and other supporting data, and any revision thereto are adopted by reference and declared to be a part of this chapter. For those land areas acquired by the city through annexation, the current FIS dated September 5, 2007, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference. Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or by private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
    The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study, accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the office of the City City Engineering Department, 2116 Stallings Street, Covington, Georgia. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.080 - Establishment of development permit. 
    A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this chapter prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.090 - Compliance. 
    No structure or land shall be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this chapter and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.100 - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
    This chapter is not intended to repeal, abrogate or impair any existing ordinances, easements, covenants or deed restrictions. However, where this chapter and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.110 - Interpretation. 
    In the interpretation and application of this chapter, all provisions shall be: (1) considered as minimum requirements; (2) liberally construed in favor of the city; and (3) deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under Georgia statutes. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.120 - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
    The degree of flood protection required by this chapter is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This chapter does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This chapter shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer, agent or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this chapter or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.130 - Penalties for violation. 
    Failure to comply with the provisions of this chapter or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this chapter or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be punished as provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
Article 3 - Administration 

15.48.140 - Designation of ordinance administrator. 
    The city engineering department is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.150 - Permit procedures. 
    Application for a development permit shall be made to the city engineering department at the building and zoning office at 2116 Stallings Street, Covington, Georgia, on forms furnished by the city prior to any development activities, and may include, but is not limited to, the following: plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
A.  Application Stage. 
1.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
2.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any non-residential structure will be floodproofed; 
3.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria in Section 15.48.180(B) of this chapter; 
4.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of proposed development; and 
B.  Construction Stage. 
1.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the city engineering department an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for non-residential structures, said certification shall be prepared under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
2.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
3.  The city engineering department shall review the above referenced certification data submitted. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.160 - Duties and responsibilities of the city engineering department. 
    Duties of the city engineering department shall include, but shall not be limited to: 
A.  Review proposed development to assure that the permit requirements of this chapter have been satisfied. 
B.  Review proposed development to assure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by Federal or Georgia law, including Section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 U.S.C. 1334. Copies of such permits shall be provided and maintained on file. 
C.  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
D.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 15.48.170, then the city engineering department shall obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a Federal, Georgia or other sources in order to administer the provisions of Article 3 of this chapter. 
E.  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with Section 15.48.070. 
F.  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with Section 15.148.170. 
G.  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, the city engineering department shall obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with Section 15.48.150(B). 
H.  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
I.  Notify adjacent communities and the Georgia Department of Natural Resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
J.  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision process. Assure that flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
K.  Where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions) the city engineering department shall make the necessary interpretation. Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this chapter. 
L.  All records pertaining to the provisions of this ordinance shall be maintained in the office of the city engineering department and shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
Article 4 - Provisions for Flood Hazard Reduction 

15.48.170 - General standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions apply: 
A.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement of the structure. 
B.  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage. 
C.  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage. 
D.  Elevated Buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwater. 
1.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
(a)  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
(b)  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
(c)  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwater in both direction. 
2.  So as not to violate the "lowest floor" criteria of this chapter, the unfinished or flood resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area. 
3.  The interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms. 
E.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing and other service facilities shall be designated and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding. 
F.  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable Georgia requirements for resisting wind forces. 
G.  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the system. 
H.  New and replacement sanitary sewer systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of flood waters into the systems and discharges from the systems into flood waters. 
I.  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding, and 
J.  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure which is not compliant with the provisions of this chapter shall be undertaken only if the non-conformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.180 - Specific standards. 
    In all areas of special flood hazard the following provisions shall be required: 
A.  New Construction and/or Substantial Improvements. Where base flood elevation data are available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.48.170(D), "Elevated Buildings". All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
B.  Non-Residential Construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH zones, may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the city engineering department as set forth above and in Section 15.48.150(B). 
C.  Standards for Manufactured Homes and Recreational Vehicles. Where base flood elevation data are available: 
1.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved on: (1) individual lots or parcels, (2) in new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions, (3) in expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions, or (4) on a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred "substantial damage" as the result of a flood, must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
2.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
(a)  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation, or 
(b)  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than thirty-six (36) inches in height above grade. 
3.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement. (Ref. Section 15.48.170(E). 
4.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
(a)  Be on the site for fewer than one hundred eighty (180) consecutive days. 
(b)  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use, (a recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions), or 
(c)  Meet all the requirements for "New Construction", including the anchoring and elevation requirements of Section 15.48.180(B). 
D.  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.48.070 are areas designated as floodway. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
1.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practice that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
2.  Only if Section 15.48.180(D)(1) is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of Section 15.48.180. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.190 - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.48.070, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
A.  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with Section 15.48.070, then the city engineering department shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, Georgia, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of Article 3. Only if data are not available from these sources, then the following subsections (B) and (C) shall apply: 
B.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
C.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area (including basement) elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. The lowest floor shall be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.48.170(D) "Elevated Buildings". All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
    The city engineering department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.200 - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
    Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.48.070 where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways hve been designated, (Zones AE) the following provisions apply: 
A.  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
B.  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with Section 15.48.180. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.210 - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
    Areas of special flood hazard established in Section 15.48.070 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
A.  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and non-residential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of flood waters shall be provided in accordance with standards of Section 15.48.170(D), "Elevated Buildings". 
    The city engineering department shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
B.  New construction or the substantial improvement of a non-residential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be water tight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot, above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions above, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth above and as required in Section 15.48.180(B). 
C.  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.220 - Standards for subdivisions. 
A.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage; 
B.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems located and constructed to minimize flood damage; 
C.  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards, and; 
D.  For subdivisions and/or developments greater than fifty (50) lots or five acres, whichever is less, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final LOMR. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.230 - Standards for critical facilities. 
A.  Critical facilities shall not be located in the one-hundred-year floodplain or the five hundred-year floodplain. 
B.  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the five hundred-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
Article 5 - Variance Procedures 

15.48.240 - Variance procedures. 
A.  The board of appeals and adjustments as established by Section 16.12.160 shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this chapter. 
B.  The board shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the city engineering department in the enforcement or administration of this chapter. 
C.  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the board of appeals and adjustments may appeal such decision to the Superior Court of Newton County, as provided in Section 5-4-1, et seq. Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
D.  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
E.  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this chapter are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
F.  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
G.  In reviewing such requests, the board of adjustments and appeals shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.250 - Conditions for variances. 
A.  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
1.  A finding of good and sufficient cause, 
2.  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
3.  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, extraordinary public expense, create nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
B.  The provisions of this chapter are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of an historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
C.  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
D.  The city engineering department shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
15.48.260 - Severability. 
    If any section, clause, sentence, or phrase of this chapter is held to be invalid or unconstitutional by any court of competent jurisdiction, then said holding shall in no way effect the validity of the remaining portions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(5)) 
Title 16 - ZONING 
Chapters 
Chapter 16.04 - ADMINISTRATION 

16.04.010 - Short title and scope. 
A.  This title shall be known as the "Covington zoning ordinance." 
B.  This zoning ordinance shall govern the use of all land and all development and redevelopment thereof within the incorporated areas of Covington, Georgia. 
C.  No building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or altered, except in conformity with the regulations of this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.020 - Authority. 
    This title is enacted pursuant to Covington's authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning granted by the Constitution of the state of Georgia, Article 9, Section 2, paragraph 4, and by Article 9, Section 2, paragraphs 2 and 3; pursuant to Chapters 66 and 70 of Title 36 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated; by the Georgia Planning Act of 1989; by Covington's authority to enact regulations and exercise zoning, planning, subdivision, and police powers granted by Sections 9, 34, 68, and other provisions of its charter; by other local laws; by the city's general police powers; and by other powers and authority provided by federal, state, and local laws applicable hereto. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.030 - Purpose. 
    This zoning ordinance is enacted by the city of Covington in order to promote the public health, safety, morals, and general welfare of the residents of Covington, Georgia and to implement the Covington comprehensive plan. To these ends, the zoning ordinance is intended to achieve the following purposes: 
A.  To guide and regulate the orderly growth, development, redevelopment, and preservation of the city of Covington in accordance with the adopted comprehensive plan and with long-term objectives, principles, and standards deemed beneficial to the interest and welfare of the people; 
B.  To protect the established character and the social and economic well-being of both private and public property; 
C.  To promote, in the public interest, the efficient utilization ofland; 
D.  To promote the preservation of open space; 
E.  To provide for adequate light, air, convenience of access, and safety from fire, flood, and other dangers; 
F.  To facilitate the creation of a convenient, attractive, and harmonious community; 
G.  To encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, both built and natural, and to provide for regulations that protect and enhance these aesthetic considerations; 
H.  To protect against the destruction of, or encroachment upon, historic areas; 
I.  To protect against overcrowding of land, undue density of population in relation to the community facilities existing or available, obstruction of light and air, danger and congestion in travel and transportation, and loss of life or health from fire, flood or other danger; 
J.  To encourage economic development activities that provide desirable employment and enlarge the tax base; 
K.  To ensure the perpetual conservation, preservation and enjoyment of the unique natural and physical resources of the county, including watersheds, streams, and the protection of water quality as the county grows; 
L.  To achieve compliance with all applicable state and federal laws and regulations; 
M.  To provide for and promote housing for all income groups and all citizens within the city; 
N.  To establish high quality standards for buildings and land development for the protection of the environment and the security of buyers and users of developed property within the city; 
O.  To provide a method of administration and procedure that ensures due process and equal protection for the citizens and property owners of the city; 
P.  To establish a just balance between the rights of owners of property and the public interest of all the citizens of the city; 
Q.  To provide for protection of the constitutional rights and obligations of all citizens within the city; 
R.  To provide penalties for violations and remedies for enforcement hereof; and for other purposes. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.040 - Official zoning map. 
A.  The city of Covington is divided into zoning districts, as shown on the official zoning map which, together with all explanatory matter thereon, is adopted by this reference and made a part of this zoning ordinance. The official zoning map shall be identified by the signature of the mayor, attested by the planning and zoning director and city clerk, and bear the seal of the city under the following words: "Official Zoning Map of the City of Covington" and shall include the date of adoption of this zoning ordinance. 
B.  Amendments. 
1.  If, in accordance with the provisions of this zoning ordinance, changes are made in district boundaries or other matter portrayed on the official zoning map, such changes shall be entered on the official zoning map within seven days after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and council, with an entry in the minutes of such council meeting as follows: "On _______ (month) _______ (day), _______ (year) by official action of the mayor and council, the following change (changes) was (were) made to the Official Zoning Map: (brief description of nature of change or changes)," which entry shall be signed by the mayor and attested by the planning and zoning director. 
2.  No changes of any nature shall be made in the official zoning map or matter shown thereon except in conformity with the procedures set forth in this zoning ordinance. 
3.  Regardless of the existence of copies of the official zoning map which may from time to time be made or published, the official zoning map which shall be located in the office of the planning and zoning director shall be the final authority as to the current zoning status of the city. 
C.  Replacement of Official Zoning Map. In the event that the official zoning map becomes damaged, destroyed, lost, or difficult to interpret because of the nature or number of changes and additions, the mayor and council may by zoning ordinance adopt a new official zoning map which shall supersede the prior official zoning map. The new official zoning map may correct drafting or other errors or omissions in the prior official zoning map, but no such correction shall have the effect of amending the original official zoning map, and shall be identified by the signature of the mayor attested by the planning and zoning director and bearing the seal of the city under the following words: "This is to certify that this Official Zoning Map supersedes and replaces the Official Zoning Map adopted the date of June 30, 2008, as amended, as part of the Covington zoning ordinance." Unless the previous official zoning map has been lost, or has been totally destroyed, the prior map or any significant remaining parts thereof, shall be preserved, together with all available records pertaining to its adoption or amendment. 
D.  Rules for Interpretation. 
1.  Zoning of Streets, Alleys, Public Ways, State Highways, Interstate Highways and Railroad Rights-of-Way. All streets, alleys, public ways, state highways, interstate highways and railroad rights-of-way; if not otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same zoning designation as the property immediately abutting upon such alleys, streets, public ways, and railroad rights-of-way. Where the centerline of a street, alley, public way, state highway, interstate highway or railroad right-of-way serves as a district boundary, the zoning of such areas, unless otherwise specifically designated, shall be deemed to be the same as that of the abutting property up to such center line. 
2.  Where the planning and zoning director determines that uncertainty exists with respect to the location of the boundaries of any zoning district as set forth on the official zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
A.  Where possible, a rezoning file, which includes a correct legal description and minutes of the mayor and council public hearing shall be used for delineating zoning boundaries. 
B.  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as approximately following a corporate limits line, a militia district line, a land lot line, a lot line or the center line of a street, a city road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way or such lines extended, then such lines shall be construed to be the zoning district boundary lines. 
C.  Where a zoning district boundary line is shown as being set back from a street, a city road, a state highway, an interstate highway, or a railroad right-of-way, and approximately parallel thereto, then such zoning district boundary line shall be construed as being at the scaled distance from the center line of the street, city road, state highway, interstate highway, or railroad right-of-way and as being parallel thereto. 
D.  Where a zoning district boundary line divides a lot, the location of the line shall be the scaled distance from the lot lines. In this situation, the requirements of the zoning district in which the greater portion of the lot lies shall apply to the balance of the lot except that such extension shall not include any part of a lot that lies more than fifty (50) feet beyond the zoning district boundary line. 
E.  In the case of a through lot fronting on two approximately parallel streets that is divided by a zoning district boundary line paralleling the streets, the restrictions of the zoning district in which each frontage of the through lot lies shall apply to that portion of the through lot. 
F.  Where zoning district boundaries are in doubt, the planning and zoning director shall make such interpretation using the appropriate scale from the official zoning map. 
(Ord. dated 10/1/12(4), §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.050 - Relationship to comprehensive plan. 
A.  Land Use Role of the Comprehensive Plan. The city of Covington comprehensive plan is established as the official policy of the city concerning designated land uses, under which the incorporated areas of the city are divided into the following land use categories, as set forth in the future land use map: 
1.  Rural residential; 
2.  Single-family residential; 
3.  Multifamily residential; 
4.  High density residential; 
5.  Traditional neighborhood development; 
6.  Commercial; 
7.  Office professional; 
8.  Mixed use neighborhood; 
9.  Mixed use corridor; 
10.  Mixed use downtown; 
11.  Industrial; 
12.  Public institutional; 
13.  Agricultural/forestry; 
14.  Park/recreation/conservation; 
15.  Transportation/communication/utilities. 
B.  Relationship Between Land Use Categories and Zoning Districts. 
1.  The comprehensive plan does not change the existing zoning districts in the city, does not effectuate an amendment to the official zoning maps, and does not itself permit or prohibit any existing land uses. Instead, the comprehensive plan establishes broad planning policy for current and future land uses and provides, among other things, designated categories within which only certain zoning districts may be authorized. 
2.  The zoning districts that are permitted within each land use category shall be restricted to those shown in the following table. 
Land Use Category Compatible Zoning Districts Rural Residential NR1 Single-Family Residential NR1, NR2, NR3 Multifamily Residential CR, TCR High Density Residential TCR Traditional Neighborhood Development NR1, NR2, NR3, NM Commercial CM Office Professional CM Mixed Use Neighborhood NM Mixed Use Corridor CM Mixed Use Downtown TCM Industrial M1, M2 Public Institutional All Districts Agricultural/Forestry NR1 Park/Recreation/Conservation All Districts Transportation/Communication/Utilities All Districts  
C.  Conformity of the Zoning Maps with the Comprehensive Plan. Within the various land use categories described in this chapter and shown on the future land use map, no amendment to the official zoning maps shall permit a use except in accordance with the uses permitted in the comprehensive plan land use category applicable to the property to which the proposed zoning map amendment applies. 
D.  Amendments to the Comprehensive Plan. See Section 16.12.040. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.060 - Administration of zoning ordinance. 
A.  It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning director to interpret and enforce this zoning ordinance and to carry out the duties required herein. The planning and zoning director may be provided with the assistance of such other persons as the mayor and council may direct. It shall be the duty of the city fire marshal to enforce all state, city and fire codes related to zoning ordinances. The city fire marshal shall also enforce all adopted codes relating to handicap access. 
B.  Nothing herein shall repeal the conditions of use or operation, or site development conditions, accompanying rezoning approval(s) or conditional use(s), variances or permits issued prior to adoption of this title. Modification or repeal of such past conditions of approval may be accomplished as authorized and provided by this title. All variances and exceptions heretofore granted by the planning and zoning director, board of appeals and adjustments, planning commission or mayor and council shall remain in full force and effect, including all terms, conditions and obligations heretofore imposed. 
C.  All applications, requests for permits, and other appeals and decisions made pursuant to this title shall be decided within thirty (30) days of receipt of completed materials requesting same unless another time limit is specified for the type of action under review. 
D.  Fees for all required applications shall not be refunded once submitted. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.070 - Zoning verification. 
    Upon request, the planning and zoning director shall have authority to issue written zoning verifications stating the existing zoning of a particular parcel of property. Requests to the director shall be in writing, accurately identify the property, and be accompanied by a fee established by the planning and zoning director. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.080 - Acceptance of alternative forms of documentation. 
    The planning and zoning director shall have the authority and sole discretion to accept digital or other forms of electronic documents required by this title, upon a determination that doing so will assist the planning and zoning director and the public in the administration of this title. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.090 - Provisions of zoning ordinance to be minimum requirements. 
    In their interpretation and application, the provisions of this zoning ordinance shall be held to be minimum requirements, adopted for the promotion of the public health, safety, morals or general welfare. Whenever the provisions of any other statute, ordinance or resolution require more restrictive standards than those of this zoning ordinance, the provisions of such standards shall govern. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.100 - Violations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person, firm or corporation to erect, construct, enlarge, alter, repair, move, improve, remove, convert or demolish, equip, use, occupy or maintain any building or structure or use any land in the city, or cause the same to be done, contrary to or in violation of any of the provisions of this title. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.110 - Penalties for violation. 
    All uses of land, buildings or structures shall be completed in accordance with approved development plans and permits, including any conditions attached thereto. The building inspector shall make periodic field inspections as required. When a violation is found to exist, the building inspector shall immediately advise the zoning enforcement officer of the violation, so that appropriate action may be taken to ensure compliance. No certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless all on-site improvements, landscaping, and exterior building facades are completed in accordance with the approved development plans and permits. 
    The planning and zoning director shall order discontinuance of illegal use of land, buildings or structures or of illegal additions, alterations or structural changes; discontinuance of any illegal work being done; or shall take any other action authorized by this zoning ordinance to ensure compliance with or to prevent violation of its provisions. If it is found that any of the provisions of this zoning ordinance are being violated, the planning and zoning director shall notify in writing the person responsible for such violation, indicating the nature of the violation and ordering the action necessary to correct it. Such written notice shall not be a necessary condition precedent to enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
    Any person, firm or corporation violating any provision of this zoning ordinance shall be deemed guilty of an offense and, upon conviction in recorder's court, shall be fined as prescribed in the city charter in an amount not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000.00) for each offense. Each day such violation continues shall constitute a separate offense. 
    The owner or tenant of any building, structure, premises, or part thereof, and any architect, builder, contractor, agent, or other person who commits, participates in, assists in, or maintains such violation may each be found guilty of a separate offense and suffer the penalties herein provided. 
    Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful action as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation, or to abate any nuisance. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.120 - Remedies. 
    If any building or structure is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or if any building, structure or land is used in violation of this zoning ordinance, the mayor and council, the planning and zoning director, or the city attorney, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus, or other appropriate action to stop, prevent, enjoin, abate or remove such unlawful erection, construction, reconstruction, alteration, maintenance or use. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.04.130 - Severability clause. 
    Should any section or provision of this zoning ordinance be declared by the courts to be unconstitutional or invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of the zoning ordinance as a whole, or any part thereof other than the part so declared to be unconstitutional or invalid. The mayor and council declares that it would have adopted the remaining parts of the zoning ordinance if it had known that such part or parts thereof would be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 16.08 - INTERPRETATIONS AND DEFINITIONS 

16.08.010 - Definitions. 
A.  For the purpose of interpreting this zoning ordinance, certain words and terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
1.  Words used in the present tense include the future tense. Words used in the singular include the plural; and words in the plural include the singular; words used in the masculine gender include the feminine and are intended to be gender-neutral. 
2.  The word "shall" is always mandatory, and the word "may" is permissive. 
3.  The word "building" includes the word "structure". 
4.  The word "used" or "occupied," as applied to any land or building, shall be construed to include the words "intended," "arranged," or "designed to be used or occupied." 
5.  The words "zone," "zoning district," and "district" have the same meaning. 
6.  The word "erected" shall be deemed also to include "constructed," "reconstructed," "altered," "moved" or "placed." 
7.  The word "land use" and "use of land" shall be deemed also to include "building use" and "use of building." 
8.  The word "person" shall include the words "individual," "firm," "partnership," "corporation," "association," "organization," "trust," "company," or any other legal entity, as well as an individual. 
9.  The phrase "used for" as applied to any land or building shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," or "occupied for." 
10.  Unless indicated otherwise, reference to zoning districts refer to the "Official Zoning Map of City of Covington, Georgia." 
B.  Rules of Precedence. The following rules set forth the order of precedence that determines which definition applies in a specific instance within the provisions of the zoning ordinance: 
1.  When definitions are provided within an individual chapter, article or section of the zoning ordinance, those definitions are to be applied within said chapter, article, or section. If the same term or phrase is also defined in this section, the definition in subsection C of this section shall not apply in that instance. 
2.  When no definitions are provided within an individual chapter, article, or section of the zoning ordinance, words and phrases used in the zoning ordinance shall have the meaning established by the definitions provided in this subsection C of this section. 
3.  For words and phrases listed in the Table of Uses in Article I of Chapter 218 with a NAICS code, the NAICS definition shall be the legal definition. Said NAICS definitions, as amended, are incorporated by this reference to the extent utilized in the zoning ordinance. 
4.  All remaining words used in the zoning ordinance are intended to have the commonly accepted definitions contained in a recent edition of the Merriam-Webster Dictionary. 
C.  Definitions. As used in the zoning ordinance, the following terms shall have the meaning set forth below, except where otherwise specifically set forth in subsection B above. 
    "Abutting" means touching at one point or along a common side, boundary or property line. Two pieces of property that are separated by a street or right-of-way are adjacent, but not abutting. 
    Accessory Building. See "Building, Accessory." 
    Accessory Structure. See "Structure, Accessory." 
    Accessory Use. See "Use, Accessory." 
    "Acre" means a unit of area equal to forty-three thousand five hundred sixty (43,560) square feet. 
    "Addition (to an existing building)" means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a fire wall. Any walled and roofed addition that is connected by a fire wall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall shall be considered new construction. 
    Adjacent Property. See "Property, Adjacent." 
    "Administrative official" means any member of the department of planning and zoning when exercising the duties authorized in the zoning ordinance. 
    Adult Entertainment Establishment. See Title 5, Chapter 5.08 of the city of Covington Municipal Code. 
    "Agriculture" means raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock or poultry; growing plants, sod, and trees for sale; the production of horticultural, diary, poultry, eggs and apiarian products. 
    "Aggrieved party" means a person whose property will be specially damaged by a decision of a city official or board involved in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
    "Airport" means a transportation terminal facility where aircraft take off and land, usually including hangars, facilities for refueling and repair, and various accommodations for passengers. 
    Airstrip, Private. "Private airstrip" means an area designated for the landing of private, noncommercial aircraft with no terminal facilities and no scheduled takeoffs and landings. 
    "Alley" means a required public thoroughfare which affords only a secondary means of access to the abutting property. 
    "Alteration" means any change, addition or modification in construction or type of occupancy; any change in the structural members of a building, such as walls, partitions, columns, beams, girders, doors, windows, means of ingress or egress, or any enlargement to, or diminution of a building or structure, whether horizontally or vertically, or the moving of a building from one location to another. 
    "Alternative tower structure" means man-made trees, clock towers, bell steeples, light and power poles, water storage tanks, outdoor advertising signs and similar alternative design mounting structures that effectively camouflage the presence of antennas or towers and are compatible with and resemble the scale of the surrounding natural setting and/or structures. 
    "Antenna" means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
    Antenna, Amateur Radio. "Amateur radio antenna" means a freestanding or building-mounted device, intended for airway communication purposes by a person holding a valid amateur radio (HAM) or Citizens Band (CB) license issued by the Federal Communications Commission. 
    Antenna, Satellite. "Satellite antenna" means a specific device, the surface of which is used to transmit and/or receive radio frequency signals, microwave signals, or other signals transmitted to or from other antennas. 
    "Apartment" means a multifamily dwelling held through a lease or rental agreement. 
    Apartment, Efficiency. "Efficiency apartment" means an apartment consisting of two or fewer rooms, not including a separate bedroom. 
    "Appeal" means a request for a review to hear and decide where it was alleged there was an error in any order, requirement, permit, decision, determination, or refusal made by any officer of the city of Covington in the enforcement of the zoning ordinance. 
    "Application" means a completed document and completed associated documentation, including fees, filed by any person seeking approval to undertake any activity regulated by the city of Covington. 
    "Aquifer" means any stratum or zone of rock beneath the surface of the earth capable of containing or producing water from a well. 
    "Authorized use" means a use authorized in a zoning district pursuant to the zoning ordinance. 
    "Automobile" means a motorized vehicle with two axles and not more than six wheels, designed for carrying ten (10) passengers or less and used for the transportation of persons. 
    "Automobile impound lot" means a facility that provides temporary outdoor storage for automobiles that are to be claimed by title holders or their agents. No vehicle shall be stored at said facility for more than thirty (30) days and must remain mechanically operable and licensed at all times. 
    Automobile Repair Services, Major. "Major automobile repair services" means general repair, rebuilding, or reconditioning of engines, motor vehicles or trailers, including body work, framework, welding, and major painting services. 
    Automobile Repair Services, Minor. "Minor automobile repair services" means the replacement of any part or repair of any part of an automobile or light truck that does not require removal of the engine head or pan, engine transmission or differential; incidental body and fender work, minor painting and upholstering service. 
    "Awning" means a shelter projecting over a window or door that is attached to the exterior wall of the building over a window or door that extends from the exterior wall of a building and is supported by or attached to a frame. 
    "Banquet hall" means an establishment which is rented for private functions such as banquets, weddings, anniversaries and other similar celebrations or events. Such use may, but shall not be required to, include: kitchen facilities for preparation or catering of food; the serving or sale of alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption only during such events which are not open to the public; and outdoor gardens or reception facilities. 
    "Basement" means that portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade and has at least six and one-half feet vertical interior clearance from floor or grade to ceiling or underside of structure. 
    "Bed and breakfast" means an owner-occupied, single-family dwelling where between one and ten (10) rooms not containing kitchen facilities are rented to overnight guests on a daily basis for periods not to exceed two weeks. 
    "Berm" means an earthen mound designed to screen undesirable views, reduce noise, or fulfill other such purposes. 
    "Block" means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. 
    "Board of appeals and adjustments" means the board of zoning appeals and adjustments, as established in accordance with this title. 
    "Boarding house" means a building, other than a hotel or bed and breakfast, where, for compensation, meals, or lodging and meals, are provided for one or more persons who are not part of the operator's family. 
    "Buildable area" means the area of a lot remaining after the minimum front, side and rear yard setback requirements of the zoning district has been met. 
    "Building" means any structure with a roof and enclosed on all sides. 
    Building, Accessory. "Accessory building" means a building detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. 
    Building Permit. See "Permit, Building." 
    "Building principal" means a building in which is conducted the main or dominant use of the lot on which such building is situated. 
    "Building wall" means an exterior load-bearing or nonload-bearing vertical structure that encompasses the area between the final grade elevation and eaves of the building, and used to enclose the space within the building. 
    Campground. See "Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds." 
    "Canopy" means a roof structure constructed of rigid materials, including but not limited to, metal, wood, concrete, plastic, or glass, which is attached to and supported by a building, or which is freestanding and supported by columns, poles or braces extended to the ground. Unlike an awning, a canopy is generally supported by vertical elements rising from the ground at two or more corners. 
    "Caretaker dwelling or employee residence" means an accessory single-family dwelling unit placed on an occupied tract for use by an employee where the tract is owned by the employer as a part of the same operation or business. At least one of the occupants of the caretaker dwelling or employee residence must be employed on the premises or their presence must be necessary and essential for the orderly operation and security of the premises. 
    "Cellar" means that portion of a building that is partly or completely below grade and has a height less than six and one-half feet. 
    "Cemetery" means any plot of ground, churchyard, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure used for the burial of deceased persons. 
    Cemetery, Pet. "Pet cemetery" means property used for the interring of dead domestic animals. 
    Cemetery, Private. "Private cemetery" means any plot of ground, building, mausoleum, or other enclosure used for the burial of deceased persons of one collateral line of descent. 
    Center Line of Street. See "Street, Centerline of." 
    "City" means the city of Covington, Georgia. 
    "Clinic" means a medical or dental establishment where patients, who are not lodged overnight, are admitted for examination and treatment. 
    Club, Private. "Private club" means a noncommercial establishment organized for a common purpose to pursue common goals, interests, or activities and usually characterized by certain membership qualifications, payment of fees and dues, regular meetings, and a constitution or bylaws. 
    "Collateral" means belonging to the same ancestral stock but not in a direct line of descent. 
    "Colleges, universities and professional schools" means establishments primarily engaged in furnishing academic courses and granting degrees at baccalaureate or graduate levels. 
    "Co-location" means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single tower or alternative tower structure. 
    "Columbarium" means a structure or building substantially exposed aboveground intended to be used for the interment of the cremated remains of deceased persons. 
    "Commercial use" means an occupation, place of employment, or enterprise that is carried on for profit by the owner, lessee, or licensee. 
    Composting Facility, Municipal Solid Waste. "Municipal solid waste composting facility" means an establishment converting municipal solid waste to humus through a controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms. 
    Composting Facility, Yard Trimmings. "Yard trimmings composting facility" means an establishment converting yard trimmings to humus through a controlled process of degrading organic matter by microorganisms. This definition does not include composting conducted on a residential lot for home gardening purposes. 
    "Comprehensive plan" means any part or element of the overall plan for development adopted by the mayor and council as provided by O.C.G.A. Section 50-8-1 and DCA Regulations Chapter 110-3-2, Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning, including the future land use map and all other maps, exhibits, and appendices. 
    "Conditional approval" means the imposition of conditions in the grant of an application for approval of a rezoning, special use permit, variance, concept plan, preliminary plat, or permit that are in addition to or different from the regulations set forth in this zoning ordinance and which are related to the promotion of the public health, safety, morals, or general welfare and designed to minimize the negative impact on surrounding property. 
    "Condominium" means a building, or group of buildings, in which dwelling units, offices, or floor areas are owned individually, and the structure, common areas, and facilities are owned by all the owners on a proportional, undivided basis. 
    "Conservation easement" means a recorded agreement between a land owner and government agency or land trust that permanently protects open space or greenspace on the owner's land by limiting the amount and type of development that can take place, but continues to leave the remainder of the fee interest in private ownership. 
    "Construction/demolition waste" means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to asbestos containing waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
    "Cremation" means as described in O.C.G.A. Section 10-14-3 G, cremation includes any mechanical or thermal process whereby a deceased human being is reduced to ashes. Cremation also includes any other mechanical or thermal process whereby human remains are pulverized, burned, recremated, or otherwise further reduced in size or quantity. 
    "Cremation unit" means the equipment used for the mechanical or thermal process whereby a deceased human being is reduced to ashes. See cremation for complete definition. 
    "Crematory" means a location containing properly installed, certified apparatus intended for use in the act of cremation. 
    "Cul-de-sac" means a local street or road with one outlet and having an appropriate terminal for the safe and convenient reversal of traffic movement. 
    "Curb cut" means the opening along the curb line or edge of pavement of a public street at which point a driveway begins for vehicular ingress and egress from a parcel. 
    Day Care Center, Adult. "Adult day care center" means an establishment operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision, and oversight only during daytime hours of seven or more adults who are elderly, physically ill or infirm, physically handicapped or mentally handicapped. 
    Day Care Facility, Adult. "Adult day care facility" means any place operated by any person with or without compensation for providing for the care, supervision, and oversight only during day-time hours of six or fewer adults who are elderly, physically ill or inform, physically handicapped, or mentally handicapped. 
    Day Care Center, Child. "Child day care center" means an establishment operated by a person, society, agency, corporation or institution, or any group, wherein are received with or without pay, seven or more children under eighteen (18) years of age for group care for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, without transfer of legal custody. 
    Day Care Facility, Child. "Child day care facility" means any place operated by any person with or without compensation providing for the care, supervision, and protection of six or fewer children who are under eighteen (18) years of age for group care for less than twenty-four (24) hours per day, without transfer of legal custody. For the purpose of computing the number of children within the child day care facility, all children who are related by blood, marriage, adoption or guardianship to the person or persons operating the facility shall be included. 
    "Deciduous" means landscaping that leaves annually. 
    "Density" means the total number of square feet of a building, or number of lots or dwelling units per acre of land unless specifically provided otherwise in the zoning ordinance. 
    Density, Gross. "Gross density" means the number of square feet of a building, or number of lots or dwelling units on a tract of land divided by the total acres of a parcel or tract of land prior to development or subdivision, including all streets or rights-of-way, open space, floodplain, and other unsubdivided or unused portions of the tract of land. 
    Density, Net. "Net density" means the number of square feet, lots or dwelling units on a tract of land, less area for streets, rights-of-way, open space, floodplain, and other unsubdivided or unused portions of the tract of land. 
    "Developer" means a person who undertakes land development activities. 
    "Development" means any man-made change to improved or unimproved real estate, including but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, clearing, grubbing, grading, paving, any other installation of impervious cover, excavation or drilling operations or and storage equipment or materials. 
    "Director" means the planning and zoning director, or designee, unless otherwise stated. 
    District, Zoning. "Zoning district" means a tract of land or contiguous parcels of the city of Covington, Georgia within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
    "Driveway" means a vehicular access, or curb cut that is in private ownership, except for that portion lying within the public right-of-way, and provides access primarily to one property. 
    "Drug rehabilitation center" means structures and land used for treatment of drug abuse where neither meals nor lodging is provided. 
    "Dry cleaning and laundry services" means a business that provides for the cleaning of laundry and dry cleaning, excluding self-service, and contains on the premises, equipment necessary for the processing of laundry and dry cleaning. 
    "Dumpster" means a portable container used for temporary storage of garbage, trash, or other refuse or receptacle material that has a capacity of one cubic yard or more. 
    "Dwelling" means a building or portion thereof designed, arranged or used principally for residential occupancy (not including buildings designed for transient use such as hotels and motels), and which complies with the provisions of the zoning ordinance and the International Building Code. 
    Dwelling, Accessory. "Accessory dwelling" means a secondary dwelling established in conjunction with, and clearly subordinate to, a primary dwelling unit on the same lot, whether a part of the same structure as the primary dwelling unit or in a detached structure. 
    Dwelling, Multifamily. "Multifamily dwelling" means a building designed, constructed, altered or used for more than two adjoining dwelling units, with each dwelling unit having a separate entrance and a party wall and/or party floor or ceiling connecting it with at least one other dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, Principal "Principal dwelling" means the building that is used as the primary residence on a lot. 
    Dwelling, Single-family. "Single-family dwelling" means a dwelling structure that is designed for the use of one family. 
    Dwelling, Single-family Attached. "Attached single-family dwelling" means a building containing two or more one-family attached dwelling units joined at one or more points by one or more party walls or other common facilities (not including the walls of an enclosed courtyard or similar area) and with property lines separating each dwelling unit. This includes townhouses. 
    Dwelling, Single-family Detached. "Detached single-family dwelling" means a freestanding building designed for or containing one dwelling unit. 
    Dwelling, Townhouse. "Townhouse dwelling" means a structure comprised of at least three but no more than six individual, fee simple single-family attached dwelling units. Such dwelling units extend from foundation to roof and are attached horizontally in a linear arrangement, contiguous to each other only by the sharing of a fire wall. 
    Dwelling, Two-family (Duplex). "Two-family (duplex) dwelling" means a single building designed for and containing two dwelling units located on one lot or one parcel of land. 
    "Dwelling unit" means one or more rooms, designed, occupied or intended for occupancy as a separate living quarter, with cooking, sleeping and sanitary facilities provided within the dwelling unit for the exclusive use of a single housekeeping unit. Does not include rooms in a hotel, motel, boarding house, bed and breakfast, or extended stay hotel. 
    Dwelling, Single-family Zero Lot Line. "Single-family zero lot line dwelling" means a single-family dwelling unit with no required side and/or front setback on one side so as to allow the dwelling unit to be built on the property line. 
    "Easement" means an acquired legal right for the specific use of land owned by others. 
    Easement, Access. "Access easement" means an easement created for the purpose of providing vehicular or pedestrian access to or across a property. 
    "Electric, petroleum or gas substation" means facilities devoted to the distribution of electricity, gas or petroleum. 
    "Equestrian training and sales facility" means establishments providing equestrian training and the sale of horses, mules, donkeys, and other equines and related tack or feed. 
    "Existing construction" means any structure for which the start of construction commenced before the effective date of the zoning ordinance. 
    Existing Manufactured Home Park or Subdivision. See "Manufactured Home Park, Existing." 
    "Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision" means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads. 
    "Facade" means the exterior of a building extending the entire width of the building elevation. 
    "Family" means a group of individuals related by blood, marriage, adoption, or guardianship, or not more than six persons not so related, living together in a dwelling unit as a single housekeeping unit based on an intentionally structured relationship providing organization and stability. 
    Farming, Commercial. "Commercial farming" means any primary use of a tract or parcel of land for the purpose of raising for sale any types of agriculture products, nursery stock, including, but not limited to, soil crops, fish, fowl, silviculture or livestock. 
    "Fence" means any structure forming a physical barrier or enclosure which is so constructed that at least fifty (50) percent of the vertical surface is open to permit the transmission of light, air and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. 
    "Fenestration" means an opening in the surface of a structure or building, primarily achieved through the use of glass. 
    "Finished grade" means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
    "Floodplain" means any land area susceptible to flooding, which would have at least a one percent probability of flooding occurrence in any calendar year based on: (a) the basin being fully developed as shown on the current land use plan, or (b) the regulatory floodplain as defined by the National Flood Insurance Program (FEMA). The more restrictive (wider) of either (a) or (b) shall be used. 
    "Floor" means the lower horizontal finished surface of each story in a building that is intended to support the contents of the building and its occupants. 
    Floor Area, Gross. "Gross floor area" means the sum of the gross horizontal areas of the total number of finished floors of a fully enclosed building measured from the exterior faces of the exterior walls or from the centerline of walls separating two buildings; excluding cellar space, carports and garages, and any space where the floor-to-ceiling height is less than six and one-half feet. 
    Floor Area, Heated. "Heated floor area" means the gross floor area of a dwelling or other building that is heated and intended for daily human activity, including hallways, stairs, and interior storage areas and closets. 
    "Floor area ratio" means the gross floor area of all buildings or structures on a lot divided by the total lot area. 
    Floor, Lowest. "Lowest floor" means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, usable solely for parking of vehicles, building access or storage, in an area other than a basement area, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of the zoning ordinance. 
    Floor, Party. "Party floor" means a floor in a multi-story building that is designed to provide required fire separation between two adjoining dwelling units that are constructed one above the other. 
    "Flush toilet" means a sanitary flushable fixture in general use for the disposal of human excrement. 
    "Forestry" means establishments primarily engaged in the operation of timber tracts, tree farms, forest nurseries, the gathering of forest products, or in performing forest services. 
    Frontage, Building. "Building frontage" means the width in linear feet of each exterior wall of a building that faces a street or public way. 
    Frontage, Road. "Road frontage" means the distance on which a parcel of land adjoins a public street or street right-of-way, including proposed streets within a subdivision of land approved by the city of Covington. 
    "Future land use map" means a map prepared as part of the city of Covington comprehensive plan prepared pursuant to O.C.G.A. 50-8-1 and Chapter 110-3-2, Minimum Standards and Procedures for Local Comprehensive Planning that divides land into a series of land use categories listed in Section 16.04.050 and serves as guidance for rezoning decisions made pursuant to this title. 
    Garage, Attached. "Attached garage" means a garage that shares a common roof with a dwelling unit or that adjoins a dwelling unit with a common wall along a distance of at least ten (10) feet. 
    Garage, Two-Car. "Two-car garage" means a permanent enclosed structure having a paved floor area designed with adequate floor area, access and egress for two standard automobiles. 
    Garbage. See "Solid waste." 
    "Gasoline station with convenience store" means a gasoline station that includes a retail store that sells a limited line of groceries and household items. 
    "Governing authority" means the mayor and council of the city of Covington, Georgia. 
    "Grade" means a reference plane representing the average of finished ground level adjoining the building at all exterior walls. When the finished ground level slopes away from the exterior walls, the reference plane shall be established by the lowest points within the area between the building and the lot line or between the building and a point six feet from the building, whichever is closer. 
    Grade, Percentage of. "Percentage of grade" means the rise or fall of a slope in feet and tenths of a foot for each one hundred (100) feet of horizontal distance. 
    "Grading" means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut and filled condition. 
    "Grasscrete" or "grasspave" means a paving systems primarily used for parking that utilize porous elements which facilitate the drainage of stormwater runoff. 
    "Greenhouse" means a building whose roof and sides are made largely of glass or other transparent or translucent material and in which the temperature and humidity can be regulated for the cultivation of plants for subsequent sale or personal enjoyment. 
    "Greenspace" means permanently protected areas of a site that are preserved in a natural or vegetated state. 
    "Ground elevation" means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting, or filling or grading. 
    "Guest house" means an attached or detached accessory building that provides living quarters for guests, may or may not contain a kitchen or cooking facility. 
    "Halfway house" means a licensed home for inmates on release from more restrictive custodial confinement or initially placed in lieu of such more restrictive custodial confinement, wherein supervision, rehabilitation, and counseling are provided to mainstream residents back into society, enabling them to live independently. 
    "Hardscape" means the man-made surface of a sidewalk or plaza including elements such as bricks, stone pavers or concrete but excluding asphalt. 
    "Hardship" means a condition of significant practical difficulty in using a lot because of physical problems relating solely to the size, shape or topography of the lot in question which are not economic difficulties and which are not self-imposed. 
    "Hazardous material" means any substance that, because of its quantity, concentration, or physical or chemical characteristics, poses a significant present or potential hazard to human health and safety or to the environment if released into the workplace or the environment. 
    "Hazardous waste" means any solid waste which has been defined as a hazardous waste in regulations, promulgated by the administrator of the United States Environmental Protection Agency pursuant to the federal act, which are in force and effect on February 1, 1988, codified as 40 C.F.R. Section 261.3. 
    "Height" means the vertical distance of a structure other than a building measured from the average elevation of the finished grade surrounding the structure to the highest point of the structure. When referring to a telecommunications antenna it shall mean the vertical distance from the base of the antenna to the highest point of the tower or any appurtenance attached to it. 
    Height, Building. "Building height" means the vertical distance measured from the average elevation of the finished grade at the front of the building to the highest point of the roof if a flat roof; to the deck line of mansard roofs; and to the mean height level between eaves and ridge of gable, hip, and gambrel roofs. The term does not include steeples, cupolas, decorative towers, antennas and mechanical equipment attached to a building. For all single-family residential detached buildings and structures, building heights shall be measured from the highest point of the front threshold of the existing or previously existing house on the property. The newly built threshold shall be built at the equivalent elevation as the existing or previously existing threshold. If a previous house site either cannot be determined or did not exist on the lot, the height calculation shall be measured from the preconstruction elevation of the proposed front yard footing. 
    Height, Telecommunications Facility. "Telecommunications facility height" means the vertical distance from grade to the highest point of the tower and its appurtenances, grade being the average level of the pre-existing or finished surface of the ground adjacent to the exterior of the tower, whichever is lower. When referring to a telecommunications antenna it shall mean the vertical distance from the base of the antenna to its highest point. 
    "Home occupation" means an occupation customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use, which is clearly incidental to the use of the dwelling unit for residential purposes, and operated in accordance with all applicable provisions. 
    "Hospital" means an establishment providing physical or mental health services, in-patient or overnight accommodations, and mental or surgical care of the sick or injured. Includes health clinics and sanatoriums. 
    "Hotel" means a building in which short-term (less than twenty-one (21) days) lodging or board and lodging is provided and offered to the public for compensation and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally made through the interior of the building. 
    "Hotel, extended stay" means any building containing six or more guestrooms rented or leased for sleeping purposes for periods less than forty-five (45) consecutive days but in excess of one week, and that contain kitchen facilities for food preparation including, but not limited to, refrigerators, stoves, and ovens. 
    "Impervious" means a material that water cannot pass through or be absorbed by. 
    "Impervious cover or surface" means areas which significantly prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater into the soil. Common impervious surfaces include, but are not limited to, rooftops, buildings, streets, roads, sidewalks, walkways, patio areas, driveways, parking lots, concrete and asphalt surfaces, storage areas, compacted gravel and soil surfaces, awning, and other fabric or plastic coverings, and other surfaces which prevent or impede the natural infiltration of stormwater runoff which existed prior to development. Impervious surface also includes unpaved graded aggregate base (GAB) or crusher run. 
    "Industrial activity" means activities subject to NPDES industrial permits as defined in 40 C.F.R. Section 122.26(b)(14). 
    "Industrial park" means a tract of land subdivided and developed according to a comprehensive development plan in a manner which provides a landscaped setting for two or more industrial establishments. 
    "Junk" means any scrap, waste, reclaimable material, or debris, whether or not stored, for sale or in the process of being dismantled, destroyed, processed, salvaged, stored, baled, disposed, or other use or disposition. 
    "Junked vehicle" means any wrecked or nonoperable dismantled or abandoned automobile, truck, boat, motorcycle, or similar device. 
    "Junkyard" means a parcel of land, including any primary or accessory structures thereon, that is used for buying, selling, storing, baling, packaging, disassembling or handling waste or scrap material. "Scrap material" may include, without limitation, vehicles, machinery, equipment not in operable condition, metal, glass, paper, plastic, rags or rubber tires. Any lot on which three or more inoperable vehicles are stored shall be deemed a junkyard. 
    Kennel, Hobby. "Hobby kennel" means an accessory use for the keeping of up to seven dogs or cats or other small animals or any combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) is carried on for the purpose of showing, training, or breeding. Such use specifically excludes any operation for which a fee or other compensation is charged and also excluded any commercial use. 
    Kennel, Pet Boarding. "Pet boarding kennel" means any use where up to twenty-one (21) dogs or cats or other small animals or any combination thereof (except litters of animals of not more than six months of age) are maintained for boarding, grooming, sitting, training, breeding, or similar purpose for a fee or other compensation is carried on. 
    "Kindergarten" means a school for pre-elementary school children ranging in age from four through six years. 
    "Kiosk" means a freestanding structure upon which temporary information and/or posters, notices, and announcements are posted or displayed electronically. 
    "Kitchen facilities" means a room used to prepare food containing, at a minimum, a sink and a stove, oven or microwave oven. 
    "Landfill" (see solid waste handling facility) means construction and demolition debris landfill, hazardous waste landfill, industrial waste landfill, inert waste landfill, monofill, sanitary landfill and private landfill. The term "landfill" shall not include approved on-site disposal of inert waste at a building, land disturbing, or development site. 
    Landfill, Construction and Demolition Waste. "Construction and demolition waste landfill" means a landfill in which construction/demolition waste is disposed. Construction/demolition waste means waste building materials and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial waste, wood, bricks, metal, concrete, wallboard, paper, cardboard, inert waste landfill material and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
    Landfill, Inert Waste. "Inert waste landfill" means a disposal facility regulated by department of natural resources accepting only wastes that will not cause production of leachate (a liquid that has passed through or emerged from solid waste and contains soluble, suspended, or miscible materials removed from such wastes) of environmental concern. Only the following waste may be deposited in the inert landfill: earth and earth-like products, concrete, cured asphalt, rock, bricks, yard trimmings, stumps, limbs, and leaves. This definition specifically excludes any transfer stations, recycling stations, household materials or the storage of these items to be taken to another location. 
    Landfill, Private. "Private landfill" means a privately owned and operated landfill for the purpose of profit. This may be each or all of the above types of landfills. 
    Landfill, Sanitary (Municipal). "Sanitary (municipal) landfill" means disposal sites, approved by the mayor and council, and owned by a municipality or by a political subdivision of the state, where putrescible solid wastes are disposed of in a manner that minimizes environmental hazards by spreading, compacting to the smallest volume, and applying earth cover thereon. 
    "Landscape strip" means a land area located within the boundary of a lot and required to be set aside and used for landscaping upon which only limited encroachments are authorized. 
    "Landing area" means the area of an airport or private airstrip used for landing, taking-off or taxiing of aircraft. 
    "Laundromat" means a business that provides self-service, coin-operated washing, drying and/or ironing machines for clothing and similar laundry. 
    "Library" means a public facility for the use, but not sale, of literary, musical, artistic or reference material. 
    "Liquified petroleum gases" means as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 10-1-262, any material that is composed predominantly of any of the following hydrocarbons, or mixtures of the same: propane, propylene, butane (normal butane or isobutane), and butylenes. 
    "Litter" means sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, discarded materials of every kind and description or paper products of every kind and description including, but not limited to, advertising materials, newspapers, promotional papers, letters, bills, publications or other writings. 
    "Livestock" means any animal raised for food, raw materials or pleasure, and customarily kept on a farm including, but not limited to, beef and dairy cattle, sheep, swine, poultry, horses, mules, donkeys, goats, turkeys, bison, llama, emus and pot-bellied pigs. 
    "Loading space" means a space within the principal building or on the same lot, providing for the standing, loading or unloading of trucks, and other carriers. 
    "Lot" means a portion, plot, or parcel of land separated from other portions, plots, or parcels by a graphic description as on a subdivision plat of record or survey map and intended for transfer of ownership or for building development. 
    "Lot area" means the total area within the boundaries of a lot. 
    "Lot coverage" means the percentage of the total area of a lot that is occupied by buildings. 
    "Lot of record" means a lot, the plat for which has been lawfully recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Netwon County, or a lot, the deed of which has been lawfully recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County. 
    "Lot remnant" means any portion or portions of a lot not suitable for building upon because of size or topography and remaining after the transfer of other portions of said lot to adjoining lots or rights-of-way. 
    "Lot width" means the width of a lot at the required front setback line measured parallel to the street right-of-way or in the case of a curvilinear street, parallel to the chord of the arc between the intersection of the side lot lines and the street right-of-way line. 
    Lot, Conforming. "Conforming lot" means a lot that meets all requirements of the zoning ordinance and is not a nonconforming lot. 
    Lot, Corner. "Corner lot" means a lot abutting upon two or more streets at their intersection. 
    Lot, Double Frontage. "Double frontage lot" means a lot other than a corner lot abutting two streets. 
    Flag Lot. "Lot, flag" or "panhandle lot" means a prohibited lot not meeting minimum frontage requirements and where access to the lot from a public road is achieved by a narrow strip of land. 
    Lot, Interior. "Interior lot" means a lot with a single street frontage. 
    Lowest Floor. See "Floor, Lowest." 
    "Manufactured home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length, or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that such term shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this paragraph except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the secretary and complies with the standards established under this title. Manufactured homes shall be constructed in accordance with the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974 as amended, 42 U.S.C. 5401, et seq. 
    Manufactured Home, Other. "Other manufactured home" means any manufactured home not meeting the definition of dwelling, single-family. 
    "Materials recovery facility (MRF)" means a solid waste handling facility that provides for the extraction from solid waste of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
    "Mean sea level" means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. This term is synonymous with National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) or the North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) of 1988. 
    Mineral Extraction. See "Mining." 
    "Mining" means the extraction of minerals, including solids, such as coal and ores; liquids, such as crude petroleum; and gases, such as natural gases. The term mining includes quarrying; groundwater diversion; soil removal; milling, such as crushing, screening, washing, and flotation; and other preparation customarily done at the mine site as part of a mining activity. 
    "Mini-warehouse" means a building or group of buildings that contain(s) individual, compartmentalized stalls or lockers used for storage, including accessory office, but not including retail sale on the premises, commercial repair or other services, manufacturing, outside storage, or any other commercial use. 
    "Mobile home" means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or forty (40) body feet or more in length or, when erected on site, is three hundred twenty (320) or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities and includes the plumbing, heating, air-conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein and manufactured prior to June 15, 1976. Mobile homes are not allowable as permanent residences in the city. 
    "Motel" means a building or a group of buildings containing sleeping accommodations for short-term (less than twenty-one (21) days) rental primarily to the motoring public and in which ingress and egress to and from each sleeping room is generally on the outside of the building. 
    Motor Vehicle Sales, Used. "Used motor vehicle sales" means an open area, other than a right-of-way or public parking area, used for display, sale, or rental of new or used motor vehicles in operable condition. 
    "Museum" means a building having public significance by reason of its architecture or former use or occupancy or a building serving as a repository for a collection of objects of interest, intended to be used by the public for viewing and which may include as an accessory use the sale of goods to the public. 
    "New development" means a land development activity on a site. 
    "Nonconforming characteristic(s) of building or structure" means a building or structure, legally existing on the effective date of the zoning ordinance, but which fails to comply with one or more of the regulations adopted under the terms of the zoning ordinance which are applicable to said building or structure, including, but not limited to, setbacks, lot frontage, lot area, building height, off-street parking or loading, buffers, landscaping or any other applicable development regulation. 
    "Nonconforming lot" means a lot of record that meets the definition of "Nonconforming, legal" or a lot of record lawfully created and recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County prior to adoption of this zoning ordinance. 
    "Nonconforming use of land," or "nonconforming use of land and building(s)," or "nonconforming use of land and structure(s)" means a use of land and building(s) or a use of land and structure(s), in combination, legally existing on the effective date of the zoning ordinance, but that is not an authorized use of land and building(s) or land and structure(s), in combination, under the terms of this zoning ordinance in the district in which such use is located. 
    "Nonconforming use requiring special use permit" means a use of land, or land and building(s) or structure(s) in combination, legally existing on the effective date of the zoning ordinance, but which is not an authorized use as of right under the terms of the district in which such use is located but rather is authorized only upon approval of a special use permit by the mayor and council. 
    Nonconforming, Legal. "Legal nonconforming" means a lot of record, structure or use that does not comply with the current requirements of the zoning ordinance, but was lawfully established and authorized in accordance with former regulations of the city of Covington prior to the adoption, revision, or amendment of the requirements in the zoning ordinance making the lot of record, structure, or use noncompliant. 
    "Nursery" means establishments primarily engaged in retailing nursery and garden products, such as trees, shrubs, plants, seeds, bulbs, and sod, which are predominantly grown elsewhere. These establishments may sell a limited amount of a product they grow themselves. 
    "Nursing home" means an institution or a distinct part of an institution that is licensed or approved to provide health care under medical supervision for twenty-four (24) or more consecutive hours to two or more patients who are not related to the institution's management or its members by marriage, blood, or adoption. 
    Occupied Structure. See "Structure, Occupied." 
    Office, Professional. "Professional office" means a land use that includes one or more buildings that are primarily used for services rendered by occupations with specialized knowledge or expertise such as architects, engineers, lawyers, doctors, bankers, realtors, financial and insurance services, and similar services, as opposed to buildings used for manufacturing, storage or sale of goods. 
    "Office-warehouse" means a structure which may include space for an office for administration or sales and related space for temporary storage or assembly or repair of goods, equipment or products. 
    "Opaque" means the complete obstruction of fenestration primarily utilized for screening and buffering for the purposes of completely eliminating the view of any element of structure that is intended to be unseen. 
    "Open space" means areas that are primarily undeveloped and reserved to provide separation, resource protection, scenic enjoyment, recreation, or amenity to abutting developed property. 
    "Open yard storage business" means any commercial or noncommercial activity except a materials recovery facility or recycling center, which involves the sale, storage, wrecking, dismantling, processing or sorting of waste, discarded or salvaged paper, rags, machinery, equipment or other junk, including automobiles, trucks and similar motor vehicles; where those materials are commonly stored in an open area outside any building as defined in this section; provided, however, that businesses engaged predominantly in the repair or sale of new or used motor vehicles and other machines shall not be included in the term "open yard storage business" if those vehicles and machines are in operating condition and ready for sale or, if non-operational, those vehicles or machines are stored in a building as defined in this section. 
    "Outdoor display" means the arrangement of objects, items, and products not in a fixed position nor permanently secured to the ground and capable of rearrangement, designed for the purpose of advertising or identifying goods and merchandise within the principal structure. 
    "Outdoor recreation facilities" means facilities including greenways, trails, bikeways, paths, tennis courts, ball fields, playfields, courts, golf courses, swimming pools, clubhouses, lockers, bicycle facilities, equestrian facilities, beaches, docks, seating areas, amphitheaters, stages, band shells, community buildings, fountains, plazas, patios, decks, lawns, picnic shelters and picnic areas, landscaping and land containing outdoor recreation structures and facilities. 
    "Outdoor recreation, commercial" means any establishment whose main purpose is to provide the general public with facilities for active, outdoor recreational activities and entertainment where tickets are sold or fees are collected for participation in the activity. Outdoor commercial recreation facilities include, but are not limited to: outdoor fairs and amusement parks, water slides and parks, golf driving ranges and miniature golf courses, baseball batting cages, paintball facilities, tracks for motor sports, and other similar activities. 
    "Outdoor storage" means the keeping of any goods, material, supplies, merchandise, or items for repair (including vehicles) in the same outdoor location for more than twenty-four (24) hours. 
    "Overlay district" means a zoning district that encompasses one or more underlying zones and that may vary the requirements, uses, and standards of the underlying zone. 
    "Owner" means the legal or beneficial owner of a site, including but not limited to, a mortgagee or vendee in possession, receiver, executor, trustee, or other person, firm or corporation, in control of the site. 
    "Owners of record" means the owner(s) of property as specified on the deed to the lot of record. 
    "Parcel" means any tract of land that has a deed and is shown as a unit on the latest county tax assessment records. 
    "Parking lot" means any area designed for temporary (less than forty-eight (48) hours) storage of motor vehicles of the motoring public in normal operating condition. 
    "Parking structure" means a covered or sheltered structure of two or more stories designed, constructed and used for the parking of automobiles. 
    Parking, Off-street. "Off-street parking" means a temporary (less than forty-eight (48) hours) storage area for a motor vehicle that is directly accessible to an access aisle and that is not located on a dedicated street right-of-way. 
    Parking, On-street. "On-street parking" means areas along curbs of a street that are authorized for temporary (less than forty-eight (48) hours) storage of automobiles belonging to owners, tenants, customers, or visitors of adjacent or nearby properties. 
    "Parks and playgrounds" means public or community land, open spaces, or recreation areas including such areas represented on a plat of a subdivision as dedicated, reserved or to be reserved, for recreational purposes. 
    "Paved" means an area which is covered by asphalt, concrete, brick, or pavers meeting the specifications of the department of public service and engineering. Pervious paving materials are subject to approval by the director. 
    "Pawn shop" means a business that loans money on deposit of personal property on condition of selling the same back to the pledgor or depositor, or loans money with personal property taken as collateral security for repayment of the loan. 
    "Pedestrian way" means a crosswalk or other areas designed and marked exclusively for pedestrian traffic. 
    "Permit" means the authorization necessary to conduct a land-disturbing activity, land development activity, building construction, or other activity regulated by the city of Covington that requires an official authorization as provided in the zoning ordinance. 
    Permit, Building. "Building permit" means a permit issued by the planning and zoning department to the owner that is required for undertaking any construction, alteration, addition or repair of a structure. 
    Permitted Use. See "Authorized use." 
    "Permittee" means any entity that has submitted a notice of intent. 
    "Person" means any individual, partnership, firm, company, agency, association, joint venture, public or private corporation, organization, society, trust, estate, commission, board, public or private institution, utility, cooperative, state agency, municipality or other political subdivision of this state, any interstate body or any other legal entity. 
    "Personal care home" means building(s) in which is provided housing, meals, and twenty-four (24) hour continuous watchful oversight for one or more ambulatory adults and which is licensed as a personal care home by the Office of Regulatory Services of the State of Georgia Department of Human Resources, including: 
1.  Personal Care Home, Congregate. A personal care home which offers care to sixteen (16) or more persons. 
2.  Personal Care Home, Family. A personal care home which offers care to at least four, but not more than six persons. 
3.  Personal Care Home, Group. A personal care home which offers care to at least seven but not more than fifteen (15) persons. 
    "Personal services" means establishments primarily engaged in providing services involving the care of a person or his or her personal goods or apparel. Personal services include, but are not limited to, laundry, including cleaning and pressing service, beauty shops, barbershops, manicure, shoe repair, tanning salons and health clubs, clothing rental, tailor shops, and domestic services, but specifically excluding adult entertainment. 
    Pet, Household. "Household pet" means a domestic animal, not including fish or livestock, which is cared for by members of a household for companionship up to a total of three such animals. 
    "Place of worship" means a lot or building wherein persons assemble for religious worship. 
    Plan, Concept. "Concept plan" means written and graphic documents submitted to the director for review that document the intent of a developer in a conceptual form, indicating the types, general arrangement and density of uses, extent and pattern of subdivision, and the relationship of the intended uses to surrounding tracts. 
    "Planned center" means one or more commercial land uses or establishments developed under unified control, to be planned, developed, operated, and maintained as a whole, having one or more structures with appurtenant common areas. 
    "Planning commission" means the city of Covington planning commission. 
    "Playschool" means a school for pre-kindergarten children ranging in age from three to four years. 
    "Premises" means any building, lot, parcel of land, or portion of land whether improved or unimproved including adjacent sidewalks and parking strips. 
    "Principal use" means the principal purpose for which a lot or the principal building thereon is designed, arranged or intended, and for which it is or may be used, occupied or maintained. 
    Private Road. See "Road, Private." 
    Private Street. See "Street, Private." 
    "Privy" means a structure (and necessary appurtenances) used for the sanitary disposal or storage of human wastes without the aid of water carriage; the term does not include chemical, composting, portable or incinerator toilets. 
    "Professional" means when used in connection with "use" and "occupancy" of a use or occupancy by persons generally engaged in rendering personal, executive, sales, or administrative services or activities, including accountants, architects, professional engineers and land surveyors, doctors, lawyers, insurance offices, real estate offices, religious organizations, stock brokers and administrative agencies considered professional in character. The term, however, does not include repairs or sales of tangible personal property stored or located within the structure nor any use that would create any loud noise or noxious odors within the city of Covington. 
    "Project" means the entire proposed development, regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
    Property, Adjacent. "Adjacent property" means property that is either abutting or on the opposite side of a common street, right-of-way, or easement that separates it from the subject property. In order for the parcels on opposite sides of an easement or right-of-way to be adjacent, it must be possible for a projected property line of one parcel to cross the street and intersect the property line of the adjacent parcel. Properties separated by a railroad track or freeway are not abutting or adjacent. 
    "Property interest" means the ownership of property, including any percentage of ownership less than total ownership. 
    "Protective covenants" means recorded restrictions imposed by private parties running with the title to the land and specifying the manner in which land may be used, developed, or improved with the intent of protecting and preserving the physical and economic integrity of any given area. Protective covenants are not enforced by the city of Covington. 
    "Public entity" means a federal, state, county or municipal government, or any agency, authority or public utility of such government that is legally established to provide public services to the citizens of Covington. 
    "Public facilities" means a use conducted by, or a facility or structure owned or managed by a unit of government, and intended to provide for needs of the public. 
    "Public hearing" means an official session of any elected or appointed board advertised according to law. 
    "Public improvement" means any street, park, water line, sanitary drainage system or similar improvement installed to serve abutting or nearby private or public property constructed by either a private entity or a public agency and ultimately owned and maintained by a public entity. 
    "Public street" means right-of-way dedicated to or owned by a public government agency for the purpose of providing principal access to abutting property. 
    "Public uses" means buildings, structures and uses of land by a unit of government, including but not restricted to government administration, water treatment facilities, streets, libraries, public schools, parks, playgrounds, recreation centers and fire stations. 
    "Public utility" means any publicly, privately, or cooperatively owned line, facility or system for producing, collecting, transmitting or distributing communications, power, electricity, light, heat, gas, oil products, water, steam, waste, stormwater not connected with highway drainage, and other similar services and commodities, including publicly owned fire and police and traffic signals and lighting systems, which directly or indirectly serve the public or any part thereof. 
    "Quarry" means a mine where rock, ore, stone, sand, and similar materials are excavated for sale or for off-site use. Quarry includes rock crushing, asphalt plants, the production of dimension stone, and similar activities. 
    "Real property" means any tract or parcel of land and, if developed, any buildings or structures located on the land. 
    "Recreation center" means a building or portion of a building designed and equipped for the conduct of sports, exercise, leisure time activities or other recreational activities, operated for profit or not-for-profit and which can be open only to bona fide members and guests of the organization or open to the public for a fee. 
    "Recreational vehicle" means a vehicle that is: 
1.  Built on a single chassis; 
2.  Four hundred fifty (450) square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
3.  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a truck or car; 
4.  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
    "Recreational vehicle parks and campgrounds" means any area that is occupied or intended for occupancy by transients using recreational vehicles, mobile trailers or tents as temporary living quarters for recreation, education or vacation purposes and is open to the public. 
    "Recycling collection center" means a facility utilized to be a collection point where only recyclable materials including, but not limited to, household plastics, glass, paper and aluminum are collected and/or sorted prior to delivery to a permanent disposal site or shipment to others for dismantling, grinding, shredding, reuse or processing into new products. 
    "Rehabilitation center" means a facility operated for the purpose of assisting in the rehabilitation of disabled persons which provides one or more of the following types of services: 
1.  Testing, fitting, or training in the use of prosthetic devices; 
2.  Prevocational or conditioning therapy; 
3.  Physical, corrective, or occupational therapy; 
4.  Adjustment training or evaluation or control of special disabilities; or a facility in which a coordinated approach is made to the physical, mental, and vocational evaluation of disabled persons and an integrated program of physical restoration and prevocational training is provided under competent professional supervision and direction. 
    Required Yard. See "Yard, Required." 
    "Research and development" means a business that engages in research, or research and development, of innovative ideas in technology-intensive fields. Development and construction of prototypes may be associated with this use. 
    "Reservoir" means a governmentally owned impoundment of water for the primary purpose of providing water to one or more governmentally owned public drinking water systems. This excludes the multipurpose reservoirs owned by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers. 
    "Reservoir boundary" means the edge of a water supply reservoir defined by its normal pool level. 
    "Restaurant" means an establishment in which the primary purpose is preparing, serving, and consuming food and beverages. 
    Restaurant, Fast-Food. "Fast-food restaurant" means an establishment that offers quick food service, which is accomplished through a limited menu of items, and in which orders are not generally taken at the customer's table, and food is generally served in disposable wrapping or containers. 
    Retaining Wall. See "Wall, Retaining." 
    "Rezoning action" means legislative action by the mayor and council pursuant to this title adopting an amendment to the official zoning map that has the effect of rezoning real property from one zoning classification to another. 
    "Right-of-way" means a strip of land dedicated to, designated, reserved, or purchased by the city of Covington for the purpose of pedestrian or vehicular access or utility line installation. 
    "Right-of-way line" means the dividing line between a lot, tract or parcel of land and a contiguous right-of-way. 
    Road, Private. "Private road" means any privately owned and maintained access way serving two or more parcels of land that is intended to provide access for motorized vehicles, including safety and emergency equipment and that is not dedicated to the city or maintained by the city. 
    Road, Public. "Public road" means any right-of-way set aside for public travel as defined in O.C.G.A. Section 32-1-3(24). 
    "Salvage yard." See "Junkyard." 
    "Sand pit" means a surface mine or excavation used for the removal of sand, gravel, or fill dirt for sale or for use off-site. 
    "Sanitary sewer" or "sewer" means a sewer that carries liquid and water-carried wastes from residences, commercial buildings, industrial plants, and institutions together with minor quantities of groundwater, storm waters and surface waters that are not admitted intentionally. 
    "Sawmill" means a facility where logs or partially processed boards are sawn, split, shaved, stripped, chipped, or otherwise processed to produce wood products, not including the processing of timber for use on the same lot by the owner or resident of that lot. 
    "School" means a public or private facility that provides a curriculum of elementary or secondary academic instruction. 
    "Screening" means a method of shielding, obscuring or buffering one use or building from another use or building by fencing, walls, densely planted vegetation, natural vegetation, including a transitional buffer or other means; a visual and acoustical barrier which is of such nature and density that provides year-round maximum capacity from the ground to a height of at least six feet. 
    "Septic tank" means an approved watertight tank designed or used to receive sewage from a building sewer and to affect separation and organic decomposition of sewage solids, and discharging sewage effluent to an absorption field or other management system. 
    "Setback" means with respect to a stream, river, lake, or impoundment, the area extending beyond any riparian buffer applicable to the stream, river, lake, or impoundment in which certain structures, including buildings, septic tanks and septic tank drainfields, are prohibited. 
    "Setback" means the shortest distance between an adjacent street curb line, property line or lot line and the nearest wall of the building or structure on a lot as prescribed in the zoning ordinance. 
    Sewage. See "Wastewater." 
    "Sewage treatment system" means a system that provides primary treatment and disposal, including absorption field components, devices and appurtenances intended to be used for disposal of sewage by soil absorption, but does not include a conventional or chamber septic tank system. 
    "Sewer" means a pipe or conduit that carries wastewater or stormwater. 
    "Shopping center" means a group of commercial establishments, planned, and developed as a unit, with common off-street parking provided on the property. 
    "Sidewalk-level" means any floor of a building with a finished-floor elevation less than or equal to five feet above the adjacent sidewalk or less than or equal to five feet below the adjacent sidewalk. 
    Sign, Nonconforming. "Nonconforming sign" means a sign that was existing legally on the effective date of the enactment or amendment of the zoning ordinance but that does not meet all the requirements of the zoning ordinance or amendments thereto. 
    "Solid waste" means any garbage or refuse; sludge from a wastewater treatment plant, water supply treatment plant, or air pollution control facility; and other discarded material including solid, semisolid, or contained gaseous material resulting from industrial, commercial, mining, and agricultural operations and community activities, but does not include recovered materials; solid or dissolved materials in domestic sewage; solid or dissolved materials in irrigation return flows or industrial discharges that are point sources subject to permit under 33 U.S.C. Section 1342; or source, special nuclear, or byproduct material as defined by the Federal Atomic Energy Act of 1954, as amended. 
    "Solid waste handling" means the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal of solid waste or any combination of such activities. 
    "Solid waste handling facility" means any facility the primary purpose of which is the storage, collection, transportation, treatment, utilization, processing, or disposal, or any combination thereof, of solid waste as approved by department of natural resources. 
    "Solid waste transfer station/materials recovery facilities" means any facility the primary purpose of which is the collection, temporary storage, or transportation, or any combination thereof, of municipal solid waste (defined as solid waste derived from households, including garbage, trash, and sanitary waste in septic tanks, and includes solid waste from single-family and multifamily residences, hotels and motels, bunkhouses, campgrounds, picnic grounds, day use recreation areas, and commercial establishments, but does not include solid waste from mining, agricultural or silvicultural operations, or industrial processes or operations, per the Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. Section 12-8-20 et seq.) and that may provide for the extraction of recoverable materials, materials suitable for use as a fuel or soil amendment, or any combination of such materials. 
    "Special events" means amusement, recreational, entertainment or community interest activities such as but not limited to carnivals, rodeos, horse shows, shooting and athletic events, art shows and community fairs. 
    Start of Construction. See "Construction, Start of." 
    "State" means the state of Georgia. 
    Storage Tank, Bulk. "Bulk storage tank" means an aboveground container used for the storage of large volumes of liquids, solids or gases, which may or may not include such flammable materials as petroleum. 
    "Storm shelter" means a structure or portion of a structure intended to provide protection to human life during periods of danger from storms or other emergencies. 
    "Story" means that portion of a building having a height greater than six feet between the surface of the floor occupied and the ceiling above it, not including cellars, basements, mechanical rooms and parking floors that do not extend more than three feet above finished grade or mechanical rooms, tanks or structures not designed for occupancy that are placed on the roof of a building and occupying less than ten (10) percent of the area of the floor below. 
    "Street" means a way for vehicular traffic, whether designated as an avenue, boulevard, road, highway, expressway, lane, alley or other way. 
    "Street Categories" means the following definitions intended to distinguish between different categories of streets: 
1.  "Freeways" are high-capacity streets from which access to abutting property is prohibited, and which are intersected at specific locations by major and collector streets. 
2.  "Major thoroughfares" are those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. The term shall include all street designations shown on the major thoroughfare plan for the city. 
3.  "Arterial and collector streets" are those which carry traffic from minor streets to the system of major streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
4.  "Arterial streets" are intended generally, but not exclusively, to provide service through industrial, commercial, and high density multiple-family complexes. 
5.  "Collector streets" are intended generally, but not exclusively, to provide service through residential areas, including low density multiple-family complexes. 
6.  "Minor streets," including loop streets and cul-de-sacs, are those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties, and for streets within a NR3 or NM district. 
7.  "Subdivision streets" are generally intended to provide service to the abutting properties and to provide access to collector streets. Street, dead end: A street that must be exited at the same point as is entered but not a cul-de-sac. 
8.  "Downtown streets" are those streets bounded on the north by Central of Georgia Railroad, south by Conyers Street, east by Elm Street and west by Emory Street. 
    Street, Centerline of. "Centerline of street" means a line that is halfway between the right-of-way lines of a street. 
    "Street curb" means the edge of street or a line of concrete or asphalt that forms part of the gutter at the edge of a street. 
    "Street fronting" means any building, sidewalk or landscaping element that is directly facing and adjacent to any public street and not facing the interior rear or side lot line adjacent to a neighboring property. 
    Street, Half. "Half street" means a street or road adjacent to a subdivision tract boundary where only half the required right-of-way and road improvements are provided within the proposed subdivision and the responsibility for the other half is undecided or is left to the adjacent property owner. 
    "Street jog" means the incidence where two streets or two portions of a single street are separated by a relatively short distance, usually at their intersection with another street. 
    Street, Private. "Private street" means any privately owned and maintained access way serving two or more lots or parcels that is intended to provide access for motorized vehicles, including safety and emergency equipment, that is not dedicated to the city or maintained by the city. 
    Street, Public. See "Road, Public." 
    Street, Stub. "Stub street" means an extension of the right-of-way of a street in a subdivision extending to the property boundary of the tract being developed and intended to provide continuity of the street pattern between subdivisions or between the individual phases of the same subdivision. 
    "Structure" means any fixed object that is constructed or erected on the ground or attached to something on the ground, including, but not limited to, towers, fences, posts, walls and walled or roofed buildings, but not including tents, flags, balloons, or vehicles. 
    Structure, Accessory. "Accessory structure" means a structure detached from the principal building located on the same lot and customarily incidental and subordinate in area, extent, and purpose to the principal building or use. Where a structure is attached to the main building in a substantial manner, as by a wall, such structure shall be considered part of the main building. 
    Structure, Occupied. "Occupied structure" means a building with one or more rooms intended for use by humans for dwelling, commerce, industry, or public services, and including buildings intended for the installation, storage, or use of equipment, merchandise, or machinery related to such use, subject to regulations and permitting procedures of the zoning ordinance. 
    "Subdivider" means any person, firm, corporation or duly authorized agent or other legal entity who undertakes the subdivision of land as defined in this chapter. 
    "Substantial damage" means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before damaged condition would equal or exceed fifty (50) percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. Market value may be determined from tax appraisal or other estimate provided by a certified professional appraiser. 
    "Swimming pool" means a facility designed and intended for water contact activities that serves the public, a club or other membership-based organization. 
    Swimming Pool, Home. "Home swimming pool" means a facility designed and intended for water contact activities that serves a single-family dwelling. 
    "Tattoo and body piercing parlor/studio" means an establishment that specifically provides the service of body piercing and/or tattooing. 
    "Telecommunications tower" means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers and monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common carrier towers, cellular communications towers, and other similar structures. 
    "Temporary structure" means a structure without any foundation or footings that is removed when the designated time period, activity, or use for which the temporary structure was erected has ceased. 
    "Temporary use" means land uses established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use within a designated time period. 
    Temporary Use, Accessory. "Accessory temporary use" means a use meeting the definition of an accessory use, building or structure that is established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use within a designated time period. 
    Temporary Use, Commercial Retail. "Commercial retail temporary use" means commercial uses established for a limited duration with the intent to discontinue such use within a designated time period. 
    "Tower" or "telecommunications tower" means any structure that is designed or constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice towers, guy towers, or monopole towers. The term includes radio and television transmission towers, microwave towers, common-carrier towers, cellular telephone towers, alternative tower structure, but not including amateur radio antennas. 
    "Townhouse" means a single-family dwelling unit that is erected in a row as part of a single building consisting of three or more dwellings on adjoining lots, each being separated from the adjoining unit or units by an approved fire-resistant party wall or walls extending from the basement or cellar floor to the roof along the dividing lot line. 
    "Transitional housing facility" means a building or buildings in which is provided long-term but not permanent living accommodations for one or more persons who have no permanent residence and are in need of short-term housing assistance, and in which may also be provided meals and social services including counseling and substance abuse recovery assistance. 
    Truck, Heavy. "Heavy truck" means trucks, including truck tractors, and similar vehicles with two or more rear axles. 
    Truck, Light. "Light truck" means trucks and similar vehicles with single rear axles. 
    "Truck stop" means a prohibited use that includes any building, premises, or land in which or upon which a business, service, or industry involving the maintenance, servicing, storage, or repair of heavy trucks and similar commercial vehicles is conducted or rendered, including the dispensing of motor fuel or other petroleum products primarily for such heavy trucks and similar commercial vehicles and the sale of accessories or equipment for heavy trucks and similar commercial vehicles, as well as overnight accommodations, showers, overnight customer parking, or restaurant facilities for the use of crews of heavy trucks and similar commercial vehicles. 
    "Use" means the purpose or activity for which land or buildings are designed, arranged, or intended or for which land or buildings are occupied or maintained. 
    Use, Accessory. "Accessory use" means a use of land or a building, or portion thereof, customarily incidental and subordinate to the principal use of the land or building and located on the same lot with such principal use. 
    Use, Civic. "Civic use" means a use of land or a building for the primary purpose of a governmental service or a community-wide service. 
    "Variance" means a grant of relief of the terms of the zoning ordinance pursuant to Chapter 16.12 that will not be contrary to the public interest and where, owing to conditions peculiar to the property (and not the applicant), a literal enforcement of the regulations would result in unnecessary and undue hardship. 
    Variance, Administrative. "Administrative variance" means the grant of relief of the terms of the zoning ordinance that is subject to review and action by the department pursuant to Chapter 16.12. 
    "Vehicle" means a mechanical device with wheels or treads for transporting people and/or loads. Vehicles include automobiles, motorcycles, trucks, cranes, earth moving equipment, trailers, and other similar conveyances. 
    Vehicle, Commercial. "Commercial vehicle" means a vehicle greater than thirty (30) feet in length with six or more wheels, including the cab portion of a tractor-trailer with or without the trailer, but not including light duty delivery trucks, motor homes, travel trailers, or school buses. 
    "Veterinary services" means establishments where animals or pets are given medical treatment and are cared for during the time of such treatment. Use as a kennel shall be limited to short-time boarding and shall be only incidental to such hospital use. 
    "Wall" means any structure forming a physical barrier or enclosure which is so constructed that fifty (50) percent or more of the gross vertical surface is closed and prevents the passage of light, air and vision through said surface in a horizontal plane. 
    Wall, Foundation. "Foundation wall" means a wall constructed on footings or piers and designed to bear the load of a building or major structure. 
    Wall, Retaining. "Retaining wall" means a structure constructed and erected between lands of different elevations to protect structures and/or to prevent erosion, and not used as a foundation. 
    "Well" means an excavation or opening into the ground by which groundwater is sought or obtained. 
    "Wetlands" means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support, and that under normal circumstances do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs and, similar areas. 
    Window, Drive-through. "Drive-through window" means an opening in the wall of a building or structure designed and intended to be used to provide for sales to and/or service to patrons who remain in their vehicles. 
    "Yard" means an open space between the property line and the wall of the principal building, on the same lot, such space being open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky except for authorized landscaping, driveways, parking, sidewalks, signs, lighting standards, encroachments and accessory buildings that are expressly permitted. 
    Yard, Front. "Front yard" means a yard extending the full width of the lot or parcel and situated between the street curb line of the abutting street and the front yard line of the principal building or structure. 
    Yard, Rear. "Rear yard" means a yard extending the full width of the lot or parcel and extending from the rear line of the lot to the rear yard line of the principal building or structure. 
    Yard, Required. "Required yard" means a yard situated between a lot line or property line and the setback line established by the zoning district for the principal building or structure. 
    Yard, Side. "Side yard" means a yard extending the full depth of a lot or parcel and situated between the side yard line and side property line of the lot or parcel and the side of the building facing such property line. 
    "Zoning district" means one or more sections of the city as set forth in the zoning ordinance and delineated and designated on the zoning maps, within which the zoning regulations are uniform. 
    "Zoning maps" means one or a series of numbered maps of the city, depicting the locations of zoning classifications set forth in the zoning ordinance and other expository material, each of which is entitled "Official Zoning Map of the Covington, Georgia," and referenced to an index map. 
    "Zoning ordinance" means the adopted set of zoning regulations in this title of this Covington Code of Ordinances. 
(Ord. dated 10-15-12(2), § 1; Ord. dated 8/16/12, §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 9/19/11, §§ 1, 2; Ord. dated 4/4/11, § 1; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 1/18/17(3), § 1; Ord. dated 3/5/18(1), § 1; Ord. dated 4/2/18(1), § 1; Ord. dated 4/2/18(2), § 1) 
Chapter 16.12 - PROCEDURES 

16.12.010 - Procedures. 
    The procedures and standards set forth in this chapter shall apply to all amendments, variances and special use permits, except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.020 - Planning commission. 
A.  Creation. There is created a planning commission for the city of Covington. The official name of this commission shall be the "Covington Planning Commission." 
B.  Intent and Purpose. The intent and purpose of the planning commission shall include conducting public hearings, requesting and receiving studies and reports from staff, and reviewing and making recommendations to the mayor and council concerning matters brought before them. Carrying out this purpose shall include the following duties: 
1.  To review and make recommendations regarding proposed amendments to the comprehensive plan, zoning ordinance, official zoning map, and applications for special use permits according to the standards for review set forth in this chapter; 
2.  To advise the city government regarding environmental policy, comprehensive planning, community development, housing, transportation, land use issues and capital improvements; 
3.  To work with the city departments, boards and authorities and mayor and council when appropriate to the purposes of the planning commission, in carrying out their various functions by making recommendations to achieve the desired benefits on behalf of present and future Covington residents, businesses and property owners. 
C.  Finances. The expenditures of the planning commission shall be within the amounts appropriated for that purpose by the governing authority of the city. 
D.  Appointment and Terms. 
1.  Composition. The planning commission shall be composed of at least five members and no more than nine members, all of whom shall be appointed by the mayor and council. 
2.  Terms. Members of the commission shall be appointed for overlapping terms of three years and shall serve until their successors are appointed. Original appointments may be made for a lesser number of years, so that the terms of said members shall be staggered. 
3.  Qualifications. Members shall be residents of the city, none of whom shall hold any other public office or position with the city of Covington. When possible, the chair and at least two other members of the planning commission shall be professionally qualified in the fields of planning, architecture, landscape architecture, civil engineering, real estate, building construction or related fields. 
4.  Compensation. All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for expenses as set forth in a resolution adopted by the city incurred in connection with their official duties. 
5.  Vacancies. All appointees shall continue to serve until a successor is appointed. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term in the same manner as the initial appointment. If the member takes action that results in them not being a resident or business owner in the city, such member shall be deemed to have resigned from the planning commission. 
6.  Other Offices. Members of the planning commission shall hold no other elected or appointed office or other city-compensated position. 
7.  Expiration of Term. Appointments shall expire on July 1st in the last year of the term. 
8.  Removal from Office. A member of the planning commission may be removed from office prior to the expiration of his/her appointed term by a majority vote of the mayor and council. 
E.  Planning Commission Officers. 
1.  Chair. In July of each year the planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The chair's term shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. 
2.  Duties of Chair. The chair shall preside at all meetings and hearings of the planning commission and decide all points of order and procedure. The chair may appoint committees necessary to assist and advise the planning commission in its work. 
3.  Vice-chair. The planning commission shall elect a vice-chair in July of each year. The vice-chair's term shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. 
4.  Duties of the Vice-chair. The vice-chair shall serve as acting chair in the absence of the chair and, when acting in such capacity, shall have the same powers and duties as the chair. 
5.  Secretary. A designated person from the planning and zoning department shall serve as the secretary of the planning commission. The secretary shall have responsibility for assisting the chair with scheduling and preparing an agenda for meetings; providing copies of staff reports to members of the planning commission; preparing public notice of hearings and other meetings; and making, publishing and preserving public records of the attendance, proceedings, reports and actions of the planning commission; attendance to the correspondence of the planning commission; and other duties assigned by the chair, subject to the budgetary limitations of the planning and zoning department. 
F.  Committees. The chair may appoint, with the concurrence of the planning commission, various standing and temporary committees to further the purposes of the planning commission. Such committees may include ex officio members of the staff of various city departments (excluding the mayor and council), residents and business owners of the city and other individuals whose background and knowledge may be of benefit to the planning commission in its deliberations. 
G.  Meetings of the Planning Commission. 
1.  Regular Meetings. Unless there is no business to be conducted, the planning commission shall hold regularly scheduled meetings each month. The planning commission shall establish and make available to the public the time, place, and dates of its regular meetings. Except as otherwise authorized by the Georgia Open Meetings Act, O.C.G.A. Section 50-14-1 et seq., all meetings shall be open to the public. Public notice of all meetings shall be as required by said Georgia Open Meetings Act, in addition to any additional public notice for zoning hearings otherwise required in this chapter. Each member shall be notified of each regular meeting at least five days preceding the meeting through a written agenda prepared and distributed by the secretary. 
2.  Special Called Meetings. The chair, secretary, or a majority of the planning commission may call a special meeting at any time provided that written notice is posted for at least twenty-four (24) hours at the place of regular meetings and written or oral notice is given at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting to the official legal organ of the city. The secretary shall prepare and cause to be delivered a written notice stating the specific purpose of the special called meeting to each planning commission member at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. No business other than the specific stated purpose shall occur at the special called meeting. 
3.  Cancellation of Meetings. In the event there is a lack of business to be discussed and/or voted upon at a future meeting, the meeting may be cancelled. In such a case, the secretary shall notify each member at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to such scheduled meeting and shall place an appropriate public notice at the city courthouse or annex building stating the date of the canceled meeting at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the scheduled meeting. 
4.  Agenda and Minutes. 
a.  The chair and secretary shall determine the meeting agenda. All matters to be considered and/or acted upon by the planning commission shall appear on the agenda. The agenda shall be available prior to each meeting and posted at the meeting site for the public. 
b.  Not more than two business days following the adjournment of a meeting of the planning commission, the secretary shall ensure that a written summary of the subjects acted on by the planning commission and a list of those members present is available for public inspection in the offices of the planning and zoning department. 
c.  Meeting minutes shall include and indicate all important facts, a report of all actions taken, a listing of those members present and those absent, a record of the vote of each member on each action taken on each matter and a brief summary of any explanation or commentary that is relevant to the decisions made on matters before the planning commission. 
d.  Copies of the approved minutes for each meeting of the planning commission shall be available to the public immediately following the next regularly scheduled meeting of the planning commission. 
5.  Procedures. The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its time of meeting. Such rules shall be subject to approval of the mayor and council. Robert's Rules of Order shall govern any procedural question not otherwise covered by this chapter or said rules of procedure. 
6.  Order of Business at Meetings. The order of business at meetings shall be as follows: 
a.  Roll call and determination of a quorum; 
b.  Approval of minutes of previous meetings; 
c.  Approval of the agenda; 
d.  Old or unfinished business; 
e.  New business; 
f.  Reports; 
g.  Public comment; 
h.  Adjournment. 
7.  Agenda Changes. The chair may change the order of the agenda on matters appearing on the agenda during the meeting if, in his or her judgment, time and purpose may be served. 
H.  Quorum and Voting. 
1.  Quorum. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members of the planning commission. A majority vote of those present constituting a quorum shall be sufficient to decide all matters that come before the planning commission except where a greater number is required by Robert's Rules of Order. 
2.  Voting. 
a.  The planning commission chair shall not cast a vote except when necessary for breaking tie votes of the commission. 
b.  A planning commission member, who is part of a quorum of the planning commission during the consideration of any matter but not participating in the discussion or vote on a specific matter because of a conflict of interest, shall be considered present for quorum purposes but abstaining from voting on that specific matter. No planning commission member who is present, may abstain from voting except in the case of having a conflict of interest with respect to the matter under consideration as provided in O.C.G.A. Section 36-67A-1 et seq. 
c.  A majority vote of those members present of the planning commission is required for approval of all motions. A motion that fails by a majority vote shall not be deemed as approval of the opposite position. 
d.  The planning commission may add conditions to any proposed amendment to the comprehensive plan, amendment to the official zoning map or any special event permit or special use permit it deems necessary so as to mitigate impacts of the proposal upon surrounding properties consistent with the purposes of the city's resolutions, ordinances, regulations, policies and procedures. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 10/18/10, § 1) 
16.12.030 - Pre-application meeting. 
A.  Applications to amend the official zoning map or the future land use map, and applications for a building permit in the NR3, CR, TCR, NM, CM, TCM and M districts, shall not be submitted or accepted by the city until a pre-application meeting is held with the planning and zoning director. At this meeting the applicant shall present preliminary plans to the planning and zoning director that demonstrate how the pending application adheres to the requirements of this zoning ordinance. The purpose of the pre-application meeting is to assist in the applicant's understanding of this zoning ordinance and its requirements; to educate the applicant on community design policies and standards; and to inform the applicant of all necessary application materials required by the zoning ordinance. No preliminary decision on the application or assurances that a particular proposal will be approved shall be made by any city personnel or officials. 
B.  When the applications listed in subsection A of this section are for uses with a combined total floor area greater than two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) square feet, the planning and zoning director shall: 
1.  Notify the department directors or their designees of other applicable city departments of the pre-application meeting and invite their attendance to same; and 
2.  Require the applicant to include a traffic study describing the extent, nature and location of traffic impacts for all property for which the application is being sought as well as all contiguous property owned by the applicant. The study area shall include the entire site being developed, future phases of multi-phase development, and the surrounding roadways likely to be impacted. The scope of required traffic studies shall be promulgated by the planning and zoning director. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.040 - Amendments. 
    Whenever the public necessity, public convenience, general welfare or good zoning practice justify such action, this zoning ordinance including the official zoning map, and the future land use map, may be amended by the mayor and council. The procedures for such amendments shall be as provided in this chapter. 
A.  Initiation of Amendments. Amendments to the official zoning map or to the future land use map may be initiated by application of the owner(s) of the subject property or the authorized agent(s) of the owner(s) of the property, or by the mayor and council. Amendments to the text of Title 16 may be initiated by the mayor and council or city manager. 
B.  Application Schedule. 
1.  Applications to amend to the official zoning map or the future land use map must be filed in accordance with a submission schedule established by the planning and zoning director. No application shall be deemed filed until all required forms have been completed and all required materials have been submitted, including all fees. The date the application is complete and hence filed shall be noted on the application form by the planning and zoning director and all subsequent deadlines tied to the date of application shall begin to run as of said date of filing. 
2.  If the final decision of the mayor and council of the city pursuant to the provisions of Section 16.12.090 is the denial of an amendment to the zoning ordinance that was for the purpose of rezoning property, then the same property may not again be considered for rezoning until the expiration of at least six months immediately following the action taken by the mayor and council in denying such rezoning. 
3.  No amendment to the future land use map that is denied by mayor and council may be resubmitted for approval for six months following the action of denial by the mayor and council. 
4.  An application may not be withdrawn or amended, unless authorized by a majority vote of the mayor and council, after the legal advertising required by this chapter has been submitted for publication. The mayor and council may allow an application to be so withdrawn without prejudice which shall not be considered a denial for purposes of Section 16.12.090. 
5.  Applications to amend the official zoning map may also include variance requests. In such cases, the mayor and council shall assume all powers and duties otherwise exercised by the board of appeals and adjustments pursuant to Section 16.12.170. 
C.  Content of Applications. Applications to amend the official zoning map or the future land use map shall be filed with the planning and zoning director on a form available from the director and shall, at a minimum, include the following: 
1.  An application fee established by the mayor and council. 
2.  The name, address, telephone number, fax number, and email address of the owner, and the same information from the applicant, if different. Whenever the applicant is not the property owner, the owner shall certify by notarized signature that the applicant has authority to file the application. When properties have more than one owner, the notarized signature of all property owners shall be required. 
3.  The street address and a legal description of the property. 
4.  Two copies of a property survey, drawn to scale, showing north arrow, land lot and district, location of the tract, dimensions along all property lines, acreage of the tract and the street names and right-of-way dimensions of abutting streets. The plat shall be prepared by an architect, engineer, landscape architect or land surveyor whose state registration is current and valid. The preparer's signature and seal shall be affixed to the plat. 
5.  A narrative description of the intent of the proposed amendment and the intended timing and phasing of development. 
6.  The current and proposed zoning and land use classification, existing and proposed uses of the property proposed to be reclassified and all zoning and land uses of properties abutting the subject property. 
7.  If the application requests a change in the official zoning map, the applicant shall provide a written analysis of the impact of the proposed amendment with respect to each of the standards governing the exercise of zoning set forth in Section 16.12.110. If the application requests a change in the future land use map, the applicant shall provide a written analysis of the impact of the proposed amendment with respect to each of the standards for review of the future land use map set forth in Section 16.12.120. 
8.  If the application requests a change in the official zoning map, the applicant shall submit all development plans required by Section 16.12.050. 
9.  If the application requests a change in the official zoning map, the applicant shall submit all disclosures of campaign contributions required by O.C.G.A. Section 36-67A-3, as amended. 
10.  If the application requests one or more variances, the applicant shall provide written analysis of the standards for application and approval of variances in Section 16.12.170 for each variance request. 
11.  Any other information or documentation the department may reasonably deem necessary or appropriate to a full and proper consideration and disposition of the particular application consistent with required review standards. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 10/1/18, § 1) 
16.12.050 - Additional application requirements. 
    Applications to amend the official zoning map shall include development plans that shall meet the following criteria. These development plans shall be prepared upon a base drawing stamped and sealed by a Georgia registered professional architect, surveyor, civil engineer, landscape architect or land planner. Applications shall contain five sets of copies of each of the following elements, unless determined inapplicable to a specific development by the planning and zoning director: 
A.  Site Analysis. A site analysis and topographic map at a minimum one inch equals twenty (20) foot scale. The site analysis shall include information on all existing man-made and natural features, utilities, all streams and easements, and features to be retained, moved, or altered. The existing shape and dimensions of the existing lot to be built upon including the size, measurement and location of any existing buildings or structures on the lot shall be included. 
B.  Site Plan. A site plan at a minimum one inch equals twenty (20) foot scale showing compliance with all regulations and calculations required by the zoning ordinance and subdivision ordinance which shall include but not be limited to information on all proposed improvements including proposed building footprints, doors, densities, parking ratios, open space, height, sidewalks, yards, under- and over-head utilities, internal circulation and parking, landscaping, grading, lighting, drainage, amenities, and similar details including their respective measurements. 
C.  Landscape Plan. A landscape plan at a minimum one inch equals twenty (20) foot scale showing compliance with all regulations and calculations required by the zoning ordinance and development ordinances which shall include but not be limited to information on landscaping, tree species and the number of all plantings and open space including the landscaping that is being preserved, removed and that which is replacing the landscaping that is removed. 
D.  Architectural Design. The architectural design elements showing compliance with all regulations and calculations required by the zoning ordinance which shall include but not be limited to scaled elevation drawings of proposed structures and information on building materials, features, exterior finish legend, windows, doors, colors, and items affecting exterior appearance, such as signs, air conditioning, grills, compressors, and similar details including their respective measurements. 
E.  Multiple Buildings. Groups of buildings on the same parcel of land may be reviewed and permitted as a single project rather than individual buildings. Grouping of similar buildings is encouraged to minimize the number of reviews required and to allow for originality and design flexibility. 
F.  LEED Analysis. Applications for developments containing greater than fifty thousand (50,000) square feet of gross floor area shall submit a LEED (Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design) check list at the time of application. The check list shall be completed by a LEED Accredited Professional and shall utilize the most recent version of the LEED program as governed by the U.S. Green Building Council. The LEED review shall document the specific elements of LEED certification that can and cannot be met and shall include a cost estimate for each element whether it is being met or not. The LEED review process shall not be a factor in the approval or denial of any development. The LEED check list shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning director but shall not be a part of the application as it moves forward through the remainder of the approval process. LEED analysis is for informational purposes only and is intended to aid the city in facilitating the awareness of better-building practices within the city. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.060 - Staff review. 
A.  All completed applications for official zoning map amendments and future land use map amendments, and proposed amendments to the zoning text, official zoning map or future land use map initiated by the mayor and council, shall be distributed by the planning and zoning director to appropriate city officials and departments for review and comment. Such applications and amendments may be referred to herein as "zoning proposals" and shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning director as set forth in this section and scheduled for public hearing before the planning commission and mayor and council, in accordance with this chapter's procedures. 
B.  The planning and zoning director shall submit a report on each zoning proposal. The director shall investigate and include in the report a recommendation applying the standards enumerated in this chapter applicable to the type of zoning proposal under review. The director's report shall be a public record. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.070 - Public hearing and notice. 
A.  Public Hearings. The mayor and council shall make all final zoning decisions on zoning proposals authorized by this chapter. The planning commission shall make recommendations on such zoning proposals to the mayor and council. The planning commission and the mayor and council shall each hold a public hearing prior to said action following the public notice requirements herein. 
B.  Notice. 
1.  At least fifteen (15) but not more than forty-five (45) days prior to the date of the hearings required in subsection A of this section, the planning and zoning director or city clerk shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the city a notice of the hearings before the planning commission and the mayor and council. The notice shall state the time, place, and purpose of each hearing. 
2.  If a zoning proposal is for the rezoning of property and the rezoning is initiated by a party other than the mayor and council, then: 
a.  The notice, in addition to the requirements of subsection (B)(1) above, shall include the location of the property, the present zoning classification of the property, and the proposed zoning classification of the property; and 
b.  The applicant shall post one or more signs in a conspicuous location on the property, not less than fifteen (15) days prior to the date of each public hearing. At least one sign shall be posted along each street on which the subject property has frontage. One additional sign shall be posted for each additional five hundred (500) feet of frontage or fraction thereof in excess of five hundred (500) feet of frontage on each street on which the subject property has frontage. The planning and zoning director shall provide the signs to the applicant for timely posting by the applicant. Each sign shall contain the time, place and purpose of the public hearings before the planning commission and the mayor and council; and 
c.  Written notice shall be mailed by first class mail by the planning and zoning director to all property owners adjacent to the boundaries of the subject property, as such property owners are listed on the city's tax records, at least fifteen (15) days prior to the date of each public hearing. The written notice shall state the time, place and purpose of the public hearings before the planning commission and the mayor and council. 
3.  When a zoning proposal relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency, a public hearing shall be held by the mayor and council on the proposed action. Such public hearing shall be held at least six months but not more than nine months prior to the date of final action on such zoning decision by the mayor and council. The hearing required by this section shall be in addition to the hearings required under subsection A above. 
a.  Notice of this hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation in the manner required by subsection (B)(1) above and sign(s) shall be posted on the property in the manner required under subsection (B)(2)(b) above. 
b.  Notice as required under this subsection, both posted and published, shall include a prominent statement that the proposed zoning decision relates to or will allow the location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center, or other facility for treatment of drug dependency. The published notice shall be at least six column inches in size and shall not be located in the classified advertising section of the newspaper. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.080 - Policies and procedures. 
    The following policies and procedures shall govern the calling and conduct of the public hearings held by the planning commission and the mayor and council pursuant to this chapter. Printed copies of these policies and procedures shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
A.  For Planning Commission. 
1.  The hearing shall be presided over by the chair. After calling the hearing to order, the chair shall request that the parcels of property and/or references to the code sections which are subject of the zoning proposal be identified and read. Following such identification and reading, the recommendation of the planning and zoning director shall be presented. The planning commission shall cause the written recommendation of the planning and zoning director to be made a part of the record. 
2.  Proponents of each zoning proposal shall then be allowed a total of ten (10) minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the zoning proposal. If all ten (10) minutes are not used, the proponent's remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. Opponents of each zoning proposal shall then be allowed a total of ten (10) minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning each zoning proposal. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote, provided they are expanded equally for proponents and opponents. 
3.  All speakers shall identify themselves and state their current address. Remarks should be limited to data, evidence and opinions relevant to the proposal under consideration. Speakers shall address all remarks to the chair. 
4.  Following public comment, the chair shall close the public comment portion of the hearing with respect to the proposal under consideration and seek discussion and/or a motion to act upon the proposal as provided in code Section 16.12.090. 
B.  For Mayor and Council. 
1.  The hearing shall be presided over by the mayor. After calling the hearing to order, the mayor shall request that the parcels of property and/or references to the code sections which are subject of the zoning proposal be identified and read. Following such identification and reading, the recommendation of the planning and zoning director and the planning commission shall be presented. The mayor and council shall cause the written recommendation of the planning and zoning director and the recommendation and all documentation of the planning commission to be made a part of the record. 
2.  Proponents of each zoning proposal shall then be allowed a total of ten (10) minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the zoning proposal. If all ten (10) minutes are not used, the proponent's remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. Opponents of each zoning proposal shall then be allowed a total of ten (10) minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning each zoning proposal. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote, provided they are expanded equally for proponents and opponents. 
3.  All speakers shall identify themselves and state their current address. Remarks should be limited to data, evidence and opinions relevant to the proposal under consideration. Speakers shall address all remarks to the mayor. 
4.  Following public comment, the mayor shall close the public comment portion of the hearing with respect to the proposal under consideration and seek discussion and/or a motion to act upon the proposal as provided in code Section 16.12.090. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.090 - Zoning decisions. 
A.  Action by Planning Commission. 
1.  In making a recommendation on zoning proposals under this chapter, the planning commission shall review and consider the application or amendment and materials of record, the data, evidence, and opinions submitted during public comment, the recommendation of the planning and zoning director, and the standards applicable to the type of proposal under review. 
2.  Upon the conclusion of deliberations, the planning commission shall make one of the following recommendations to the mayor and council: 
a.  Approve the proposal as requested; 
b.  Approve the proposal with changes and/or conditions; 
c.  Deny the proposal; 
d.  Recommend the applicant be allowed to withdraw and further recommend as to with or without prejudice; 
e.  Recommend deferral of the proposal for additional information at a future public hearing. 
3.  If the planning commission fails to make one of the above recommendations at the conclusion of the public hearing, it shall be deemed to have given a recommendation of "no comment" on the proposal. 
B.  Final Action by Mayor and Council. A meeting of the mayor and council for the purposes of reviewing and making final decisions on zoning proposals under this chapter shall be held immediately upon the conclusion of the public hearing or at the next regular or specially called meeting of the mayor and council. At said meeting, the mayor and council shall review the analysis and materials submitted by the initiating party, the recommendations of the planning and zoning director and the planning commission, other matters of record, materials, data, evidence and opinion submitted during public comments, and the review standards and criteria set forth herein that are applicable to the type of proposal under review in making a final decision on each zoning proposal. Upon the conclusion of deliberations, the mayor and council may approve, deny, or defer the proposal, make changes to or add or delete conditions to the proposal, or allow the proposal to be withdrawn with or without prejudice. An application allowed to be withdrawn with prejudice may not be resubmitted except in compliance with Section 16.12.040(B). An action by the mayor and council to defer a final decision on the zoning proposal shall include a statement of the date and time of the next meeting at which the proposal will be considered by the mayor and council. If the proposal is referred to the planning commission for another public hearing, all of the notice procedures in Section 16.12.070 shall again be followed. Actions by the mayor and council that result in a rezoning or other amendment to this title, shall be adopted by an ordinance implementing such action in accordance with Section 5 of the charter of the city of Covington. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.100 - Procedures for annexation. 
    If a zoning is for property to be annexed into the city of Covington, then: 
A.  The mayor and council shall complete the procedures required by this chapter for rezonings, except for the final vote of the mayor and council, prior to the adoption of the annexation, ordinance or resolution or the effective date of any local Act but no sooner than the date the notice of the proposed annexation is provided to the governing authority of the county as required under the Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 36-36-6. 
B.  The public hearings required by Section 16.12.070 of this chapter shall be conducted prior to the annexation of the subject property into the city of Covington. 
C.  In addition to any other notice requirements, the city of Covington shall cause to be published within a newspaper of general circulation within the territorial boundaries of the county wherein the property to be annexed is located a notice of the hearing as required under the provisions of Section 16.12.070, as applicable, of this chapter and shall place a sign on the property when required by Section 16.12.070(B) of this chapter; and 
D.  The zoning classification approved by the mayor and council following the hearing required by this section shall become effective on the later of: 
1.  The date the zoning is approved by the mayor and council; 
2.  The date that the annexation becomes effective pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 36-36-2; or 
3.  Where a county has interposed an objection pursuant to O.C.G.A. Section 36-36-11, the date provided for in paragraph (8) of subsection (b) of said code section. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.110 - Zoning proposal review standards. 
    The planning and zoning director, the planning commission and the mayor and council shall consider the following standards governing the exercise of the zoning power whenever deliberating over any zoning proposal pursuant to this chapter. The review standards for special use permits are set forth in Section 16.12.140(I). The review standards for the future land use plan amendments are set forth in Section 16.12.120. Printed copies of these standards shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
A.  The existing uses and zoning of nearby property; 
B.  The extent to which property values are diminished by their particular zoning restrictions; 
C.  The extent to which the possible reduction of property values of the subject property promotes the health, safety, morals or general welfare of the public; 
D.  The relative harm to the public as compared to the hardship imposed upon the individual property owner; 
E.  The suitability of the subject property for the zoning proposed; 
F.  The length of time the properly has been vacant as zoned, considered in the context of land development in the area in the vicinity of the property; 
G.  Whether the zoning proposal will permit a use that is suitable in view of the use and development of adjacent and nearby property; 
H.  Whether the zoning proposal will adversely affect the existing use or usability of adjacent or nearby property; 
I.  Whether the property to be affected by the zoning proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently zoned; 
J.  Whether the zoning proposal will result in a use which will or could cause an excessive or burdensome use of existing streets, transportation facilities, utilities, or schools; 
K.  Whether the zoning proposal is in conformity with the policy and intent of the future land use map; and 
L.  Whether there are other existing or changing conditions affecting the use and development of the property which gives supporting grounds for either approval or disapproval of the zoning proposal. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.120 - Future land use map standards. 
    The planning and zoning director, the planning commission and the mayor and council shall consider the following standards governing future land use map amendments. Printed copies of these standards shall be available for distribution to the general public. 
A.  Whether the land use amendment proposal is compatible with the surrounding future land uses as identified in the future development map; 
B.  Whether the land use amendment proposal can be adequately served by existing transportation facilities and other infrastructure, such as schools, water and sewer; 
C.  Whether the land use amendment proposal negatively impacts natural and historic resources identified by the city; 
D.  Whether the land use amendment proposal is in the best interest of the city and the public good and whether the proposal protects the health and welfare of its citizens; 
E.  Whether the property to be affected by the land use amendment proposal has a reasonable economic use as currently designated on the future development map; and 
F.  Whether the land use amendment proposal meets the policies and intent established in the future development map. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.130 - Conditional zoning. 
    Each zoning classification shall have a subheading thereunder to be known as "conditional." 
A.  Whenever an application for amending the official zoning map, amending the future land use map, or for a special use permit or other special permit is accompanied or supported by specific plans and designs or other written requirements for a particular use and its development, the mayor and council may approve the amendment as "conditional." In addition, the planning commission and the planning and zoning director may recommend, and the mayor and council may adopt, conditions to any such actions when deemed necessary to mitigate impacts of the proposal upon surrounding properties consistent with the purpose of this chapter and the comprehensive plan. It shall be the duty of the planning and zoning director to ensure that the development, and use of the property is in strict compliance with the plans, designs and other written requirements adopted and approved as conditions by the mayor and council. 
B.  Upon approval by the mayor and council, said conditional plans shall bear a certificate by the city clerk indicating said approval. One copy of said plan shall be maintained by the city clerk as a part of the record, one copy filed with the planning and zoning director and one copy returned to the applicant. 
C.  If for any reason, development and use of the property approved in accordance with the procedure outlined in subsections A and B above cannot be accomplished, such conditions shall not be altered, changed or varied, except after approval by the mayor and council, in accordance with the procedures for amendments set forth in this chapter, except minor modifications authorized in subsection D below. 
D.  Minor Modification of Final Conditions. The planning and zoning director shall have sole authority to approve minor changes to final conditions that were approved by the mayor and council. For the purposes of this section, a minor change in the final conditions means a slight alteration to a final conditional plan or change in layout or wording of a written condition that does not result in the visible intrusion of any building, structure, driveway, walkway, parking lot, plaza, wall or similar built element into any open space, yard, landscaped buffer, undeveloped space, or any similar space, when any such space is shown on the final conditional plans as being next to and visible from a property line or street; and that is made necessary due to development constraints unknown at the time of adoption of the conditions; and is a minor alteration that will not disturb the primary purpose and intent of the original condition(s) and is consistent with the underlying zoning action, this title, and the comprehensive plan. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.140 - Special use permits. 
A.  Purpose. The purpose of this section is to provide for uses that are potentially compatible with the use characteristics of a zoning district but that require individual review of their location, design, intensity, configuration and public facility impact to determine the appropriateness of the use in any particular site in the district and compatibility with adjacent uses. A special use permit shall not be approved in any zoning district unless it is listed as a special use for the subject district in the use table in Chapter 16.16. 
B.  Application Procedures. 
1.  Special use permit applications may be initiated upon application by the owner(s) of the subject property or the authorized agent of the owner(s). 
2.  Applications for special use permits shall be filed with the planning and zoning director on a form available from the director and shall, at a minimum, include the application requirements of Section 16.12.040(C). 
3.  Application Fees. Application fees shall be established by the mayor and council and shall not be refunded once submitted. 
C.  Staff Analysis, Findings of Fact, and Recommendations. 
1.  The planning and zoning department shall conduct a site inspection and shall prepare an analysis of each application for special use permit and shall present its findings and recommendations in written form to the planning commission. 
2.  Staff recommendations on each application for special use permit shall be based on the criteria contained in subsection I of this section and in addition, as applicable to the use proposed, to the applicable regulations contained in Chapters 16.16 and 16.24. 
3.  Initiation of Ordinance. Prior to action by the mayor and council, the planning and zoning department shall prepare a proposed ordinance to effect the proposed special use permit. 
D.  Public Hearings Required. Before deciding on any special use permit pursuant to the requirements set forth in this section, the planning commission and the mayor and council shall provide for public notice and a public hearing thereon pursuant to the requirements of this section and Section 16.12.070(A). 
E.  Notice. Notice of any proposed application for a special use permit shall be provided as is required in Sections 16.12.070(B)(1), (B)(2) and (B)(3) of this chapter and shall, in addition to the information required in Section 16.12.070(B)(2), indicate the type of special use requested for the subject property. 
F.  Action by the Planning Commission. 
1.  The secretary shall provide the members of the planning commission complete information on each proposed application for special use permit which the planning commission considers including a copy of the application and all supporting materials, all communications and other writings either in support of or in opposition to the application, and the written report and recommendation of the planning and zoning department, applying the required criteria in subsection I of this section as well as the regulations of Chapters 16.16 and 16.24, where applicable, to each application. 
2.  After public notice as required in subsection E, the planning commission shall conduct a public hearing in a manner consistent with Section 16.12.080 of this chapter. Prior to initiating a motion regarding its recommendation to the mayor and council, the planning commission shall review and consider each of the criteria contained in subsection I of this section, and the regulations contained in Chapters 16.16 and 16.24, as applicable to the proposed use. 
3.  The planning commission recommendation on each application shall be based on a determination as to whether or not the applicant has met the criteria contained in subsection I of this section, the regulations contained in Chapters 16.16 and 16.24, as applicable to the use proposed use, and the requirements of the comprehensive plan and zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located. 
4.  The planning commission may recommend the imposition of conditions based upon the facts in a particular case in accordance with Section 16.12.130. 
5.  The planning commission may recommend approval of the application, approval of the application with conditions, approval of the application for a lesser area, extent or intensity, or denial of the application. Failure of a motion to achieve a majority vote on such decision shall result in no recommendation to the mayor and council on the matter. 
G.  Action by the Mayor and Council. 
1.  The planning and zoning director shall provide the mayor and council complete information on each proposed application for special use permit including a copy of the application and all supporting materials, all communications and other writings either in support of or in opposition to the application, the written report and recommendation of the planning and zoning department, and the recommendation of the planning commission. 
2.  After public notice as required in subsection E of this section, the mayor and council shall conduct a public hearing in a manner consistent with Section 16.12.080 of this chapter. Prior to initiating a motion, the mayor and council shall review and consider each of the criteria contained in subsection I of this section, and the regulations contained in Chapters 16.16 and 16.24, as applicable to the proposed use. 
3.  The mayor and council, after conducting the public hearing with public notice required by this section, shall take one of the following actions: 
a.  Vote to approve the application. 
b.  Vote to approve the application with conditions. 
c.  Vote to approve the application for a lesser area, extent or intensity. 
d.  Vote to deny the application. 
e.  Vote to defer the application to its next regular meeting or special called meeting. 
f.  Vote to refer the matter back to the planning commission for another public hearing. Such hearings following referrals shall be re-advertised in accordance with Section 16.12.070. 
4.  The decision of the mayor and council on each application for special use permit shall be based on a discretionary determination as to whether or not the applicant has met the criteria contained in subsection I of this section, the use standards contained in Chapters 16.16 and 16.24, where applicable to the use proposed, the consistency of the application with the comprehensive plan, and the requirements of the zoning district in which such use is proposed to be located. 
H.  Time Limits of Special Use Permits. 
1.  The mayor and council shall specify limits, if any, of the duration of each such special use permit which is approved. 
2.  Subject to any limit in duration, the special use permit shall become an integral part of the zoning applied to the subject property and shall be extended to all subsequent owners and interpreted and continually enforced by the planning and zoning department in the same manner as any other provision of the zoning ordinance, subject to the limitations provided in subsections K, L and M of this section. 
I.  Special Use Permit Criteria. The following criteria shall be applied by the planning and zoning director, the planning commission, and the mayor and council in evaluating and deciding any application for a special use permit. These criteria shall be in addition to any applicable use standards set forth in Chapters 16.16 and 16.24. Printed copies of these standards shall be available for distribution to the general public. No application for a special use permit shall be granted by the mayor and council unless satisfactory provisions and arrangements have been made concerning each of the following criteria, all of which are applicable to each application: 
1.  Whether or not the proposed plan is consistent with all of the requirements of the zoning district in which the use is proposed to be located, including required parking, loading, setbacks and transitional buffers; 
2.  Compatibility of the proposed use with land uses on surrounding properties and other properties within the same zoning district, including the compatibility of the size, scale and massing of proposed buildings in relation to the size, scale and massing of adjacent and nearby lots and buildings; 
3.  Adequacy of the ingress and egress to the subject property, and to all proposed buildings, structures, and uses thereon, including the traffic impact of the proposed use on the capacity and safety of public streets providing access to the subject site; 
4.  Consistency with the county's wastewater treatment system, including the feasibility and impacts of serving the property with public wastewater treatment service and, if an alternative wastewater treatment method is proposed, whether such wastewater treatment method will have a detrimental impact on the environment; 
5.  Adequacy of other public facilities and services, including stormwater management, schools, parks, sidewalks, and utilities, to serve the proposed use; 
6.  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any surrounding properties by reason of noise, smoke, odor, dust, or vibration, or by the character and volume of traffic generated by the proposed use; 
7.  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any surrounding land use by reason of the manner of operation or the hours of operation of the proposed use; and 
8.  Whether or not the proposed use will create adverse impacts upon any environmentally sensitive areas or natural resources. 
J.  Development of an Approved Special Use. The issuance of a special use permit shall only constitute approval of the proposed use, and development of the use shall not be carried out until the applicant has secured all other permits and approvals required. 
K.  Expiration of a Special Use Permit. Unless a building permit or other required approvals is secured within twelve (12) months, and construction subsequently undertaken pursuant to such building permit, the special use permit shall expire automatically unless the permit is extended upon application to the mayor and council in accordance with subsection L of this section. 
L.  Time Extension of a Special Use Permit. The time limitations imposed on special use permits by subsection K and expiration date established pursuant to subsection M of this section may be extended by the mayor and council not more than once, and not for more than twelve (12) months, upon written request by the applicant and approval of the mayor and council. 
M.  Limitations on Approvals for Special Use Permits. A special use permit shall expire automatically and cease to be of any force or effect if such use shall, for any reason, be discontinued for a period of twelve (12) months. 
N.  Modifications to a Special Use Permit. Changes to an approved special use permit, other than time extensions provided under subsection L of this section and minor modifications of final conditions under Section 16.12.130(D), shall be subject to the same application, review and approval process as a new application, including the payment of relevant fees. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.150 - Administrative variances. 
A.  The planning and zoning director shall have the authority to grant limited minor administrative variances from certain provisions of this zoning ordinance, where the planning and zoning director determines that: 
1.  The strict application of the requirements of this zoning ordinance would cause undue and unnecessary hardship to the property owner; and 
2.  The intent and continued integrity of the zoning ordinance can be achieved with equal performance and protection of public interests through grant of the administrative variance. 
B.  All applications for administrative variances shall be submitted to the planning and zoning director on forms approved by the director. The authority to grant such administrative variances shall be limited to variance from the following requirements: 
1.  Front yard or yard adjacent to public street-variance not to exceed ten (10) percent of the footage deducted from the required setback. 
2.  Side yard-variance not to exceed three feet deducted from the required setback. 
3.  Rear yard-variance not to exceed five feet deducted from the required setback. In the NR1, a variance not to exceed one hundred twenty (120) square feet rear addition to the principal building; provided, however, that no addition shall be located within thirty (30) feet of the rear property line. 
4.  Front yards-variance not to exceed five feet from the required setback. 
5.  Height of building-variance not to exceed five feet of the minimum or maximum allowable height. 
6.  Discontinuous building massing-variance not to exceed twenty percent. 
7.  Variation in building silhouettes-variance not to exceed five feet. 
8.  Building step backs-variance not to exceed ten (10) percent. 
9.  Storefront requirements-variance not to exceed twenty (20) percent. 
10.  Landscape zone-variance not to exceed two feet deducted from the required minimum width. 
11.  Street tree spacing-variance not to exceed five feet. 
12.  Sidewalks clear zone-variance not to exceed two feet. 
13.  Outdoor dining encroachment-variance not to exceed two feet. 
14.  Open space calculations-variance not to exceed ten (10) percent. 
15.  Block dimensions-variance not to exceed ten (10) percent. 
C.  The planning and zoning director shall make an "administrative variance decision" for the application. For purposes of this chapter the term "administrative variance decision" means final action by the planning and zoning director which results in an administrative variance approval or an administrative variance denial. 
D.  The decision of the planning and zoning director regarding an administrative variance decision shall be considered the "final decision." Said final decision shall be made no later than forty-five (45) days following filing of a complete application, unless extended by agreement of the applicant. 
E.  Appeals from a final decision on an administrative variance by an aggrieved party shall follow the appeals procedure of Section 16.12.180(A). 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.160 - Board of appeals and adjustments. 
A.  Creation and Membership. There is created a board of appeals and adjustments for the city, the official name of this board to be the "Covington board of appeals and adjustments." The board of appeals and adjustments shall be composed of no fewer than five nor more than nine members, all of whom shall be residents of the city and appointed by the mayor and council. The members shall serve three-year staggered terms without compensation. Original appointments may be made for a lesser number of years, so that the terms of said members may be staggered. Any vacancy in the membership shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council. None of the members shall hold any other public office in the city, except that one member may be also a member of the planning commission. Any member of the board may be removed by the mayor and council for cause, upon written notice of such charge and after public hearing. The members of the board shall serve without compensation. 
B.  Organization, Rules, Officers. The board of appeals and adjustments shall elect one of its members as chairman, who shall serve for one year or until he is reelected or his successor is elected. The board of appeals and adjustments shall appoint a secretary who may be an officer or employee of the city or of the planning commission. The board shall adopt rules, consistent with the provisions of this chapter, for the transaction of its business. Meetings of the board shall be held at the call of the chairman and at such other times as the board may determine. The chairman, or in his absence the acting chairman, may administer oaths and compel the attendance of witnesses by subpoena. The board shall keep accurate and complete minutes of its proceedings, showing the vote of each member upon each question, or if any member should be absent or fail to vote on any question, the minutes shall record such fact; and the board shall also keep records of its examinations and findings and other official actions, all of which shall be immediately filed in the office of the board and shall be a public record. 
C.  Powers. The board of appeals and adjustments shall have the powers to hear and decide variances pursuant to Section 16.12.170 and to hear and decide appeals pursuant to Section 16.12.180(A). 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.170 - Variances. 
    The board of appeals and adjustments may authorize, upon proper application in specific cases, variance from the terms of this zoning ordinance. Request for variance applications shall be filed with the planning and zoning director. All filed applications shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning director and shall provide a written recommendation to the board of appeals and adjustments prior to a final decision. 
A.  General Standards for Application and Approval. 
1.  Prohibited Variances. No variance shall be granted to allow a building, structure or use not authorized in the applicable zoning district, a density of development not authorized within such district, reinstatement of any nonconforming situation, or a special use permit. 
2.  Application Methods. Applications for variances shall include the materials set forth in Section 16.12.040(A)(1) through (A)(6). In addition, a statement showing compliance with each of the standards set forth in subsection (A)(3) below shall be provided. 
3.  Criteria. The board of appeals and adjustments may authorize variances from the terms of this zoning ordinance only upon making all of the following findings: 
a.  There are extraordinary and exceptional conditions pertaining to the particular property in question because of its size, shape or topography; 
b.  The application of this zoning ordinance to the particular piece of property would create an unnecessary hardship; 
c.  Such conditions are peculiar to the particular piece of property involved; 
d.  Such conditions are not the result of any actions of the property owner; and 
e.  Relief, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good nor impair the purposes or intent of this zoning ordinance. 
B.  Board of Appeals and Adjustments Hearings. 
1.  Before deciding a variance application in accordance with this zoning ordinance, the board of appeals and adjustments shall provide for a hearing on the proposed action in accordance with the procedures set forth in Section 16.12.080(A), except that the board of appeals and adjustments shall act upon the variance in accordance with this subsection. 
2.  The provisions regarding public notice set forth in Sections 16.12.070(B)(1) and (B)(2) regarding publication, sign postings, and written notice shall apply to variance applications. 
3.  The board of appeals and adjustments shall make a "variance decision" for each application based upon a determination of the facts and application of the criteria in subsection (A)(3) above. For purposes of this chapter the term "variance decision" means final action by the board of appeals and adjustments which results in a variance approval or a variance denial. 
4.  Variance decisions shall be made no later than forty-five (45) days following filing of a complete application, unless extended by agreement of the applicant. 
5.  The board of appeals and adjustments may impose conditions as it deems necessary in a particular case to protect the public interest and mitigate impacts of the variance upon surrounding properties as part of a variance decision, thereby approving the variance as conditional. 
6.  An application may be withdrawn by the applicant prior to the variance decision. Fees shall not be refunded. 
7.  Appeals of a variance decision of the board of appeals and adjustments by an aggrieved party to the superior court shall be authorized and shall follow the appeal provisions in Section 16.12.180(B). 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.180 - Appeal procedures. 
A.  Appeal to the Board of Appeals and Adjustments. 
1.  Where it is alleged by any aggrieved person, firm or corporation that there is an error in any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the planning and zoning director, or other authorized city official in the performance of duties under this zoning ordinance, such person, firm or corporation may seek a review of such order, requirement, decision or determination by the board of appeals and adjustments. Said appeals shall be filed with the planning and zoning director in writing on forms provided by such director within fifteen (15) days following the date of such order, requirement, decision or determination. 
2.  An appeal stays all legal proceedings in furtherance of the action appealed from unless the official from whom the appeal is taken certifies to the board of appeals and adjustments, after notice of appeal has been filed, that by reasons of facts stated in the certificate, a stay would, in that official's opinion, cause imminent peril to life and property. In such case, proceedings shall be stayed only by a restraining order granted by the Superior Court of Newton County on notice to the officer from whom the appeal is taken and on due cause shown. 
3.  The board of appeals and adjustments shall fix a reasonable time for the hearing of the appeal and provide fifteen (15) days notice thereof as well as written notice to the parties in interest. Any party may appear at the hearing in person, by an agent or by an attorney. The chair of the board of appeals and adjustments shall request that the appeal be identified and read. Following such identification and reading, the chair shall cause the action being appealed to be identified and read. The aggrieved party shall then be allowed a total of ten (10) minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the appeal. If all ten (10) minutes are not used, the aggrieved party's remaining time may be reserved for rebuttal. The acting party and those in opposition to the appeal shall then be allowed a total of ten (10) minutes for presentation of data, evidence and opinion concerning the order, requirement, decision or determination. The presentation times may not be reduced but may be extended by majority vote of the board of appeals and adjustments, provided they are expanded equally for the aggrieved party and the acting party. 
4.  Following the consideration of all testimony, documentary evidence, and matters of record, the board of appeals and adjustments shall make a determination on each appeal. The board of appeals and adjustments shall decide the appeal within a reasonable time but in no event more than forty-five (45) days from the date of the filing of the appeal unless an extension of time is agreed to by the aggrieved party. The board of appeals and adjustments shall reverse, defer, affirm, or modify any order, requirement, decision or determination made by the planning and zoning director or other authorized city official and to that end shall have all the powers of the administrative official from whom the appeal was taken. An appeal shall be sustained or the decision below modified only upon an expressed finding by the board of appeals and adjustments that the authorized city official's action was based on an erroneous finding of a material fact, or that said official's action was arbitrary. The action of the board of appeals and adjustments on an administrative appeal shall be final. 
B.  Appealing a final decision of the board of appeals and adjustments. Any person aggrieved by a final decision of the board of appeals and adjustments, or any officer or department of the city, affected by such decision, may appeal from such decision pursuant to Georgia state law. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.12.190 - Event permits. 
A.  A special event is a temporary amusement, recreational, entertainment, educational or other community interest activity in which the general public is invited and an admission fee may or may not be charged. By way of example, and without limiting the generality of the foregoing, special events shall include art shows, carnival rides and special events of community interest. A special event may occur on public or private property and shall meet the following regulations: 
1.  All applications for a special event permit shall be made to the planning and zoning director on forms provided by the planning and zoning department and shall be filed with the planning and zoning department. 
2.  The planning and zoning director shall have the authority to grant a special event permit upon a determination that the special event permit, if granted, would not cause substantial detriment to the public good, would not negatively affect the safety and welfare of pedestrian and vehicular traffic, nor impair the purposes or intent of this zoning ordinance. The planning and zoning director shall have up to thirty (30) days make a decision on the issuance of the permit from the submission of a completed application. 
3.  Appeals from a decision of the planning and zoning director on an event permit shall be as provided in Section 16.12.180A. 
B.  Any event, whether a special event or private, that will occur on property owned or leased by the city of Covington shall complete the same regulations as set forth in subsection A. of this section. 
(Ord. dated 7/6/16(2), § 1) 
Chapter 16.16 - STANDARD ZONING DISTRICTS 

16.16.010 - Establishments of zoning districts. 
    For the purposes of this zoning ordinance, the city is divided into zoning districts designated as follows: 
A.  NR-1, Neighborhood Residential 1 District. This zoning district is intended primarily for lower density one-family residences and related uses. This district is designed to stabilize and protect the residential characteristics of the district and to encourage a suitable family life on larger lots. 
B.  NR-2, Neighborhood Residential 2 District. This zoning district is intended primarily for medium density one-family residences and related uses. This district is designed to stabilize and protect the residential characteristics of the district and to encourage a suitable family life on smaller lots. 
C.  NR-3, Neighborhood Residential 3 District. This zoning district is intended primarily for higher density one-family residences and related uses. This district is designed to stabilize and protect the residential characteristics of the district and to encourage a suitable family life on smaller lots. 
D.  CR, Corridor Residential District. This zoning district is intended primarily for two-family and multifamily housing and related uses. This district is designed to provide a multifamily residential characteristic with lower densities. 
E.  TCR, Town Center Residential District. This zoning district is intended primarily for two-family and multifamily housing and related uses. This district is designed to provide a multifamily residential characteristic with higher densities. 
F.  NM, Neighborhood Mixed-Use District. This zoning district is intended primarily for mixed-use development and related uses at a lower density. This district provides a location for residences and convenient goods and services directly adjacent to single-family neighborhoods that will satisfy the common and frequent needs of the residents of nearby residential neighborhoods with design standards and design parameters to encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form, oriented to pedestrians, which will limit the conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
G.  CM, Corridor Mixed-Use District. This zoning district is intended primarily for mixed-use development and related uses at a medium density. This district provides a location for residences, retail, goods and services and offices to satisfy the common and frequent needs of the city's businesses and residents with design standards and design parameters to encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form, oriented to pedestrians, which will limit the conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
H.  TCM, Town Center Mixed-Use District. This zoning district is intended primarily for mixed-use development and related uses at a higher density. This district provides a location for residences, retail, goods and services and offices to satisfy the common and frequent needs of the city's commercial core and greater Covington area with design standards and design parameters to encourage a pedestrian-friendly traditional urban form, oriented to pedestrians, which will limit the conflicts between vehicles and pedestrians. 
I.  M1, Light Industrial District. This zoning district is intended for properties that are located on or have ready access to a major street or state highway and are well adapted to light industrial development but whose proximity to residential or commercial districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operation and processes to those that are not objectionable in terms of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors and do not create fire or explosion hazards, or other obnoxious conditions. 
J.  M2, Heavy Industrial District. This zoning district is intended for properties that are located on or have ready access to a major street or state highway and are well adapted to heavy industrial development but whose proximity to residential or commercial districts makes it desirable to limit industrial operation and processes to those that are not objectionable in terms of the emission of noise, vibration, smoke, dust, gas, fumes, odors and do not create fire or explosion hazards, or other obnoxious conditions. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.16.020 - Permitted uses. 
A.  The uses set forth in the table below shall be permitted only as listed within each zoning district and only in the manner so listed. Any use not listed in said table is prohibited in all districts. No use shall be permitted and no structure associated with such use shall be erected, structurally altered or enlarged unless the use is permitted as one of the following: 
1.  P: A permitted use. 
2.  S: A use requiring a special use permit subject to approval following the application procedures and requirements in Chapter 16.12 and the additional criteria of Chapter 16.24. 
3.  A: An accessory use subject to the requirements specified herein and in Chapter 16.24 and those regulations and definitions generally applicable to accessory uses. 
B.  Any use not listed with the letter P, S, or A in a particular zoning district shall be prohibited in that zoning district, unless it is a nonconforming use lawfully established prior to the effective date of the regulation that rendered it legally nonconforming. See Chapter 16.36. 
C.  Any use listed with a "Yes" in the column headed by the words "Suppl. Regs" in the table below shall satisfy the applicable supplemental use standards established in Chapter 16.24 of this chapter. 
D.  Restrictions on the location of telecommunication facilities in certain zoning districts are provided in Chapter 16.56. 
E.  Permitted uses for overlay zoning districts are listed in Chapter 16.20. 
F.  The majority of uses listed in the table below are based on the North American Industry Classification System (NAICS). Where the use is not defined in Chapter 16.08 and where the use has a NAICS code indicated in the table below, the NAICS definition shall apply. For uses that fall within more than one use category, the more detailed definition shall apply: the definition of a six-digit NAICS class usurps the definition of a five-digit NAICS class, the definition of a five-digit NAICS class usurps the definition of a four-digit NAICS class and so on. All remaining uses identified in the zoning ordinance are intended to have the commonly accepted definitions contained in the most recent edition of the Merriam-Webster Dictionary. 
NAICS Code Uses Suppl. 
Regs. NR1 NR2 NR3 CR TCR NM CM TCM M1 M2 AGRICULTURE, 
FORESTRY, FISHING 
AND HUNTING                       Animal Hospitals and Veterinary Clinics Yes S S P P Farming, General Yes P 113 Forestry and Logging (Timber Harvesting) Yes P P P 1114 Greenhouse, Nursery and Floriculture Production P S P P P Keeping and Raising of Farm Animals Yes P P Kennel, Hobby and Pet Boarding Yes A Livestock Quarters and Enclosures Yes P Horse Stables, Riding and Boarding P P P RESIDENTIAL                       624410 Day Care Facility, Adult; Day Care Facility, Child Yes S S S S S S P P P Drug Rehabilitation Center, or Other Facility for Treatment of Drug Dependency Yes S S S S S S Dwelling, Caretaker/Employee Yes P P P P P P P P P Dwelling, Multifamily (less than 5 acres) Yes P P P P P Dwelling, Multifamily (5 acres or more) S S S S S Dwelling, Single-Family Detached P P P P Dwelling, Two-Family (Duplex) P P P Dwelling, Townhouses (5 acres and more) S S S S S Dwelling, Townhouses (less than 5 acres) P P P P P P 623312 Homes for the Elderly S S S S S S P P Home Occupation Yes A A A A A A A A Industrialized Home Yes P P P P P P P P 623110 Nursing Care Facilities S S S S S S P P Parking in NR1, NR2 or NR3 Districts A A A A Personal Care Home, Congregate (16+) Yes S S P P P Personal Care Home, Family (4-6) Yes S S S P P P P P Personal Care Home, Group (7-15) Yes S S P P P Halfway House Yes S S P P P 623220 Residential Mental Health Facility S S P P P Storm Shelter Yes S S S S S P P P Subdivision, Residential P P P P P P P P Transitional Housing Facility S S S S S S Yard Sales Yes A A A A A A A A MINING                       211, 212, 213 Mining, Oil and Gas Extraction, Quarry Yes S Mineral Extraction (Rock for Production and Processing of Crushed Stone) Yes S UTILITIES                       Electric, Petroleum or Gas Substation Yes S S S S S P P 22111 Electric Power Generation Yes S S S S S P P 22133 Stam and Air-Conditioning Supply P Utility Structures and Buildings Yes S S S S S P P CONSTRUCTION                       236 Construction of Buildings (business office only) P P P 238 Specialty Trade Contractors P P P Temporary Structure Yes P P P P P P P P P P MANUFACTURING                       315 Apparel Manufacturing Yes P P 312 Beverage and Tobacco Product Manufacturing Yes P P P P Compost Facility Yes P P 334 Computer and Electronic Product Manufacturing Yes S P S P P 322211 Corrugated and Solid Fiber Box Manufacturing P 335 Elect. Equip., Appliance, and Component Manufacturing Yes P P 332 Fabricated Metal Product Manufacturing Yes P P 311 Food Manufacturing Yes P P 337 Furniture and Related Product Manufacturing Yes P P 316 Leather and Allied Product Manufacturing Yes P P 333 Manufacturing Plants, Machinery Manufacturing Yes P P 339 Miscellaneous Manufacturing (incl. jewelry, toys and musical instruments) Yes S P S P P 327 Nonmetallic Mineral Product Manufacturing Yes S P Outdoor Storage Yes A A A 323 Printing and Related Support Activities Yes P P Recycling Collection Center Yes P P 313 Textile Mills Yes P P 336 Transportation Equipment Manufacturing Yes S P Open Yard Storage Business Yes P 424 Merchant Wholesalers, Nondurable Goods Yes P P 423610 Other Motor Vehicle Electrical and Electronic Equipment Manufacturing Yes P P 423930 Recyclable Material Merchant Wholesalers Yes S P 421, 422 Wholesale Trade Yes P P RETAIL TRADE                       452990 All Other General Merchandise Stores P P P P 453998 All Other Miscellaneous Store Retailers (except Tobacco Stores) P P P 445299 All Other Specialty Food Stores P P P P 441310 Automotive Parts and Accessories Stores S P S P P 445310 Beer, Wine, and Liquor Stores P P P P 441222 Boat Dealers P 451211 Book Stores P P P P 444 Building Material and Garden Equipment and Supplies Dealers Yes S P P P P 443130 Camera and Photographic Supplies Stores P P P P 448150 Clothing Accessories Stores P P P P Convenience Store S P S P P 446120 Cosmetics, Beauty Supplies, and Perfume Stores P P P P 452110 Department Store P P P 454110 Electronic Shopping and Mail-Order Houses P P P P 443 Electronics and Appliance Stores P P P P 442210 Floor Covering Stores P P P P 453110 Florists P P P P 445 Food and Beverage Stores P P P P 445230 Fruit and Vegetable Markets S P P P P P P 442 Furniture and Home Furnishings Stores P P P P 447110 Gasoline Station with Convenience Store Yes P P P P P 447 Gasoline Stations Yes P P P P P 452 General Merchandise Stores P P P P P P 453220 Gift, Novelty, and Souvenir Stores P P P P P P 444130 Hardware Stores P P P P P P 446 Health and Personal Care Stores P P P P P P 444110 Home Centers P P P P 443111 Household Appliance Stores P P P P 448310 Jewelry Stores P P P P P 454312 Liquefied Petroleum Gas (Bottled Gas) Dealers S P 448320 Luggage and Leather Goods Stores P P P P P P 453 Miscellaneous Store Retailers P P P P P P 441 Motor Vehicle Sales Yes S P S P 451212 News Dealers and Newsstands P P P P P P P 444220 Nursery and Garden Centers P P P P 453210 Office Supplies and Stationery Stores P P P P P P 446130 Optical Goods Stores P P P P P P Outdoor Display A A A A 444190 Other Building Material Dealers P P P P 444120 Paint and Wallpaper Stores P P P P 52229 Pawn Shops Yes S S S P 453910 Pet and Pet Supplies Stores P P P P 446110 Pharmacies and Drug Stores P P P P P 443112 Radio, Television, and Other Electronics Stores P P P P 441210 Recreational Vehicle Dealers P 451130 Sewing, Needlework, and Piece Goods Stores P P P P P P 451120 Shopping Center P P P 451110 Sporting Goods Stores P P P Temporary Use, Commercial Retail Yes P P P P 453991 Tobacco Stores P P P P 453310 Used Merchandise Store (except pawn shops) P P P P TRANSPORTATION AND WAREHOUSING                       481 Air Transportation; Airport, Private P 492110 Couriers P P P 488510 Freight Transportation Arrangement P 484210 General Freight Trucking, Local P 493110 General Warehousing and Storage P P Intermodal Terminal Facility P 485210 Interurban and Rural Bus Transportation P P 493110 Mini-warehouses and Self-Storage Units Yes P P P 488490 Other Support Activities for Road Transportation P 488991 Packing and Crating P Parking and Storage of Large Vehicles P 487110 Scenic and Sightseeing Transportation, Land P P Storage Tank, Bulk, Flammable Liquids Yes P 4881 Support Activities for Air Transportation (incl. airports) Yes P P 485310 Taxi Service P P 485 Transit and Ground Passenger Transportation P P P COMMUNICATIONS                       Antenna, Amateur Radio Yes P P P P P P P P P P Antenna, Satellite Yes P P P P P P P P P P 515, 517 Broadcasting and Telecommunications Buildings P P P P 515 Cable and Other Program Distribution P S P P 518 Data Processing Services P P P P 512 Motion Picture and Sounds Recording Industries P S P P 512131 Motion Picture Theaters (except Drive-Ins) P P P P 519 Other Information Services (archives, internet publishing, broadcasting) P P P P 511 Publishing Industries P P P P 51511 Radio Stations P P P P 51512 Television Broadcasting Stations P P P P 517110 Wired Telecommunications Carrier Buildings P P FINANCE AND INSURANCE                       522110 Commercial Banking P P S P 522291 Consumer Lending S P S P 522130 Credit Unions S P S P 524210 Insurance Agencies and Brokerages P P P P 522120 Savings Institutions P P S P 523120 Securities Brokerage S P S REAL ESTATE AND RENTAL AND LEASING                       532411 Commercial Air, Rail, and Water Transportation Equipment Rental and Leasing P P P 532412 Construction, Mining, and Forestry Machinery and Equipment Rental and Leasing P 532310 General Rental Centers P P 5312 Offices of Real Estate Agents and Brokerages P P P P 532111 Passenger Car Rental Yes P P 532230 Video Tape and Disc Rental P P P P PROFESSIONAL, SCIENTIFIC AND TECHNICAL SERVICES                       54181 Advertising Agencies P P P P 541870 Advertising Material Distribution Services P P 541922 Commercial Photography S P P P 541512 Computer Systems Design Services P P P P P 541511 Custom Computer Programming Services P P P P 541860 Direct Mail Advertising P P P 541330 Engineering Services P P P P 541430 Graphic Design Services P P P P 541320 Landscape Architecture Services P P P P 541211 Offices of Certified Public Accountants P P P P Office, Professional P P P P 541890 Other Services Related to Advertising P P P 541614 Process, Physical Distribution and Logistics Consulting Services P P P 54 Professional Services P P P P 541820 Public Relations Agencies P P P P 541710 Research and Development P P P P P 541370 Surveying and Mapping Services P P P P P 541213 Tax Preparation Services P P P P 541380 Testing Laboratories P S P P 541940 Veterinary Services Yes S P P P P MANAGEMENT OF COMPANIES AND ENTERPRISES                       551 Management of Companies and Enterprises P P P ADMINISTRATIVE AND WASTE MANAGEMENT AND REMEDIATION SERVICES                       561740 Carpet and Upholstery Cleaning Services P P 561440 Collection Agencies P P 561710 Exterminating and Pest Control Services P P P Landfill, Sanitary (Municipal) Yes S 561730 Landscaping Services P P 561622 Locksmiths P P P 561439 Other Business Service Centers (including Copy Shops) S P P P 561510 Travel Agencies P P P P P P P EDUCATIONAL SERVICES                       6113 Colleges, Universities, and Professional Schools S P S P P 611710 Educational Support Services Yes S P P P S 51912 Libraries and Archives Yes S S S P P P P P S 6116 Other Schools and Institutions S S S P P P S S P P 611110 Schools, K-12 Yes S S S P S P S S S S 61151 Technical and Trade Schools P S P S S P P HEALTH CARE AND SOCIAL ASSISTANCE                       621 Ambulatory Health Care Services S P P 532411 Commercial Air, Rail and Water Transportation Equipment Rental and Leasing P P P 624120 Day Care Center, Adult (For Day Care Facility, see Residential Use category) Yes S S S P P S 624410 Day Care Center, Child (For Day Care Facility, see Residential Use category) Yes S S S P P S 525 Funds, Trusts and Other Financial Vehicles (health and welfare included) S P P P 622110 General Medical and Surgical Hospitals Yes S P P 532291 Home Health Equipment Rental S P P P 524 Insurance Carriers and Related Activities P P P P Medical, Dental Clinic S P P 339116 Medical, Dental Laboratories S P P P P 621511 Medical Laboratories S P P P P 623 Nursing and Residential Care Facilities S P P 621111 Offices of Physicians P P P ARTS, ENTERTAINMENT AND RECREATION                       Adult Entertainment Establishments Yes P P 713110 Amusement and Theme Parks Yes P S 713120 Amusement Arcades Yes P 713950 Bowling Centers P P P 713940 Fitness and Recreational Sports Centers (incl. Public Swimming Pool) Yes P P P P P P P P P P 713910 Golf Courses and Country Clubs P P P P P P P 713990 Indoor Shooting Range P P 712 Museums, Historical Sites, and Similar Institutions S S S S S P P P 712190 Nature Parks and Other Similar Institutions P P P P P P P P P 711 Performing Arts, Spectator Sports, and Related Activities (incl. Amphitheater, Stadiums and Concert Halls) S P P P P Recreation Center and Club, Private P P P P 711211 Sports Teams and Clubs Yes S S S S S S P P P P Swimming Pool, Home Yes A A A A A A A A 712130 Zoos and Botanical Gardens Yes P ACCOMMODATION AND FOOD SERVICES                       721191 Bed and Breakfast Inn Yes S S S P P P P P 722320 Caterers S P P P 72211 Full-Service Restaurants P P P P P P Hotels and Motels Yes S P P P P 72111 Hotels and Motels/Extended Stay Yes P P 722211 Limited-Service Restaurants (incl. fast food) P P P P P P P 722213 Ice Cream Parlors P P P P P 721214 Recreational and Vacation Camps (except Campgrounds) S P 721310 Rooming and Boarding Houses Yes S S S P 721211 Recreational Vehicle (RV) Parks and Campgrounds Yes P OTHER SERVICES 
(EXCEPT PUBLIC 
ADMINISTRATION)                       92312 Administration of Public Health Programs S P P P 811412 Appliance Repair and Maintenance Yes S S S P Automobile Impound Lot Yes S S 811192 Automobile Wash Services Yes S P S P P 8111 Automotive, Repair and Maintenance Yes S S S S P Banquet Hall P P P P 812111, 812112 Barber Shops and Beauty Salons S P P P P P 812910 Boarding and Breeding Kennels Yes S P 812220 Cemeteries, Mausoleums and Colabariums Yes S S S S S S S S S S 812220 Crematory Yes S P P 8134 Civic and Social Organizations S S S S S P P P P 811310 Commercial and Industrial Machinery and Equipment (except Automotive and Electronic) Repair and Maintenance P P 811212 Computer and Office Machine Repair and Maintenance P P P P 811211 Consumer Electronics Repair and Maintenance P P P P 812320 Dry Cleaning and Laundry Services (except Coin-Operated) Yes S P S P Equestrian Training and Sales Facility S P P P 811430 Footwear and Leather Goods Repair P P P P P P 812210 Funeral Homes and Funeral Services P P S P Funeral Homes and Funeral Services with Crematory S S S S 811411 Home and Garden Equipment Repair and Maintenance S P P 812332 Industrial Launderers P P 812320 Laundromat (coin operated) P P P P P P 812331 Linen Supply P P P 812930 Parking Lot and Garages A A A P P P P P P P Place of Worship (less than 10 acres) P P P P P P P P S S Place of Worship (10 acres and more) Yes S S S S S S P P S S 813920 Professional Organizations (incl. health professional's associations) P P P P 926150 Regulation, Licensing and Inspection of Miscellaneous Commercial Sectors P P P 811420 Reupholstery and Furniture Repair S P P Tattoo and Body Piercing Parlor/Studio P P 813212 Voluntary Health Organizations S P P P  
(Ord. dated 5/4/15(1), §§ 1, 3; Ord. dated 9/15/14(2), § 2; Ord. dated 9/15/14(1), § 1; Ord. dated 7/1/13, § 1; Ord. dated 11-19-12(3), § 1; Ord. dated 10-15-12(2), § 2; Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 3(1-11); Ord. dated 4/4/11, § 2; Ord. dated 3/7/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/3/10, § 1(Exh. A); Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 9/21/15(1), § 1; Ord. dated 5/2/16(4), § 1; Ord. dated 7/6/16(1), §§ 1.A., B.; Ord. dated 3/5/18(1), § 2; Ord. dated 4/2/18(1), § 2, 3; Ord. dated 4/2/18(2), § 2; Ord. dated 7/2/18(1), §§ 1-7; Ord. dated 11-13-18(3), §§ 1, 2) 
16.16.030 - Space dimensions. 
    The following table set forth the space dimensions required for each zoning district. 
A.  Where a rear yard abuts upon a street, no structure shall be closer to the rear lot line than the required front yard setbacks found in the Street Type Dimensions Table in Section 16.28.030. 
B.  For size limitations on accessory uses and structures see Section 16.20.020. 
C.  For all landscape zone, sidewalk, minimum building height and front yard dimensions reference Chapter 16.28. In the case of a corner lot which abuts any two intersecting streets, the minimum side yard setback for the side of the building or structure facing a street shall be two-thirds of the front yard setback for that street in the district as listed in the Streetscape Dimensions Table in Section 16.28.030. 
SPACE 
DIMENSIONS 
TABLE Neighborhood 
Residential 1 Neighborhood 
Residential 2 Neighborhood 
Residential 3 Corridor 
Residential Town Center 
Residential Neighborhood Mix Corridor Mix Town Center Mix Industrial 1 Industrial 2 Building Coverage (Max, % of lot area) 35% 70% 80% 70% 100% 80% 80% 100% 60% 60% Open Space (Min, a % of lot area) N/A N/A N/A 20% 10% 10% 20% 10% 10% 10% Impervious Surface (Max, % of lot area) 45% 80% 90% 70% 100% 90% 90% 100% 80% 80% Max Building Height (Max, in feet and floors) 35' 35' 35' 60' 70' 50' 75' 70' N/A N/A Dwelling Gross Floor Area (Min, in square feet) 1,500 1,200 900 N/A N/A 900 N/A N/A N/A N/A Dwelling Gross Floor Area (Min, in square feet) (One bedroom multifamily dwelling) N/A N/A N/A 900 600 900 600 600 N/A N/A Lot Area (Min, in square feet) 12,000 5,000 1,800 N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Lot Width (Min, in feet) 75' 50' 20' N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A Side Yard (Min, in feet) 10' 7' 5 10' or 0' N/A 10' or 0' 10' or 0' N/A 20' 20' Rear Yard (Min, in feet) 20' 20' 5 20' N/A 10' 20' N/A 20' 20'  
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 5/18/15(1); Ord. dated 7/2/18, §§ 8-14; Ord. dated 11-13-18(2), § 1) 
Chapter 16.20 - SUPPLEMENTAL USE PROVISIONS 

16.20.010 - Supplemental use regulations. 
    The regulations set forth in this zoning ordinance within each district are the minimum regulations that apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land. The following regulations also shall apply to each type of use listed, whether such use is authorized as of right or by special use permit. When applied to special use permits these regulations shall be in addition to all additional criteria and procedures set forth in Section 16.12.140. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.020 - Accessory uses. 
    Accessory uses shall be permitted as follows: 
A.  Accessory uses for commercial development shall include those normally appurtenant to such development, as provided for in other sections of this zoning ordinance. 
B.  Any accessory use normally appurtenant to a permitted use shall be allowed provided such use shall conform with all performance standards set forth for that district as well as any conditions of zoning. 
C.  Accessory structures and uses shall be located on the same lot as the principal structure to which they are accessory. 
D.  Accessory structures and uses shall not be permitted in a required front or side yard. 
E.  Accessory uses and structures such as garages, greenhouses or workshops, shall not be rented or occupied for gain. 
F.  No accessory building shall be constructed upon a lot until construction of the principal structure has commenced. 
G.  Where a corner lot adjoins in the rear a lot in a NR1 and NR2 district, no accessory structure shall be located closer to the side street right-of-way line than the principal structure or closer than twenty-five (25) feet from the rear property line. 
H.  No garage or other accessory structure shall be located closer than three feet from a side or rear lot line. 
I.  When an accessory structure is attached to the principal structure by breezeway, passageway or similar means, it shall comply with the yard requirements of the principal structure to which it is accessory. 
J.  Residential sheds, workshops, greenhouses or other such accessory structures shall be located in a rear yard, are limited to one story and shall not exceed four hundred (400) square feet in size. 
K.  In all zoning districts, no accessory use or structure shall be permitted in public rights-of-way except mailboxes, sidewalks, driveways, light posts, and decorative landscaping, subject to city approval. 
L.  Accessory use swimming pools having a depth of two feet or more at any point: 
1.  Shall be permitted only upon written approval of the city health department to indicate compliance with applicable health department swimming pool regulations; 
2.  Shall be located a minimum of ten (10) feet from any property line; and 
3.  Shall be completely enclosed with an adequate protective fence of not less than six feet in height with appropriate closure. 
M.  Swimming pools, fitness or recreation centers and other recreational facilities shall be permitted as accessory uses or structures for hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels/motels. 
N.  Accessory uses for NR1, NR2 and NR3 districts. Accessory uses, structures and yards are permitted as follows: 
1.  Structures. 
a.  Every structure shall be located on a lot as herein defined. In no case shall there be more than one main residential building and its accessory building on one lot. Zero-lot-line dwellings may be considered as one main residential structure. 
b.  No accessory structure shall have a square footage of twenty-five (25) percent of the total conditioned square footage of the primary structure, or six hundred (600) feet, whichever is less. 
c.  No accessory living quarters, whether attached or detached and including garage apartments, shall be located in an NR1 zone, except that a bona fide guest house where no rent is paid or servant's quarters shall be permitted upon a lot with an area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more. Such accessory structure may be detached from the primary structure and shall not be closer than ten (10) feet to any lot line. 
2.  Uses. 
a.  Accessory uses may generally be considered include as private garages, stables, storehouses, greenhouses, children's playhouses, summerhouses, home workshops and swimming pools. 
b.  Animals. Private stables will be permitted upon a lot with an area of fifteen thousand (15,000) square feet or more only in an NR1 district. Dogs, mules, cows, chickens and other domestic animals may be kept for noncommercial purposes. 
O.  Donation boxes intended to be used for the unmanned collection of donated and secondhand goods and merchandise for the purpose of redistribution. 
1.  Locations. Unmanned donation boxes shall only be placed on property within corridor mixed use or neighborhood mixed use zoning districts. 
2.  Setbacks. 
a.  Donation boxes shall be placed within the building setback requirements of the parcel on which they are located and shall not encroach into a front, side or rear setback areas. 
b.  Donation boxes shall be located on a concrete pad or paved area constructed of sufficient strength for the donation box, equipment and vehicles that will utilize the boxes. 
3.  Requirements and Maintenance. The box owner and/or operator shall cause to be operated and maintained unmanned donation boxes located in the city as follows: 
a.  Donation boxes shall display the following contact information in two-inch letters visible from the front of each box: the name, address, email and phone number of the owner and operator, if the operator is different from the owner; 
b.  It shall be the duty of the owner and/or operator of a donation box to maintain such box in good condition and appearance without structural damage, holes, visible rust, or graffiti; 
c.  Donation boxes shall be locked or otherwise secured; 
d.  Donation boxes shall be serviced and emptied as frequently as necessary to prevent overflow; 
e.  No items shall be deposited on or outside a donation box, and all such items shall be considered property of the owner and/or operator of the box, who shall be responsible for enforcing this subsection; and 
f.  Donation boxes shall be no larger than seven feet tall, seven feet wide and seven feet deep. 
4.  The owner of the property on which the donation box is placed shall be ultimately responsible for maintenance of the site of such box and shall be held responsible for such box in the event the box owner or operator is unavailable or fails to undertake action necessary for proper compliance with this subparagraph. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 1/5/15, § 1) 
16.20.030 - Adult entertainment establishments. 
    Adult entertainment establishments shall be as defined by Title 5, Chapter 5.08 of the city of Covington Municipal Code. Adult entertainment establishments shall be governed and regulated as defined by said title and chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.040 - Amusement, arcade, amusement theme park. 
A.  Outdoor recreation facilities consisting of amusement rides, games, water slides, amusement vehicles, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, batting cages, water slides or any similar commercial outdoor recreation shall be limited as follows: 
1.  Minimum lot size: Five acres. 
2.  Maximum lot size: Twenty (20) acres. 
3.  All commercial outdoor recreation facilities and equipment must be enclosed within an eight-feet high fence with gates that are to be locked except when the facility is open to the public. 
4.  Outdoor recreation activities are limited to the hours of ten a.m. to ten p.m. 
5.  A site plan shall be prepared at a scale of one inch equal to fifty (50) feet to indicate access and egress, type, location and height of recreation facilities, buildings and other structures and lights, parking areas, landscaping, buffers and drainage. A site location plan at a scale of one inch equal to two hundred (200) feet shall illustrate surrounding property uses and the location of the nearest residence. 
6.  The site shall have at least one approved entrance to a street classified as an arterial. 
7.  All outdoor equipment, rides, vehicles and structures taller than thirty-five (35) feet shall be setback at least two hundred (200) feet from property lines, and shall meet all other district height requirements. 
8.  Lighting must be designed to direct light downward and away from adjacent properties. 
9.  An environmental-acoustical study shall be submitted to the planning and zoning director for review and approval. The study shall be prepared by an acoustical engineer indicating compliance with all Covington noise ordinances. It shall identify and analyze all sources of noise emanating from the site including outdoor speakers, sound effects or sound systems as well as rides, vehicles, and mechanical equipment. Noise levels shall not exceed sixty-five (65) decibels, dbA measured at property lines. 
10.  A 100-foot buffer shall be maintained adjacent to all abutting NR1, NR2 and NR3 zoned property. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.050 - Animal hospitals and veterinary clinics-Horse stables, riding and boarding. 
    Animal hospitals, veterinary clinics, horse stables and riding and boarding shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet from any NR1, NR2 and NR3 zoned property. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.060 - Antennae, amateur radio. 
A.  No such antenna structure, including any support upon which it may be constructed, shall exceed a combined height of fifty (50) feet. 
B.  Amateur radio service antenna structures exceeding fifty (50) feet in height shall be permitted only by the board of zoning appeals subject to all of the requirements of the zoning ordinance. 
C.  Amateur radio service antennae shall be located a distance of at least one-half the height of the tower from all property lines. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.070 - Antennae, satellite. 
A.  Satellite antennae shall be located as follows: 
1.  In any CR, TCR, NM, CM, TCM, M1 and M2 district, satellite antennae may be located anywhere in the buildable area of the lot or on a building thereon, subject to applicable zoning district setback regulations. 
2.  In NR1, NR2 and NR3 districts, satellite antennae shall be located only to the rear of any principal structure. If usable communication signals cannot be obtained from the rear location, the satellite antenna may be located in the side yard. Both locations shall be subject to applicable zoning district setbacks or regulations. 
3.  In the event that usable satellite communication signals cannot be received by locating the antennae in the rear or to the side of the principal structure, such antennae may be placed in the front yard or on the roof of the dwelling, provided that approval of the planning and zoning director shall be obtained prior to such installation. The planning and zoning director shall issue such a permit only upon a showing by the applicant that usable communication signals are not receivable from any location on the property other than the location selected by the applicant. 
B.  Satellite antennae shall comply with the following regulations for height, screening and grounds: 
1.  In any NR1, NR2 and NR3 district a satellite antenna shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in diameter. 
2.  A ground-mounted satellite antenna shall not exceed twenty (20) feet in height including any platform or structure upon which said antenna is mounted or affixed. All non-ground-mounted satellite antennae shall not exceed thirty-five (35) feet in height. 
3.  If usable satellite signals cannot be obtained from an antenna installed in compliance with the height limitation imposed by subsection (B)(2) above, such satellite antenna may be installed at a greater height, provided the greater height is approved by the planning and zoning director. Such approval shall be granted only upon a showing by the applicant that installation at a greater height is necessary for the reception of usable communication signals. Under no circumstances shall said antennae exceed fifty (50) feet in height. 
4.  Except in CR, TCR, NM, CM, TCM, M1 and M2 districts, satellite antennae shall be located and designed to screen and reduce visual impact from surrounding properties at street level and from public streets. 
5.  All satellite antennae shall meet all manufacturers' specifications, be located on noncombustible and corrosion-resistant material and be erected in a secure, wind-resistant manner. 
6.  All satellite antennae shall be adequately grounded for protection against a direct strike of lightning. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.080 - Appliance repair and maintenance. 
    Any structure used for appliance repair and maintenance shall be located and its activities conducted at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned NR1, NR2 or NR3, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject properties. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.090 - Automobile impound lot. 
    Any structure used for an automobile impound lot shall be located and its activities conducted at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned NR1, NR2 or NR3, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject properties. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.100 - Automotive repair and maintenance. 
A.  Outdoor storage of automobiles, parts and equipment shall be limited to a maximum of ten (10) percent of the parcel area and shall otherwise conform to the requirements of Section 16.20.500 of this code. 
B.  No boundary line of a property used for automobile repair and maintenance with outdoor storage shall be closer than two hundred (200) feet to the nearest boundary line of any property zoned NR1, NR2 or NR3. 
C.  All automobile repair and maintenance activity shall be conducted indoors. 
D.  No junkyard or salvage yard shall be maintained or permitted to exist on property used for automobile repair and maintenance. 
(Ord. dated 9/19/11, § 3; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.110 - Automobile wash services. 
    Automobile wash services shall provide a paved area located on the same lot for the storage of vehicles awaiting service. Said space shall be adequate in size to accommodate the number of vehicles equal to one-third of the practical hourly capacity of the washing facilities. The preceding space requirements do not apply to automobile service stations which provide automobile wash services as an accessory use. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.120 - Bed and breakfast inn. 
A.  The operator of the establishment shall reside on the site. 
B.  The use shall have a lot area of not less than twenty thousand (20,000) square feet and a floor area within the dwelling unit of no less than two thousand five hundred (2,500) square feet. 
C.  No guest shall reside in a bed and breakfast inn for a period in excess of fourteen (14) consecutive days. 
D.  One parking space shall be provided for each guest bedroom, and one space shall be provided for the operator's or owner's unit in the building. 
E.  Increased automobile traffic in the neighborhood caused by the use shall not negatively impact the residential character of the neighborhood. 
F.  The proposed use shall not exceed customary residential noise levels. 
G.  No restaurant use shall be permitted. Breakfast only may be served on the premises and only for guests and employees of the bed and breakfast inn. 
H.  Rooms shall not be equipped with cooking facilities. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.130 - Boarding and breeding kennels. 
    Boarding and breeding kennels shall locate all structures and elements used for housing animals, at least two hundred (200) feet from any property zoned NR1, NR2 or NR3. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.140 - Building material and garden equipment and supplies dealers. 
A.  All outside storage shall be completely screened from view from all streets and adjacent NR1, NR2 or NR3 zoned property. 
B.  Security fencing, a minimum of six feet in height, shall be provided around the outside of all storage areas. 
C.  All storage areas shall be maintained in a manner so as to limit dust from drifting onto adjoining properties. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.150 - Cemeteries. 
A.  Private and public cemeteries shall comply with all provisions of state law. In addition: 
1.  A plat of the cemetery shall be recorded in the office of the clerk of Superior Court of Newton County. 
2.  Any new cemetery shall be located on a site containing not less than twenty (20) acres. 
3.  The site proposed for a cemetery shall not interfere with the development of a system of collector or larger streets in the vicinity of such site. In addition, such site shall have direct access to a thoroughfare by an access way of not less than twenty (20) feet wide. 
4.  Any new cemetery shall be enclosed by a fence or wall not less than six feet in height. 
(Ord. dated 11-19-12(4), § 1; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.160 - Crematories. 
    Crematories shall comply with all provisions of state law. In addition: 
A.  The crematory shall have no more than one cremation unit per location. 
B.  The crematory will be owned and operated by a licensed funeral home. The crematory will be used solely by the funeral home for customers having services at the location of the licensed funeral home and operate as an off-site accessory type use to the funeral home and not as a customer-based independent business. 
C.  The crematory shall not front on a major thoroughfare or arterial street. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.170 - Child and personal care uses. 
    Day nurseries, kindergartens; and nursing, convalescent, or rest homes not used primarily for the treatment of contagious diseases, alcoholism, drug addiction, or mental illness shall meet all applicable state requirements and shall receive all necessary board of health and state and local fire marshal approvals prior to issuance of a permit for construction and operation. Day nurseries and kindergartens shall have the following additional criteria; 
A.  The lot on which such uses are established shall have access on a major or minor thoroughfare; 
B.  There shall be not less than thirty (30) square feet of indoor play area for each child at maximum enrollment, and not less than one hundred (100) square feet per child of outdoor play area at maximum enrollment; 
C.  The outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence not less than four feet in height; and 
D.  A circular drive shall be provided for off-street loading and unloading of children. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.180 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 1 of an ordinance adopted Aug. 2, 2010, deleted and reserved § 16.20.180, which had pertained to college and universities, and derived from an Ord. dated 6/30/08. 
16.20.190 - Compost facility. 
A.  Composting materials shall be limited to tree stumps, branches, leaves, grass clippings or similar putrescent vegetative materials. They shall not include manure, animal products or inorganic materials such as bottles, cans, plastics, metals or similar materials. 
B.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a three-foot high landscaped earthen berm with a maximum slope of three to one and/or a minimum six-foot high, one hundred (100) percent opaque, solid wooden fence or masonry wall. The fence/wall or berm must be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscaped strip. The finished side of a fence/wall shall face the exterior property lines. 
C.  Minimum acreage required-three acres. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.200 - Day care center, adult-Day care center, child. 
A.  The use shall comply with all applicable state day care requirements for standards, licensing and inspections. 
B.  The use must provide at least one hundred (100) square feet of outdoor recreation area per child. 
C.  The outdoor play area must be enclosed with a six-foot high fence. 
D.  The use shall provide paved driveways with drop-off areas and turnarounds to be reviewed by the department so that traffic associated with the use does not impede the flow of traffic on adjacent streets. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.210 - Day care facility, adult-Day care facility, child. 
A.  The use shall comply with all applicable state day care requirements for standards, licensing and inspections. 
B.  The use shall maintain a residential appearance compatible with the neighborhood and not be detrimental to adjacent properties as a result of traffic, noise, light, refuse, parking or other activities. 
C.  No sign for use shall be maintained on the site. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.220 - Dry cleaning plants. 
A.  Dry cleaning plants shall meet the following requirements: 
1.  Dry cleaning plants using systems which make use of solvents rated at above forty (40) according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. Standard of Classification known as Class I systems shall be prohibited. 
2.  Dry cleaning plants which make use of solvents rated at more than five but less than forty (40) according to the Underwriters' Laboratories, Inc. Standard of Classification, known as Class II and III systems, shall not be established in buildings with other occupancy and shall only be established in buildings which shall be set back not less than twenty (20) feet from any side or rear property line and another building. 
3.  The applicant for such a plant shall certify in writing at the time of application that all the above conditions shall be met. 
4.  Such plant shall comply with all of the requirements of the city, county and state fire prevention codes. 
5.  Such plant shall be designed to operate in a manner that will not emit smoke, odor, or objectionable waste materials and which will not produce noise that will carry beyond the walls of the building occupied by such plant. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.230 - Drug rehabilitation center. 
A.  If abutting NR1, NR2, NR3, CR or TCR districts the following standards shall apply: 
1.  No meals or overnight accommodation shall be provided. 
2.  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, front yard, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
3.  Services shall only be provided on a temporary, "out-patient basis" during daylight hours, and consistent with subsection (A)(1) above. 
4.  At least one thousand (1,000) feet shall separate a drug rehabilitation center from another drug rehabilitation center, transitional housing facility, rooming and boarding house, or personal care home. 
5.  The operator must be licensed to provide treatment and rehabilitation services for persons with drug and alcohol dependency by the state of Georgia. 
6.  If a rezoning or special use permit application is made for location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center or other facility for treatment of any dependency, public hearing requirements shall conform to O.C.G.A. Section 36-66-4(f). 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.240 - Dwelling, caretaker/employee. 
    The use must maintain a residential appearance and shall produce no impacts in appearance, noise, light and traffic that are detrimental to surrounding properties. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.250 - Dwelling, multifamily. 
    The purpose of the multifamily dwelling supplemental use provisions are to ensure that new multifamily development implements and exemplifies quality architecture and construction, appropriately connects to its surroundings, meets the demands of future generations for design variety and interest, includes well designed amenities and open spaces, orients outward to the community, promotes sustainability, and contributes to walkable and safe environments. 
A.  In the corridor mixed use, town center mixed use and town center residential zoning districts, where higher density and urbanization are sought, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Unless otherwise stated here, the space dimensions of the corresponding zoning district shall comply with those of the zoning district as found in Section 16.16.030. 
2.  Maximum gross density shall not exceed sixteen (16) units per acre. 
3.  For projects containing more than five contiguous acres the following requirements shall be met. 
a.  Special use permit. 
b.  Master plan of the project containing all proposed elements (i.e., residential and non-residential uses), the phasing of development, the total square feet of improvements, overall project density and density of phases and specific nodes if applicable. The master plan, as a condition of approval, is binding and indicative of what shall be developed. Changes to an approved master plan shall only be made by a majority vote of the city council. 
c.  A density bonus of an additional ten (10) units per acre may be granted upon compliance with the following criteria: 
i.  To prevent the undesirable effects of incompatible densities and to reduce the dependency of the automobile, the core of the multifamily dwellings shall be within walking distance from areas of commerce that provides convenient goods and services to satisfy the daily and common needs of nearby residents. Walking distance is defined as no more than one-fourth of a mile to absolute center of an area of commerce via safe, pedestrian designated walk ways such as improved sidewalks and identified multi-use paths. 
ii.  Conserving a total of forty (40) percent open space of the overall project area to be used as passive recreation common area to be owned and maintained by the owner or owner's association. Stormwater detention and water quality areas shall not count towards this open space requirement for a density bonus. A system of pedestrian pathways consisting of sidewalks or multi-use paths shall be provided linking multifamily structures to the common area(s). 
4.  The minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit shall not be less than six hundred (600) square feet. 
5.  Multifamily buildings shall contain a minimum of three stories. 
6.  Primary building entrances shall be visibly emphasized and accessible from a street or sidewalk. Entrances that do not face a street shall face a pedestrian path that connects directly to a street, sidewalk, courtyard or plaza. The primary building entrance shall not overlook a designated parking lot. Multifamily buildings constructed as part of a larger mixed use development may front towards designated community courtyards and improved common areas. 
7.  Exterior corridors and stairways that provide access to multiple units and multiple floors are prohibited. All primary entrances into individual units shall be from an air conditioned and heated interior corridor. 
8.  An interior lobby containing a minimum of three hundred (300) square feet in size shall be provided at the ground level of each building. 
9.  To reduce the perceived height and bulk, façade walls that exceed eighty (80) continuous horizontal feet shall utilize offsets such as full height projections or recesses a minimum of twenty (20) inches in depth. This adds architectural interest and variety, creates the appearance of separate buildings and shall vary in appearance with different finish colors, architectural features, building materials, etc. 
10.  The minimum distance separating multifamily buildings shall be twenty (20) linear feet from side-to-side and forty (40) linear feet from front-to-front, front-to-rear, and rear-to-rear. 
11.  Architectural standards: 
a.  A minimum of two and a maximum of four of the following exterior finished materials may be used on a multi-family dwelling: 
i.  Clay masonry brick. 
ii.  Natural stone. 
iii.  Manufactured stone. 
iv.  Traditional stucco. 
b.  A maximum of twenty (20) percent of the total building wall area, with each façade being calculated independently, may contain the following materials: 
i.  Fiber cement siding, at least ?-inch thick. 
ii.  Natural wood siding. 
iii.  Natural wood shake. 
c.  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) siding is prohibited. 
d.  Soffits, eaves, trim and window frames may be finished in PVC or aluminum clad materials. Natural wood in shall not be used for these applications unless specified within a historic district. 
e.  Where multiple exterior materials are used on a single building, they shall only be combined on each face horizontally, with the heavier material below the lighter. For example, brick below fiber cement siding. 
f.  The rear and side facades shall be of the same construction quality and the same exterior finish and exterior color as the front façade. 
g.  Balconies and decks shall consist of concrete or composite board decking materials and shall be supported by metal or wood brackets having an appropriate size and strength or with architectural columns or pillars also having an appropriate size and strength. The required brackets or architectural columns or pillars shall have an appearance that is complementary to the architecture of the overall structure. 
h.  Doors and windows shall be rectangular in orientation and proportion, with the height of the door or window opening greater than its width. 
i.  If visible from the exterior of the building all gutters, scuppers, and down spouts, shall be of compatible architectural material and complimentary in scale and color to the facades. Downspouts shall be tied into the stormwater management system or collected for irrigation purposes. Stormwater shall not be discharged from the down spouts over the surface of the ground. 
j.  No façade shall exceed thirty (30) horizontal feet without containing fenestration treatment per story. 
k.  Security bars on door and or windows shall be prohibited. 
l.  Multifamily residential buildings shall incorporate a flat roof designed to accommodate a resident amenity area and exterior mechanical equipment, such as but not limited to HVAC units, condensers, conduits, satellite dish etc. A decorative parapet wall shall encompass the roof top. Parapets in building masses exceeding eighty (80) continuous horizontal feet shall be varied in height and projection and shall use decorative elements such as crown moldings, dentil, brick soldier course or similar detail. 
m.  Garages shall be integrated into the overall design of the site, and shall be prohibited in the front and side yards. Garages shall be designed in a manner consistent with the architectural design of the multifamily residential buildings. 
n.  Under no circumstances shall any mechanical equipment or related elements such as air conditioning units, banks of meter boxes and utility conduits, HVAC mechanical equipment systems, satellite dishes or any other similar mechanical equipment or related elements be attached or mounted to any exterior building elevation that is visible from a required sidewalk along an adjacent street, or sidewalk abutting a required open space. Any mechanical equipment or related elements located at finished grade, shall be completely screened from view with dense evergreen hedges, or with an opaque wall that is veneered in brick or stone with an appearance that is complimentary to the architecture of the multifamily structure. 
12.  Common recreational activity areas shall be provided and equipped in scale with the recreational needs for the residents of the development. A minimum of fifty (50) square feet of developed recreation space shall be provided for each dwelling unit, provided that no required recreational space shall be less than four hundred (400) square feet in area. Recreational activity areas shall be aggregated, located in readily accessible sites and shall be any recreational/leisure activity area (indoor and outdoor) and may include, but are not limited to, at least two of the following: 
a.  Active recreation courts and lawns. 
b.  Clubhouse. 
c.  Swimming pool and associated areas. 
d.  Dog parks. 
e.  Tot lots and playgrounds. 
f.  Exercise and weight training equipment rooms. 
g.  Picnic and pavilion areas with trails and walking paths. 
h.  Other similar type of active or passive recreation areas. 
B.  In the neighborhood mixed use and corridor residential zoning districts, where less density is sought, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Unless otherwise stated here, the space dimensions shall comply with those of the zoning district as found in Section 16.16.030. 
2.  A minimum of two contiguous acres of land and one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage along a street classified as a major thoroughfare, arterial or collector on the City of Covington Street Plan Map dated November, 2008. 
3.  Maximum gross density shall not exceed ten (10) units per acre. 
4.  For projects containing more than five contiguous acres the following requirements shall be met. 
a.  Special use permit. 
b.  Master plan of the project containing all proposed elements (i.e., residential and non-residential uses), the phasing of development, the total square feet of improvements, overall project density and density of phases and specific nodes if applicable. The master plan, as a condition of approval, is binding and indicative of what shall be developed. Changes to an approved master plan shall only be made by a majority vote of the city council. 
c.  A density bonus of an additional five units per acre may be granted upon compliance with the following criteria: 
i.  To prevent the undesirable effects of incompatible densities and to reduce the dependency of the automobile, the core of the multifamily dwellings shall be within walking distance from areas of commerce that provides convenient goods and services to satisfy the daily and common needs of nearby residents. Walking distance is defined as no more than one-fourth of a mile to absolute center of an area of commerce via safe, pedestrian designated walk ways such as improved sidewalks and identified multi-use paths. 
ii.  Conserving a total of forty (40) percent open space of the overall project area to be used as passive recreation common area to be owned and maintained by the owner or owner's association. Stormwater detention and water quality areas shall not count towards this open space requirement for a density bonus. A system of pedestrian pathways consisting of sidewalks or multi-use paths shall be provided linking multifamily structures to the common area(s). 
5.  The minimum heated floor area: 
a.  One bedroom: nine hundred (900) square feet; 
b.  Two bedroom: one thousand (1,000) square feet; and 
c.  Three bedroom: one thousand one hundred (1,100) square feet. 
6.  Primary building entrances shall be visibly emphasized and accessible from a street or sidewalk. Entrances that do not face a street shall face a pedestrian path that connects directly to a street, sidewalk, courtyard or plaza. Multifamily buildings constructed as part of a larger mixed use development may front towards designated community courtyards and improved common areas. 
7.  At a minimum, all stairways that provide access to multiple units and multiple floors shall be covered in all multifamily buildings. 
8.  No building shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in length. 
9.  The minimum distance separating multifamily buildings shall be twenty (20) linear feet from side-to-side and forty (40) linear feet from front-to-front, front-to-rear, and rear-to-rear. 
10.  To reduce the perceived height and bulk, façade walls that exceed fifty (50) continuous horizontal feet shall utilize offsets such as full height projections or recesses a minimum of twenty (20) inches in depth. This adds architectural interest and variety, creates the appearance of separate buildings and shall vary in appearance with different finish colors, architectural features, building materials, etc. 
11.  Architectural standards: 
a.  The exterior materials on multifamily residential buildings shall contain no more than fifty (50) percent of any one type of the following materials: 
i.  Clay masonry brick. 
ii.  Natural stone. 
iii.  Manufactured stone. 
iv.  Traditional stucco. 
b.  A maximum of twenty (20) percent of the total building wall area, with each façade being calculated independently, may contain the following materials: 
i.  Fiber cement siding, at least ?-inch thick. 
ii.  Natural wood siding. 
iii.  Natural wood shake. 
c.  Polyvinyl chloride (PVC) siding is prohibited. 
d.  Soffits, eaves, trim and window frames may be finished in PVC or aluminum clad materials. Natural wood shall not be used for these applications unless specified within a historic district. 
e.  Where multiple exterior materials are used on a single building, they shall only be combined on each face horizontally, with the heavier material below the lighter. For example, brick below fiber cement siding. 
f.  The rear and side facades shall be of the same construction quality and the same exterior finish and exterior color as the front façade. 
g.  Each dwelling unit shall provide a balcony, deck, patio or porch no less than seventy-five (75) square feet in area. Balconies and decks shall be constructed from composite board decking material or concrete and supported by metal or wood brackets having an appropriate size and strength or with architectural columns or pillars also having an appropriate size and strength. The required brackets or architectural columns or pillars shall have an appearance that is complementary to the architecture of the overall structure. 
h.  Doors and windows shall be rectangular in orientation and proportion, with the height of the door or window opening greater than its width. 
i.  If visible from the exterior of the building all gutters, scuppers, and down spouts, shall be of compatible architectural material and complimentary in scale and color to the facades. Downspouts shall be tied into the stormwater management system or collected for irrigation purposes. Stormwater shall not be discharged from the down spouts over the surface of the ground. 
j.  No façade shall exceed thirty (30) horizontal feet without containing fenestration treatment per story. 
k.  Security bars on door and or windows shall be prohibited. 
l.  Multifamily buildings shall have pitched roofs meeting the following standards: 
i.  Pitched roofs shall be sloped no less than 6:12, except that pitched roof structures for attached sheds, porches, patios and balconies may be sheds, with pitches no less than 2:12. 
ii.  Pitched roofs shall be clad in at least a fifty (50) year architectural asphalt shingles, natural slate, or wood shingles, except that standing seam metal may be used provided that it complements an architectural style while minimizing glare. 
iii.  The eaves of pitched roofs shall overhang exterior walls a minimum of eighteen (18) inches. 
m.  Garages, if provided, shall be integrated into the overall design of the site, and shall be prohibited in the front and side yards. Garages shall be designed in a manner consistent with the architectural design of the multifamily residential buildings. 
n.  Under no circumstances shall any mechanical equipment or related elements such as air conditioning units, banks of meter boxes and utility conduits, HVAC mechanical equipment systems, satellite dishes or any other similar mechanical equipment or related elements be attached or mounted to any exterior building elevation that is visible from a required sidewalk along an adjacent street, or sidewalk abutting a required open space. Any mechanical equipment or related elements located at finished grade, shall be completely screened from view with dense evergreen hedges, or with an opaque wall that is veneered in brick or stone with an appearance that is complimentary to the architecture of the multifamily structure. 
12.  Common recreational activity areas shall be provided and equipped in scale with the recreational needs for the residents of the development. A minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of developed recreation space shall be provided for each dwelling unit, provided that no required recreational space shall be less than one thousand (1,000) square feet in area. Recreational activity areas shall be aggregated, located in readily accessible sites and shall be any recreational/leisure activity area (indoor and outdoor) and may include, but are not limited to, at least two of the following: 
a.  Active recreation courts and lawns. 
b.  Clubhouse. 
c.  Swimming pool and associated areas. 
d.  Dog parks. 
e.  Tot lots and playgrounds. 
f.  Exercise and weight training equipment rooms. 
g.  Picnic and pavilion areas with trails and walking paths. 
h.  Other similar type of active or passive recreation areas. 
(Ord. 7/2/18(1), § 15) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated 7/2/18(1), § 15, amended § 16.20.250 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 16.20.250 pertained to dwelling, single family zero lot line and derived from Ord dated 6/30/08(part). 
16.20.255 - Dwelling, townhouse. 
A.  A horizontal row of townhouses shall contain at least three but not more than six dwelling units. 
B.  To prevent the undesirable effects of incompatible densities, townhouses shall be located within walking distance from areas of commerce that provides convenient goods and services to satisfy the daily and common needs of the nearby residents. Walking distance is defined as no more than one-fourth of a mile to absolute center of an area of commerce via safe, pedestrian designated walk ways such as improved sidewalks and identified multi-use paths. 
C.  Maximum gross density is ten (10) units per acre. 
D.  Maximum front setback is twenty (20) feet. 
E.  Minimum lot size is two thousand (2,000) square feet for a townhouse dwelling. 
F.  Minimum lot width is twenty (20) feet for each individual dwelling unit within a townhouse dwelling. 
G.  Minimum side yard setback adjacent to the end of a townhouse dwelling shall be ten (10) feet. 
H.  Minimum heated floor area per dwelling unit is one thousand eight hundred (1,800) square feet. 
I.  Each dwelling unit shall contain a minimum of two stories. 
J.  A minimum of twenty-five (25) feet of common area shall separate townhouse dwellings from one another. Private drives, alleys, courtyards, gardens and other such amenities may occupy these common areas. 
K.  Each dwelling unit shall have separate and individual front and rear entrances. 
L.  The front facade of each townhouse dwelling shall front on a dedicated public street. 
M.  Townhouse dwellings constructed as part of a larger mixed use development may front towards designated community courtyards and improved common areas. 
N.  To reduce the perceived height and bulk, front and rear facade walls that exceed eighty (80) continuous horizontal linear feet shall utilize offset such as full height projections or recesses a minimum of twenty (20) inches in depth. This adds architectural interest and variety, creates the appearance of separate buildings and shall vary in appearance with different finish colors, architectural features, building materials, etc. 
O.  Slab on grade construction shall be prohibited. The finished floor of a townhouse dwelling shall be raised a minimum of two feet above the finished ground elevation. 
P.  A minimum of two and a maximum of four of the following exterior finished materials may be used on a townhouse dwelling and no more than three of the following exterior finished materials may be used on an individual dwelling unit composing a townhouse: 
1.  Clay masonry brick. 
2.  Natural stone, i.e., granite, marble, limestone, sandstone or field stone. 
3.  Manufactured stone, i.e., imitation limestone, imitation sandstone or imitation field stone. 
4.  Wood siding. 
5.  Fiber-cement siding. 
6.  Traditional stucco. 
7.  Other exterior finished materials may be approved by the planning and zoning director when requested in writing by the applicant. 
Q.  At least two and no more than four of the following elements shall be used on the front facade of an individual dwelling unit composing a townhouse: 
1.  Hip returns. 
2.  Operable window shutters. 
3.  Casement windows. 
4.  Transoms. 
5.  Wrought iron railings. 
6.  Gas lights. 
7.  Brick molding. 
8.  Upper floor balconies. 
9.  Standing seam metal roofing. 
10.  Other elements may be approved by the planning and zoning director when requested in writing by the applicant. 
R.  The same exterior finished materials shall be used for the front and rear facades of the same dwelling unit. Dwelling units on the ends of the townhouse dwelling shall have the same exterior finish material on the side facade as that on the front and rear facade. No side facade shall exceed thirty (30) linear feet without containing fenestration treatment per story. 
S.  To avoid repetition and to promote aesthetic variation, the same front elevation of a townhouse building shall not be duplicated on more than one-third of the buildings throughout a townhouse development located on more than two acres. 
T.  Individual dwelling units shall incorporate a covered front door, the manner of which shall be the same for all units within the same townhouse. This may be accomplished with a recessed entry, a portico, a door canopy or a covered front porch. Covered porches shall extend the width of the individual dwelling unit and shall be a minimum of six feet in depth. For those units designed with a stoop, the top platform shall be a minimum of three feet in depth. 
U.  Townhouses shall either incorporate a flat roof design utilizing a decorative parapet wall or have a minimum 6:12 roof pitch. For pitched roofs the use of gables, dormers, cornices, chimneys and other design features shall be used to enhance the overall appearance of the individual dwelling units. Variation in the roofline of buildings and offsets in pitched roofs and gables shall be required. Parapets in building masses exceeding eighty (80) continuous horizontal linear feet shall be varied in height and projection and shall use decorative elements such as crown moldings, dentil, brick soldier course or similar detail. 
V.  On-site parking shall not be located between the front facade and the public street. All driveways, parking pads and enclosed residential garages shall be rear entry from either a private alley or an adjacent street. Enclosed residential garages shall have single bay doors to avoid overemphasizing the horizontal nature of the garage and shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) linear feet from the alley edge of pavement. 
W.  HVAC units, trash and recycling receptacles shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. Trash and recycling receptacles shall not be placed at the point of pick up more than twenty-four (24) hours prior to the scheduled servicing. 
X.  Townhouse developments shall establish a homeowners association to manage and maintain all common areas, alleys and structural elements as well as ensure that the requirements governing such associations and their developments as provided by this section are met in full. 
(Ord. dated 4/2/18(1), § 4) 
16.20.260 - Educational support services. 
    Any structure used for educational support services when located in a M1 district shall have a minimum assemblage size of three acres. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.270 - Electric power generation. 
A.  Structures shall be placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
B.  Structures shall be enclosed by a chain link fence at least eight feet high. 
C.  The lot shall be suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide along the front, side and rear property lines; planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.280 - Electric, petroleum or gas substation. 
A.  Structures shall be placed not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
B.  Structures shall be enclosed by a chain link fence at least eight feet high. 
C.  The lot shall be suitably landscaped, including a buffer strip at least ten (10) feet wide along the front, side and rear property lines; planted with evergreen trees and shrubs that grow at least eight feet tall and provide an effective visual screen. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.290 - Extended-stay motels/hotels. 
A.  Regulations. 
1.  Hotels, motels and extended-stay motels/hotels are limited to no more than twenty-five (25) guest rooms per acre; 
2.  Each guest unit must contain a minimum square footage per unit of three hundred (300) square feet; 
3.  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels/motels must be constructed on a tract of land containing at least two acres; 
4.  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels/motels must contain an enclosed, heated and air conditioned laundry space containing a minimum of three clothes washers and three clothes dryers for the use of guests; 
5.  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels/motels must provide a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet for recreational use by guests. In computing the one thousand (1,000) square feet requirement, swimming pools, fitness or recreation centers and other recreational facilities may be used in determining the square footage required by this subsection; 
6.  Management must be on the property twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week; 
7.  Daily maid service must be included in the standard room rate; and 
8.  Parking areas must have security fencing and lighting with a minimum luminescence of one footcandle at pavement level. 
9.  No guest shall register, reside in, or occupy any room or rooms within the same licensed facility for more than forty-five (45) consecutive days. 
B.  Location. Extended-stay motels/hotels shall be located only within CC, corridor commercial district. 
C.  Change of Location or Name. 
1.  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an extended-stay motel/hotel under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the occupation tax certificate. 
2.  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an extended-stay motel/hotel is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 1/18/17(3), § 2) 
16.20.300 - Farming, general. 
A.  All structures, buildings or enclosed areas used for the operation shall be a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from all property lines. 
B.  Equipment-producing noise or sound in excess of seventy (70) decibels shall be located no closer than one hundred (100) feet to the nearest residential dwelling. 
C.  All unpaved storage areas shall be maintained in a manner which prevents dust from adversely impacting adjacent properties. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.310 - Fitness and recreational sports centers. 
A.  This regulation shall apply to tennis courts, neighborhood recreation centers, basketball courts, ice rink, hockey rink, soccer, field hockey and football fields, baseball and softball fields, gymnasiums, spas, group exercise and fitness centers, yoga, karate and similar facilities. 
B.  If abutting NR1, NR2, NR3, CR or TCR districts, the following standards shall apply: 
1.  Hours of operation shall be limited to the hours of six a.m. to eleven p.m. 
2.  Outdoor recreation activities shall be limited to the hours of eight-thirty a.m. to ten p.m. 
3.  No outdoor loudspeakers or sound amplification systems shall be permitted. 
4.  No outdoor storage shall be permitted. 
5.  No building, swimming pool, tennis court, ball field or other form of outdoor recreation shall be closer than fifty (50) feet from these abutting districts. Outdoor lights shall be no more than ten (10) feet in height nor closer than fifty (50) feet from a property line. Outdoor lighting fixtures shall be cut-off luminaries designed to cast light downward and away from adjacent property. 
6.  Property lines abutting these districts shall provide a minimum fifty (50) feet buffer continuous except where penetrated from driveways or utility lines that shall be located perpendicular to property lines. 
7.  Swimming pools shall meet applicable regulations contained elsewhere in this chapter. 
8.  Any commercial recreation or entertainment facility that includes amusement rides, water slides, amusement vehicles, golf driving ranges, miniature golf, batting cages, fully enclosed buildings shall meet requirements of amusement arcades. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.320 - Forestry and logging. 
A.  Such activities shall be conducted consistent with "Georgia's Best Management Practices for Forestry." 
B.  Forestry and logging activities taking place on commercially zoned property shall preserve undisturbed buffers as required in Chapter 16.40. 
C.  Forestry and logging activities taking place on property that is adjacent to occupied residential property shall preserve a fifty (50) feet undisturbed buffer from the property line of the adjacent occupied residential property. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.330 - Gasoline station and gasoline station with convenience store. 
A.  The use shall not be established on any lot that is within one hundred (100) feet of any NR1, NR2 or NR3 district. 
B.  All repair and maintenance activities shall be carried on entirely within an enclosed building. 
C.  Outdoor storage is prohibited. 
D.  Only minor automotive repair and maintenance is allowed and shall be confined within the principal structure, out of public view. 
E.  The use shall have a minimum frontage on the primary street of one hundred fifty (150) feet and a minimum lot area of twelve thousand (12,000) square feet. 
F.  Gas pumps, canopies, air hoses and other accessories, appurtenances and equipment shall be set back at least fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line. 
G.  Provide eight feet high visual buffer adjacent to any existing adjacent residential uses. 
H.  All drives, parking, storage and service areas shall be paved and curbed. 
I.  Outside aboveground tanks for the storage of gasoline, liquefied petroleum gas, oil, and other flammable liquids or gases shall be prohibited at any gasoline service station. 
J.  Overnight accommodations, showers, and overnight customer parking is prohibited. 
K.  The use shall not be combined with any other use(s) or facility so as to create a truck stop. See Chapter 16.08. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.340 - Halfway house. 
A.  No more than fifteen (15) residents shall be permitted, not including attendants and employees of the operator. 
B.  Operator must be licensed for treatment of drug and alcohol dependency. 
C.  Parking must be provided in an enclosed garage or in the rear or side yard. 
D.  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, front yard, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
E.  Services shall not be provided on an "out-patient basis" to persons who are not regular residents of the facility, as described in subsection A above. 
F.  At least one thousand (1,000) feet shall separate the halfway house from another halfway house, transitional housing facility, rooming and boarding house, or personal care home. 
G.  If a rezoning or special use permit application is made for location or relocation of a halfway house, drug rehabilitation center or other facility for treatment of any dependency, public hearing requirements shall conform to O.C.G.A. Section 36-66-4(f). 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.350 - Home occupations. 
A.  It is the intent and purpose of this section to provide for certain types of restricted occupational uses within NR1, NR2, NR3, CR and TCR zoning districts. Such uses are restricted to those which: 
1.  Are incidental to the use of the premises as a residence; 
2.  Are compatible with residential uses; and 
3.  Do not detract from the residential character of the neighborhood. 
B.  In all NR1, NR2, NR3, CR and TCR zoning districts, any building used for residential occupancy may conduct a home occupation use provided that: 
1.  The primary use of the unit is a dwelling; 
2.  The following standards are complied with in full at all times: 
a.  Such use shall be conducted entirely within the dwelling unit and only persons living in the dwelling unit shall be engaged and employed in such occupation, and the number of residents employed shall not exceed two, 
b.  No mechanical or electrical equipment is to be utilized except that which is necessarily, customarily, or ordinarily used for household or leisure purposes, 
c.  No equipment that interferes with radio and/or television reception shall be allowed, 
d.  No toxic, explosive, flammable, combustible, corrosive, radioactive, or other restricted materials shall be used or stored on the premises, 
e.  There shall be no outside operations, storage, or display of materials or products, 
f.  No accessory buildings shall be used in connection with the home occupation; 
g.  No alteration of the residential appearance of the premises occurs, including the creation of a separate entrance to the dwelling or utilization of an existing entrance exclusively for the business, 
h.  There shall be no exterior evidence of the home occupation, 
i.  No commodity shall be stocked or sold on the premises to the general public, 
j.  No process shall be used which is hazardous to public health, safety, or welfare, 
k.  Visitors, customers, or deliveries shall not exceed that normally and reasonably occurring for a residence and shall, under no circumstance, exceed more than two business visitors an hour and eight a day and not more than two manufacturer or wholesaler direct deliveries of products or materials per week, 
l.  No on-street parking associated with the business shall be permitted, 
m.  Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the home occupation, 
n.  The home occupation shall be restricted to twenty-five (25) percent of the dwelling and shall not exceed one hundred fifty (150) square feet of floor area. Said home occupation use shall be clearly secondary to the use of the dwelling for dwelling purposes, and 
o.  There shall be no group instruction, assembly or activity. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.360 - Hospital. 
A.  The lot shall have access to a major thoroughfare. 
B.  Side and rear setbacks shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet or the minimum required by the zoning district, whichever is greater. 
C.  Front building setback shall be at least fifty (50) feet. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.370 - Hotel/motel. 
A.  All guest rooms shall be accessed internally to the building with no direct room access to the outside. The lobby shall be a minimum of seven hundred (700) square feet in size. 
B.  Except within the TCM zoning district where there is no minimum lot size, each hotel/motel site shall be a minimum of two acres. 
C.  Each hotel/motel must provide management on duty twenty-four (24) hours a day. 
D.  Each guest room shall have a minimum of two hundred (200) square feet and shall be accessed with a magnetic keycard entry/locking device. 
E.  For buildings three stories or less or containing no more than one hundred thirty (130) rooms, each hotel/motel building shall have a minimum roof pitch of two to one. 
F.  Outside storage of commercial equipment is prohibited. 
G.  No business license shall be issued for any business operating from any guest room of the facility. 
H.  Provide a seventy-five (75) feet natural buffer, enhanced with an additional twenty-five (25) feet landscaped buffer (total one hundred (100) feet) adjacent to NR1, NR2, NR3, CR and TCR zoned property. 
I.  Any outdoor recreational areas provided shall be located to the rear of the site. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 1/18/17(2), § 1; Ord. dated 11-13-18(1), § 1) 
16.20.380 - Industrialized homes. 
A.  Industrialized homes shall be used only for residential purposes. Nothing in this section is intended to prohibit industrialized buildings designed and used as nonresidential structures in mixed use or industrial districts. 
B.  All industrialized homes shall comply with the following regulations: 
1.  At the time an application for installation of any industrialized home is presented for review, the applicant must present evidence of the following: 
a.  The serial number for the home as provided by the manufacturer; 
b.  Proof of the identity of the manufacturer; 
c.  Proof of inspection of the home at the date of manufacture, including Department of Community Affairs (DCA) insignias. 
2.  No industrialized home shall be in a state of disrepair at the time of its installation at the intended location within the unincorporated areas of the city. Proof of an approved DCA insignia may be accepted as evidence of a new industrialized home's compliance with this subsection. 
3.  It shall be the responsibility of the building inspector to inspect industrialized homes being placed or relocated within the city. The building inspector shall conduct such inspections necessary to ensure the following: 
a.  External connections to gas, plumbing, electric and any other utility systems shall be constructed and installed in a manner that meets all city building codes. 
b.  Each industrialized home site shall include an approved potable water source and an approved sewage disposal system meeting the requirements of the state division of environmental protection and all city and county requirements. 
c.  Steps and landings of the requisite size and composition under the Standard Building Code of the Southern Building Code Congress International (SBCCI), shall, at a minimum, be required of all industrialized homes, with such provisions being expressly incorporated by reference herein as part of this requirement. 
4.  All industrialized home sites shall conform to all regulations for the zoning district in which the home is located. 
5.  No industrialized home may be attached to another industrialized home by means of a breezeway, corridor or hallway. Industrialized homes designed to be part of a multi-unit residential structure are prohibited. 
6.  Industrialized homes shall not be used as accessory structures. 
7.  No industrialized home shall be located within the boundary of any designated historic district unless and until a certificate of appropriateness has been obtained from the historic preservation commission pursuant to the applicable provisions and criteria of Chapter 16.52. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.390 - Keeping and raising of farm animals. 
A.  The keeping and raising of all hoofed farm animals and use of private stables shall be limited to property having a minimum lot area of three acres which is not part of a platted subdivision. All buildings appurtenant to the keeping and raising of hoofed farm animals shall be located a minimum of one hundred (100) feet from any property line. 
B.  The accessory use of keeping and raising of fowl for personal use shall be limited to the following: 
1.  No fowl shall be kept on a lot of less than one thousand (1,000) square feet. 
2.  The number of fowl shall be limited to one per one thousand (1,000) square feet of lot size with a maximum of twelve (12) fowl. 
3.  All fowl shall be penned or corralled and shall not run at large off of the owner's property. 
4.  All buildings appurtenant to the keeping and raising of fowl shall be kept fifteen (15) feet from all property lines. 
5.  All coops, pens or other structures housing fowl shall be free of vermin. 
6.  The following shall be prohibited: male fowl (roosters, toms, drakes, etc.), guineas and geese. 
C.  The keeping and raising of hoofed farm animals and fowl shall be subject to all regulations promulgated by the Newton County Health Department. 
(Ord. dated 3/7/11, § 2; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.400 - Kennel, hobby and pet boarding. 
A.  The lot size shall be a minimum of two acres. 
B.  All structures housing animals shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from property lines or street right-of-way. 
C.  All areas maintaining animals outside shall be located no closer than two hundred (200) feet from property lines or street right-of-way. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.410 - Landfill, inert waste. 
A.  Standards. 
1.  Minimum acreage of site: twenty-five (25) acres. 
2.  No facility shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of a residential dwelling, private well, or school. 
3.  A minimum one hundred (100) foot-wide buffer, meeting the requirements of this chapter, shall be maintained on all property lines including property lines abutting a public street. 
4.  All facilities shall be enclosed with a security fence at least six feet in height with openings therein not more than those in two-inch mesh wire or some other similar fencing materials and placed inside the buffer. A minimum six-foot-high solid fence or wall is required inside buffers adjacent to any zoning district other than M1 or M2. A sight line study shall be submitted to city staff for approval. 
5.  Access to inert waste landfills shall be limited to authorized entrances that shall be closed when the site is not in operation. Access shall not be derived through any residential subdivision or development. Routes and entrances shall be approved by the public works director to ensure that access is derived from paved streets and that such streets will withstand maximum load limits established by the city. 
6.  Materials placed in inert waste landfills shall be spread in layers and compacted to the least practical volume. 
7.  A uniform compacted layer of clean earth no less than one foot in depth shall be placed overall exposed inert waste material at least monthly. 
8.  The inert waste landfill site shall be graded and drained to minimize runoff onto the landfill surface, to prevent erosion and to drain water from the surface of the landfill. 
9.  The property owner shall obtain a land disturbing permit for any inert waste landfill. 
10.  No hazardous wastes, industrial wastes, demolition wastes, biomedical wastes, asbestos, or liquid waste shall be allowed in an inert waste landfill. 
11.  This section shall not prohibit the burial of dry waste building materials on the same property of a structure currently under construction. However, hazardous materials may not be included in this disposal. 
12.  Suitable means, such as stockpiled soil, shall be provided to prevent and control fires. 
13.  A uniform compacted layer of final cover not less than two feet in depth and a vegetative cover shall be placed over the final lift not less than one month following final placement of inert waste within the lift. 
14.  Notice of final closure must be provided to the inspections department within thirty (30) days of receiving the final load of waste. Any site not receiving waste in excess of one hundred eighty (180) days shall be deemed abandoned and in violation of this section unless properly closed. Notice of closure must include the date of final waste receipt and an accurate legal description of the boundaries of the landfill. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.420 - Landfills, sanitary (municipal). 
A.  Standards. 
1.  Minimum acreage of site: one hundred (100) acres. 
2.  No facility shall be permitted within five hundred (500) feet of a residential dwelling, private well, or school. 
3.  A minimum two hundred (200) foot-wide buffer, meeting the requirements of this chapter, shall be maintained against all property lines including property lines abutting a public street. 
4.  All facilities shall be enclosed with a security fence at least six feet high with openings therein not more than those in two-inch mesh wire or some other similar fencing materials and placed inside the buffer. A minimum six-foot-high solid fence or wall is required inside the buffers adjacent to any zoning district other than M1 or M2. 
5.  Limited Access. A gate or other barrier shall be maintained at potential vehicular access points to block unauthorized access to the site when an attendant is not on duty. Access shall not be derived through any residential subdivision or development. Routes and entrances shall be approved by the public works director to ensure that access is derived from paved streets and that such streets will withstand maximum load limits established by the city. 
6.  The property owner shall obtain a land disturbing permit for any sanitary landfill. 
7.  Groundwater Protection. The site must be designed with adequate soil buffers or artificial lines and leachate collection and treatment systems to preclude, to the maximum extent possible, the contamination of drinking water supplies. 
8.  Erosion and Sedimentation Control. All surface runoff from disturbed areas must be controlled by the use of appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures or devices. Sediment basins must be designed to handle both the hydraulic loading for the twenty-five (25) year, twenty-four (24) hour storm and the sediment loading from the drainage basin for the life of the site. 
9.  Revegetation. The plan must call for the revegetation of any disturbed area that will remain exposed for more than three months. Revegetation of final cover must take place within two weeks after final cover placement. 
10.  Sequence of Filling. The plan must define a sequence of filling the entire site that minimizes any problems with drainage or provides for all-weather access roads to the working area. 
11.  Daily Cover. The composition of daily cover shall meet the following standards: 
a.  Must be capable of preventing disease vectors, odors, blowing litter, and other nuisances; 
b.  Must be capable of covering solid waste after it is placed without change in its properties and without regard to weather; 
c.  Must be capable of allowing loaded vehicles to successfully maneuver over it after placement; 
d.  Must be noncombustible; 
e.  Forty (40) percent by weight of the fragments in the daily cover shall pass through a two millimeter, No. 10 sieve; 
f.  Must not include rock fragments that are greater than six inches in diameter. 
12.  Intermediate or Monthly Cover. The composition of intermediate or monthly cover shall meet the same criteria for daily cover and be capable of supporting the germination and propagation of vegetative cover. 
13.  Final Cover. The composition of final cover shall meet the same criteria as for monthly cover and must compact well and preclude the excessive infiltration of surface water. 
14.  Final Grading. The grade of final slopes shall be designed, installed and maintained to: 
a.  Ensure permanent slope stability; 
b.  Control erosion due to rapid water velocity and other factors; 
c.  Allow compaction, seeding and revegetation of cover material placed on slopes; 
d.  Ensure minimal percolation of precipitation into and surface runoff onto the disposal area; 
e.  The grade of the final surface of the facility may not be less than three percent nor greater than thirty-three percent (33%). 
15.  Fire protection, groundwater monitoring, methane gas control, liners and leachate collection, closure, post-closure care and financial responsibility shall be in conformance with Chapter 391-3-4, Solid Waste Management Rules of the Environmental Protection Division of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
B.  Any operator of any sanitary landfill shall comply with the performance requirements of Chapter 391-3-4, Solid Waste Management Rules of the Environmental Protection Division of the State Department of Natural Resources. 
C.  No regulated quantities of hazardous waste may be accepted. The operation must have a plan for excluding regulated quantities of hazardous waste. 
D.  No person in responsible charge of a sanitary landfill which has a leachate collection system shall perform the duties of a sanitary landfill operator without being duly certified by the state. 
E.  No sanitary landfill which has a leachate collection system shall be operated in the state unless the person in responsible charge is duly certified by the state. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.430 - Libraries and archives. 
A.  When located in NR1, NR2 or NR3 districts, such uses shall: 
1.  Be located on a collector or arterial street. 
2.  Provide a fifty (50) feet buffer adjacent to NR1, NR2 or NR3 zoning districts. 
3.  Setback driveways and parking areas a minimum of twenty-five (25) feet from side and rear property lines. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.440 - Livestock, quarters and enclosures (includes poultry). 
A.  The keeping and raising of all farm animals and fowl and use of private stables shall be limited to property located within the NR1 zoning district on lots having a minimum lot area of three acres. 
B.  Any structure, pens, corral or other building appurtenant to the keeping and raising of livestock or poultry must be located a minimum of thirty (30) feet from any property line. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.450 - Manufacturing plants. 
    Manufacturing plants shall maintain noise level factors that meet minimum state of the industry standards for: 
A.  Building Equipment. Sound pressure or sound power level data for refrigeration machines, boilers, fans, cooling towers, condensers, roof-top units, pumps, motors, diesel and gas reciprocating engines, gas turbine engines, steam turbines, gears, transformers and similar equipment; sample calculations of sound levels in mechanical equipment room; sample noise specification for equipment. 
B.  Industrial Equipment. Sound level data for representative transportation, construction, manufacturing and power plant equipment. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 5/4/15(1), § 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated May 4, 2015(1), § 1, changed the title of § 16.20.450 from "Manufacturing plants-machinery manufacturing" to "Manufacturing plants." This historical notation has been preserved for reference purposes. 
16.20.460 - Mineral extraction/rock for production and processing of crushed stone. 
A.  Standards. 
1.  All improved and maintained entrances shall be fenced and locked during nonbusiness hours. The property shall be adequately posted and such notice filed with the proper city authority. 
2.  Operators shall comply with state department of natural resources, surface mining land reclamation program rules and regulations, and the mining permit number filed with the director of public works. 
3.  A blasting limit of two inches per second peak particle velocity as measured from any of three mutually perpendicular directions in the ground adjacent to off-site buildings shall not be exceeded. 
4.  An air blast limit of ninety (90) decibels (linear-peak) measured at the property line of adjacent NR1, NR2, NR3, CR, TCR, NM, CM or TCM district properties shall not be exceeded. 
5.  Seismographic and noise instrumentation shall be required for a minimum of one blast per three-month period. The records of such instrumentation and records of all blasts (including total charge weight, charge weight per delay, charge depth, date and time, location and meteorological conditions) shall be retained by the operator for a period of not less than two years. Copies of all blast records shall be forwarded to the director of public works within five days following each blast. All non-instrumental blasts shall be in compliance with the recommended scaled distance, as defined by the United States Department of Interior, Bureau of Mines Bulletin 656 entitled, "Blasting Vibrations and Their Effects on Structures." 
6.  Millisecond-delay blasting shall be used to decrease the vibration level from blasting. 
7.  Blasting shall coincide with the period between eight a.m. and five-thirty p.m. except when on-site hazards to safety dictate otherwise. 
8.  The blasting and extraction shall not be established within five hundred (500) feet of any property line. 
9.  These uses shall only be established on a site of not less than two hundred (200) acres. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.470 - Mini-warehouses and self-storage units. 
A.  A seventy-five (75) foot-wide buffer shall be required when abutting NR1, NR2 or NR3 property. 
B.  Buildings shall have a pitched roof with pitch of at least one is to three. 
C.  No sale of merchandise or flea markets shall be conducted on the property. 
D.  Access shall be only to streets classified as arterials by the city of Covington. 
E.  No outdoor storage is permitted. 
F.  No outdoor speakers or amplification shall be permitted. 
G.  Outdoor lighting shall be directed downward and away from adjacent property. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.480 - Motor vehicle sales. 
    The following regulations shall apply to motor vehicle sales: 
A.  All vehicles shall be parked on paved surfaces or pervious paving materials approved by the city engineer. 
B.  No vehicle shall be parked or displayed within the boundary of a public road or street right-of-way, within any side or rear building setback area as established in Section 16.16.030, or closer than one hundred (100) feet from the nearest residence. 
C.  Vehicle maintenance, repair, painting and body work must take place within a building. All vehicles awaiting maintenance, repair, painting and/or body work shall be stored within an opaque fence or wall, and not visible from the nearest public road or street right-of-way or neighboring property. 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.490 - Open yard storage business. 
A.  Intent. The intent of this supplemental regulation is to protect residential property values and to ensure that the community's children will not be visually attracted to or have easy access to potentially dangerous accumulations of materials stored out of doors by businesses regulated under this article. 
B.  Site Development Standards. No person shall engage in or operate an open yard storage business in the unincorporated areas of the city unless that business is in compliance with the following: 
1.  Each business shall establish and maintain a transitional buffer around the property upon which the storage area is located, measured from the right-of-way of the nearest public road to the fence, or the property line of any other real property adjoining the property upon which the business is located, whichever is closest. Said transitional buffer shall be at least: 
a.  Thirty (30) feet in depth for all storage areas under three acres in size. 
b.  Fifty (50) feet in depth for all storage areas from three acres to ten (10) acres in size; or for any portion of the open yard storage business adjacent to a stream or lake. 
c.  One hundred (100) feet in depth for all storage areas over ten (10) acres in size. 
C.  No storage or vehicle parking shall be allowed in any transitional buffer, provided entrance roadways shall be allowed in any transitional buffer. 
D.  Each such business shall establish and maintain a fence on the inner boundary line of the transitional buffer for that business. 
E.  Any fence required in this article shall be a substantial and solid wooden, rock, brick or masonry fence or wall of at least six feet in height approved by the planning and zoning director. Said fence shall have openings only for gates at entrance roadways. Each such gate shall be designed and constructed of materials compatible with the fence to which it is attached and shall be capable of being securely locked. All gates shall be approved by the planning and zoning director for those purposes. 
F.  The transitional buffer shall be undisturbed except for entrance roadways, which roadways shall run generally perpendicular to the buffer zone boundaries. No road shall be built in the transitional buffer to provide access to the perimeter of the property. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.495 - Outdoor display. 
    Outdoor display shall comply with the following criteria: 
A.  Shall be located within a designated area as shown on a site plan provided by the business owner or manager responsible for the day-to-day operations; 
B.  Shall not encroach into a public right-of-way, public or private street, easement, pedestrian walkway, or designated fire lane; 
C.  Shall by limited to sites that are not adjacent to NR1, NR2 or NR3 zoned property; 
D.  Shall not occupy more than fifty (50) percent of the business' linear building frontage nor exceed fifteen (15) feet in depth from the principal building facade; 
E.  Shall not block, or prevent access to, fire hydrants, FDC connections, or other identified life safety devices; 
F.  To ensure an aesthetically appealing and safe environment, outdoor display areas shall be kept in an orderly manner and be free from litter and debris; and 
G.  Subsection 16.20.495(D) shall not apply to boat dealers, motor vehicles sales, recreational vehicle dealers, or passenger car rental. 
(Ord. dated 4/2/18(2), § 3) 
16.20.500 - Outdoor storage. 
    Outdoor storage shall comply with the following: 
A.  Shall be prohibited from front yards; 
B.  Storage area(s) shall not be adjacent to properties used residentially or zoned NR1, NR2 or NR3; 
C.  Shall not block, or prevent access to, fire hydrants, FDC connections, or other identified life safety devices; and 
D.  Shall be screened from view from public streets and adjacent property by a permanent opaque enclosure consisting of a minimum eight feet high solid fence or wall. Items being stored shall not extend above the required enclosure. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 3/5/18(1), § 3) 
16.20.510 - Parks and playgrounds. 
    Parks and playgrounds shall have the following additional criteria: 
A.  When located within any NR1 and NR zoning district, all buildings and structures shall be located not less than fifty (50) feet from any property line. 
B.  Outdoor activity shall be limited to the hours of eight a.m. to eleven p.m. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 3/5/18(1), § 3) 
16.20.540 - Pawn shops. 
A.  At least two thousand (2,000) feet shall separate a pawn shop from another pawn shop. 
B.  If the pawn shop involves title pawn then associated vehicles shall be stored at another location which allows for the long-term storage of such vehicles. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.550 - Personal care homes-Family, group or congregate. 
A.  The home shall maintain a residential appearance compatible with the surrounding neighborhood. 
B.  The home shall meet all requirements of, and be licensed, permitted, or registered with, the Department of Human Resources, Office of Regulatory Services. 
C.  No personal care home shall be occupied prior to issuance of a business license. A certificate of occupancy certifying compliance with all building, electrical, fire safety and other local and state codes applicable to such uses shall be required prior to issuance of a business license. 
D.  To prevent a negative institutional atmosphere created by the concentration or clustering of community residences of this type, personal care homes shall have the following distance requirements: 
1.  Personal care homes, family; when located in NR1, NR2 and NR3 districts. Personal care homes shall be located a minimum distance of one thousand five hundred (1,500) linear feet apart measured from the closest point of the lot. 
2.  Personal care home, group; when located in CR, TCR, NM, CM and TCM districts. No more than one personal care home shall be located on each block, including opposing sides of the same block. 
3.  Personal Care Home, Congregate. This subsection shall not apply to congregate personal care homes. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.560 - Passenger car rental. 
A.  All vehicles shall be parked in marked spaces that are separate and over and above in number the required parking spaces for rental business establishments. 
B.  All vehicles shall be parked on paved surfaces or approved pervious paving materials. 
C.  All outdoor vehicle display areas shall be at least fifty (50) feet from the right-of-way line and no closer than one hundred (100) feet from the nearest residence. 
D.  Vehicle storage, cleaning and maintenance must take place within a building or outside storage area that is screened from public view. 
E.  Vehicle repair, painting and body work may not be conducted on the premises. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.570 - Places of worship and religious institutions larger than ten acres. 
    Religious institutions and other places of worship that are ten (10) acres or greater in size shall meet the following additional criteria: 
A.  Said uses shall be located on a four lane or wider street with at least one hundred (100) feet of public street frontage; 
B.  The buildings shall not be set back less than seventy-five (75) feet from any property line, except where the adjoining property is zoned NM, CM, TCM, M1 or M2, in which case the setback shall be established within the applicable zoning district; 
C.  No parking area shall be established within twenty (20) feet of a residence; and 
D.  There shall be a planted buffer strip of at least ten (10) feet in width along the side and rear property lines. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.580 - Quarry. 
A.  Quarry areas being excavated shall be entirely enclosed within a fence located at least ten (10) feet from the edge of any excavation and of such construction and height as to be demonstrably able to exclude children and animals from the quarry area. 
B.  The operators and owners of the quarry shall present to the planning commission as part of their special use permit application an acceptable comprehensive plan for the reuse of the property at the cessation of operations. 
C.  In the case of an existing quarry, an extension of quarry operations beyond the areas being quarried or approved for quarrying at the effective date of the zoning ordinance shall be permitted and shall not be considered a new operation, provided that the extension does not extend to within one thousand (1,000) feet of a NR1, NR2, NR3, CR, TCCR, NM, CM or TCM zoning district boundary line, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject district boundaries. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.20.590 - Recycling collection center. 
A.  Activities shall be limited to collection, sorting, compacting and shipping. Dismantling, grinding and/or shredding are prohibited. 
B.  The facility shall not be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used or zoned for residential use. 
C.  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed so as to direct away from any adjacent properties. 
D.  Materials collected shall not be visible and shall be deposited in a bin or bunker. All sorting and collection bins shall either be enclosed and have chutes available to the public or be located inside a fully-enclosed building. 
E.  No outdoor storage of non-containerized materials shall be allowed. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 4) 
16.20.600 - Recyclable material merchant wholesaler. 
A.  The minimum lot size for such use is five contiguous acres. 
B.  The facility shall not be located adjacent to or across the street from any property used or zoned for residential use. 
C.  Lighting for such facilities shall be placed so as to direct away from adjacent properties. 
D.  The hours of operation shall not exceed eight o'clock a.m. to six o'clock p.m. Monday through Saturday. 
E.  A fifty-foot-wide undisturbed buffer against all adjoining property(s). Said buffer shall provide for a year-round, one-hundred-percent opaque screening and in cases where the existing vegetation is sparse additional supplemental plantings shall be planted prior to the issuance of a certificate of occupancy and/or an occupational tax. Supplemental plantings, if required, shall be at least eight feet in height at the time of planting and a minimum of two inches in diameter at the breast height. 
F.  Along the entire road frontage (except for approved access crossings), provide a minimum eight-feet-high, one-hundred-percent opaque, masonry wall. The wall shall be located outside of any public right-of-way and interior to any landscape strip. The finished side of the wall shall face the public roadway. Approved finished materials are brick, stone, concrete masonry unit or other similar materials except cinder block. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5) 
16.20.610 - Recreational and vacation camps, RV parks and campgrounds. 
A.  Only accessory services and parking related exclusively to the recreational operations shall be allowed. 
B.  Total floor area of all buildings shall be a minimum of two thousand (2,000) square feet. The building(s) shall be located at least one hundred (100) feet from all NR1, NR2 or NR3 zoned property. 
C.  The site shall be at least twenty (20) acres in size. 
D.  All outdoor activities shall take place at least one hundred (100) feet from any property line adjacent to a NR1, NR2 or NR3 district. 
E.  Outdoor activity areas shall be sufficiently screened and insulated so as to protect adjacent property from noise and other disturbances. 
F.  No outdoor storage shall be allowed. 
G.  No outdoor public address system shall be allowed. 
H.  Outdoor recreation activity adjacent to NR1, NR2 or NR3 zoned property shall cease before eight p.m. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated Aug. 6, 2012, § 5, renumbered §§ 16.20.590-16.20.740 as 16.20.610-16.20.760. 
16.20.620 - Rooming and boarding house. 
A.  No more than six occupants, not including owner and owner's family if residing on the premises. 
B.  Parking must be provided in an enclosed garage or in the rear or side yard. 
C.  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, front yard, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
D.  If meals are served on the premises, meals may only be served to residents and owner's family members if present. 
E.  At least one thousand (1,000) feet shall separate a rooming and boarding house from another rooming and boarding house, transitional housing facility or personal care home. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.610 editor's note. 
16.20.630 - School K-12. 
A.  Private School in a NR1 or NR2 Zoning District. When located in a NR1 or NR2 zoning district, the following additional standards shall apply: 
1.  A fifty (50) foot buffer adjacent to the NR1 or NR2 zoning district is required. 
2.  Driveways and parking areas must set back twenty-five (25) feet from side property lines. 
3.  The scale, intensity, and operation of the use shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic congestion, or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous NR1 or NR2 properties. 
4.  Accessory Uses and Facilities. In addition to the accessory uses and facilities that are permitted in Chapter 16.16 for the zoning district in which the private school is located, additional accessory uses and facilities are permitted that are customarily associated with schools and intended primarily for the use of students, such as an auditorium, library, administrative offices, cafeteria and related kitchen and dining area, or outdoor recreational facilities occupying less than ten thousand (10,000) square feet. No signage shall be allowed for accessory uses. 
B.  The following additional uses may be permitted as accessory to the private school only upon approval of a special use permit in accordance with Section 16.12.220, and provided that they meet all regulations specific to the proposed use or facility contained in Chapter 16.24, and that they meet each of the additional standards provided in subsection D of this section: 
1.  Outdoor recreation facilities ten thousand (10,000) square feet or larger. 
2.  Indoor recreation facilities such as gymnasiums, health, and fitness facilities. 
3.  Recreation center and club. 
4.  Health and social services; including counseling, outpatient clinics, and the like. 
5.  One dwelling for an employee of the private school. 
C.  Standards for approval of special use permits for additional uses listed in subsection C of this section: 
1.  Outdoor activity shall be limited to the hours of ten a.m. to ten p.m., unless otherwise granted by the planning and zoning director. 
2.  The scale, intensity, and operation of the accessory use or facility shall not generate unreasonable noise, traffic congestion, or other potential nuisances or hazards to contiguous NR1, NR2 or NR3 properties. 
3.  No signage shall be allowed for any accessory or special use. 
D.  Retail and commercial sales uses shall be prohibited in a NR1, NR2 or NR3 zoning district. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 7/7/14) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.610 editor's note. 
16.20.640 - Solid waste transfer station/materials recovery facilities. 
A.  A survey, demonstrating compliance with all standards in this section and sealed by registered surveyor, and site plan are required. 
B.  Minimum acreage of site: Five acres. 
C.  Maximum acreage of site: Ten (10) acres. 
D.  The property shall be located at least five hundred (500) feet, measured from nearest property line to nearest property line, from NR1, NR2, NR3, CR or TCR zoning districts, nonconforming residential dwellings in NM, CM or TCM zoning districts, private or public wells, lakes, medical facilities, childcare facilities, schools or churches. 
E.  A minimum one hundred (100) foot-wide landscaped buffer, to include evergreen species and meeting all other requirements of this chapter, with access only allowed in the buffer, shall be maintained along all property lines including property lines abutting a public street. 
F.  All facilities shall be enclosed with a solid security fence at least eight feet in height parallel to all property lines and placed on the interior side of the required landscape buffer. A sight line study shall be submitted to city staff for approval. 
G.  Processing, equipment, materials and waste shall be strictly confined to the interior of the transfer station building. 
H.  Solid waste shall not be allowed to be stored on the tipping floor in the transfer station building overnight. Vehicles containing waste materials shall not be allowed to remain on-site overnight. 
I.  All runoff from wash water and stormwater shall be discharged to an on-site wastewater treatment system approved by the city. All paved areas shall drain into the on-site wastewater treatment system. 
J.  Solid residues from sewerage or other materials treatment processes shall be excluded from transfer station facilities. 
K.  Dust, odors and similar conditions, rodents, insects, and other such pests shall be controlled in accordance with federal, state and city health codes. All necessary action shall be taken to mitigate such conditions at transfer station facilities. These conditions shall not be detectable at the boundary of the property without the aid of instruments. 
L.  All parking and queuing of vehicles shall be paved and provided on-site. In addition to the parking requirements of this chapter, a minimum of five spaces for queuing of vehicles containing waste materials shall be provided. No parking or queuing shall be allowed in any buffer area or on a public street. 
M.  Vehicular access shall not be through any residential subdivision or development. Routes and entrances shall be approved by the public works director to ensure that access is derived from paved streets, that such streets will withstand anticipated maximum load limits, and that all safety issues are satisfactorily addressed. 
N.  All vehicles containing waste materials shall enter and leave the facility in a covered condition as required in subsection M above. 
O.  Establish operating hours of five a.m. to four p.m., Monday through Friday, and seven a.m. to twelve noon on Saturday, to reduce the nuisance produced by the operation. 
P.  The operation of transfer station facilities will comply with any and all current and updated applicable federal, state and local laws regarding the processing and disposal of solid waste. 
Q.  All permits are required to be in force and active from the state environmental protection division prior to permitting of the facility. Permit or certificate of approval from the state environmental protection division is to be provided to the department of public services and engineering on an annual basis at the time of business licensing renewal. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.610 editor's note. 
16.20.650 - Sports teams and clubs. 
A.  All athletic fields shall have access to collector or arterial street. 
B.  No amplified outdoor sound system speaker may be located closer than two hundred (200) feet from the nearest residence, measured along a straight line connecting the source with the nearest point of the nearest residential structure. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.610 editor's note. 
16.20.660 - Storage tank, bulk, flammable liquids. 
A.  No aboveground storage facilities may be located on the same lot as an automobile service station or closer than five hundred (500) feet from any NR1, NR2, NR3, CR or TCR zoned property or school. 
B.  No tank or other structure used for storage of flammable or toxic liquids shall be closer than one hundred (100) feet from a property line. 
C.  A fire prevention, evacuation and safety plan must be approved by the Covington fire department. 
D.  A spill containment and noise and air pollution abatement plan must be approved by the department. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.610 editor's note. 
16.20.670 - Storm shelter. 
A.  Storm shelters are permissible as accessory uses and structures, where permitted, subject to the following conditions: 
1.  If any portion of the structure extends above the ground, that portion above the ground must comply with the minimum setback and lot coverage regulations of the district in which it is located, and the site plan for such shelter must be approved by the planning and zoning director. 
2.  If the structure is completely underground, it shall comply with yard requirements of an accessory use, and impervious surface limits or building coverage limits shall not apply to an underground storm shelter which has no impervious surface extending closer than two feet below natural grade. 
3.  A storm shelter, underground or aboveground, shall be confined to a side or rear yard and shall not be located in the front yard between the main building and the street on which it fronts. 
4.  Storm shelters may be contained in other structures or may be constructed separately. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.610 editor's note. 
16.20.680 - Support activities for air transportation. 
    The following guidelines shall apply to all support activities for air transportation located on the City of Covington Municipal Airport property and on all property throughout the city of Covington: 
A.  Any business shall require a facility hangar or building that is of a size sufficient to contain the proposed or prescribed use, business service and customers. 
B.  The facility hangar or building shall be served with, at a minimum, electric, water and sanitary sewer utilities. All facility hangars and buildings shall comply with the requirements set forth in Title 15, Buildings and Construction. 
C.  All aircraft repair and maintenance activities shall be conducted indoors. 
D.  Outdoor storage of dismantled aircrafts or equipment awaiting repair is prohibited. 
E.  No junkyard or salvage yard shall be maintained or permitted to exist on property used for support activities for air transportation. 
(Ord. dated 7/1/13, § 2) 
16.20.690 - Swimming pool, home. 
    Swimming pools accessory to residences shall be enclosed by a security fence of a minimum height of five feet with a gate containing a self-closing positive latch device to insure that the pool is enclosed at all times. Health department approval shall be required prior to issuance of a building permit. The fence and gate shall be installed prior to filling the pool with water. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated July 1, 2013, renumbered §§ 16.20.680-16.20.760 as §§ 16.20.690-16.20.770. 
16.20.700 - Swimming pool, nonresidential. 
    Any constructed or prefabricated pool used other than in conjunction with a private residence requires health department approval. Public pools shall be enclosed by a fence of a minimum height of five feet with all gates containing a self-closing positive latch device to insure the pool is enclosed at all times. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.690 editor's note. 
16.20.710 - Temporary structure. 
A.  A temporary structure shall be any small structure, not to exceed the size of a large house trailer (twenty (20) feet by fifty (50) feet), or any portable, movable or mobile building or trailer, which is placed on a construction site within the unincorporated areas of the city; or any building as used for a sales office for real estate brokers and agents properly authorized to do business within the city; or any building as used as an office for the contractor who is properly authorized to do business within the city; or any other properly licensed agents within the city. 
B.  A temporary structure may be located on a particular site during the construction of houses, factories, stores and the like as provided in this section: 
1.  A permit for the construction or location of a temporary structure to be used as a real estate sales office or construction office may be issued only after verification of proper zoning and approval of the construction site plans. 
2.  The permit, when issued, shall expire one year from the date of issuance or immediately upon the completion of the construction concerned or if a subdivision, when the last house is sold, if before the one-year limit. 
3.  An extension may be granted upon request, and may be granted for any length of time so approved, not to exceed a period of six months; and the fee may be prorated on a per-month basis if so deemed by the mayor and council. 
4.  Cost of the permit shall be as established by the mayor and council. 
5.  Any violation of this section shall constitute grounds for the refusal of the city to issue any building permit requested by the violator. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.690 editor's note. 
16.20.720 - Temporary use, commercial retail. 
    Commercial structures of a seasonal or temporary nature including, but not limited to food stands, vendors or similar uses are permitted only in those commercial districts allowing similar uses on a permanent basis. Such structures shall meet appropriate city building codes, and if connected to utility systems, shall obtain necessary permits. A commercial retail temporary use shall require a permit issued by the department based on compliance with these provisions and other Covington code provisions for a duration not to exceed ninety (90) days. A single thirty (30) day extension may be authorized if approved in writing by the planning and zoning director. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.690 editor's note. 
16.20.730 - Transitional housing facility. 
A.  No more than six residents, not including owner and owner's family if residing on the premises. 
B.  Parking must be provided in an enclosed garage or in the rear or side yard. 
C.  The outer appearance of the building shall be compatible in height, style, front setback, roof type, fenestration and floor area with buildings on the same block. 
D.  If meals are served on the premises, meals may only be served to residents and owner's family members, if present. 
E.  Services shall not be provided on an "out-patient basis" to persons who are not regular residents of the facility, as described in subsection B of this subsection. 
F.  At least one thousand (1,000) feet shall separate a transitional housing facility from another transitional housing facility, rooming and boarding house or personal care home. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.690 editor's note. 
16.20.740 - Utility structures and buildings. 
    Utility structures and buildings, including electric power generating units and natural gas substations, telephone exchanges, and similar structures must be fenced and properly screened with a six-foot high planted buffer as approved by the department. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.690 editor's note. 
16.20.750 - Veterinary services. 
A.  Any structure used as an animal hospital or veterinary clinic shall be located and its activities conducted at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned NR1, NR2 or NR3, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject properties. 
B.  Medical treatment or care shall be practiced only within an enclosed building or structure. 
C.  Kennel or boarding operations incidental to the principal use shall be permitted only within an enclosed building or structure located at least one hundred (100) feet from any property zoned NR1, NR2 or NR3, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject properties. 
D.  The building or structure shall be designed to prevent the adverse impact of noise and/or odor from the animals on adjoining properties. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.690 editor's note. 
16.20.760 - Yard sale regulations. 
A.  Purpose. These rules and regulations are intended to serve the following purposes, among others: to protect and promote the health, safety, morals and general welfare of the residents of the city of Covington; to protect the number of yard sales within any one area of the city; to establish time limits; to certify by property owners the type of merchandise to be sold; to establish parking requirements and zoning districts; and to provide for the issuance of permits and sign regulations. 
B.  Administration. These rules and regulations shall be administered by the planning and zoning office. 
C.  Approval Before Sale. No property owner shall sell or negotiate to sell merchandise at a yard sale before the issuance of the permit from the planning and zoning office of the city. 
D.  Zoning Districts. A yard sale can be conducted in any zoning district within the city. 
E.  Limits on Sales. Only one permit can be issued per property owner within any ninety (90) day period. 
F.  Time Limit. A single permit is good for a period not to exceed two consecutive days at any one time. All sales shall be between one hour after sunrise to one hour before sunset. 
G.  Certifying of Merchandise. The individual holding the sale shall be responsible for certifying that there shall be no retail business conducted in said sale. 
H.  Parking. Parking shall not be in conflict with the normal traffic flow of said street in front of property. 
I.  Signs. One temporary on-premise sign is allowed containing not over six square feet in area and only for the time period of the authorized yard sale. No off-premise signs will be allowed. 
J.  Form of Application. The planning and zoning office shall revise the forms for permit application. 
K.  Penalty. Whenever any of these provisions are violated, the penalty will be as set out in Section 16.04.110 of this title. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.690 editor's note. 
16.20.770 - Zoo and botanical gardens. 
    Any structure used as a zoo and botanical garden shall be located and its activities conducted at least fifty (50) feet from any property zoned NR1, NR2 or NR3, measured along a straight line connecting the nearest points of the subject properties. 
(Ord. dated 8/6/12, § 5; Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Editor's note- See § 16.20.690 editor's note. 
Chapter 16.24 - OVERLAY ZONING DISTRICTS 

16.24.010 - Procedures governing overlay zoning districts. 
    Application. 
A.  Overlay districts are supplemental to the underlying zoning district classifications established in the zoning ordinance that govern all properties within Covington. Within areas mapped as overlay zoning districts in this chapter, these overlay district regulations shall be overlaid upon and shall be imposed in addition to said underlying zoning regulations. 
B.  The provisions of each overlay zoning district apply to all applications for rezoning, land disturbance permits, driveway permits, plan review, plat approval, building permits, utility permits and licenses for all property and rights-of-way within the boundaries of the overlay district. 
C.  All plan reviews, plat approvals, permits and licenses for parcels located within each overlay district shall meet all of the requirements of the base zoning district in which it is located and, in addition, shall meet the requirements of the overlay zoning district applicable to the parcel. All road and utility projects shall adhere to all requirements of the overlay zoning district. 
D.  Any parcel of land that is wholly or partly within the boundary shall be included in the overlay district. 
E.  Relationship to Underlying Zoning District Standards. In any case where the standards and requirements of an overlay zoning district vary from those of the base zoning district, the standards and requirements of the overlay district shall govern. 
F.  Map Amendments. No change in the boundary of an overlay zoning district shall be authorized, except by the mayor and council pursuant to procedures in Chapter 16.12. 
G.  Overlay Zoning District Boundary Maps. Overlay zoning district boundaries shall be as established on the official zoning map. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.24.020 - Airport Hazard overlay zoning district. 
A.  Findings of Fact. The mayor and council of the city find that airport hazards endanger the lives and property of users of the Covington Municipal Airport and the property and occupants of land in its vicinity. Such hazards may also reduce the area available for utilization by aircraft, thus impairing the utility of the airport and the public investment therein. It is, therefore, appropriate for the city to provide by ordinance for the prevention and control of airport hazards in the interest of the public health, safety and general welfare. 
B.  Airport Zone. In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there is created and established an overlay zone incorporating all of the land lying within the approach zones, transitional zones, horizontal zones, and conical zones of the airport. Such zones are shown on the airport hazard zoning map, including the approach and profile plan maps, on file at city hall and the planning and zoning office, which map is by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. Any area located in more than one zone shall be considered to be in the zone with the more restrictive height limitation. The airport zones are described as follows: 
1.  Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. The inner edge of this zone coincides with the width of the primary surface and is five hundred (500) feet wide. The approach zone expands outward uniformly to a width of three thousand five hundred (3,500) feet at a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet from either end of the primary surface. Its centerline is the centerline of the runway as extended in either direction from the ends of the airport runway. 
2.  Transitional Zone. The area beneath a plane extending outward and upward at ninety (90) degree angles to the runway centerline and the extended runway centerline with a slope of seven feet horizontally for each foot vertically from the sides of the primary and approach surfaces to where they intersect the horizontal and conical planes, and extending a distance of five thousand (5,000) feet measured horizontally from the edge of the approach zones and at ninety (90) degree angles to the extended runway centerline. 
3.  Horizontal Zone. A zone delineated by arcs of five thousand (5,000) feet in radius for all runways designated as utility or visual and ten thousand (10,000) feet in radius for all others, measured from the center of each end of the primary surface of each runway and connecting the adjacent arcs by drawing lines tangent to those arcs. 
4.  Conical Zone. An area that commences at the periphery of the horizontal zone and extends outward therefrom a horizontal distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. The conical zone does not include the precision instrument approach zones or the transitional zones. 
C.  Airport Height Limitations. Except as otherwise provided in this section, no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, allowed to grow, or maintained in the space within an airport zone or otherwise to a height in excess of the applicable height limit herein established for such zone. When more than one height limitation is applicable to a single space, the more restrictive limitation shall apply. 
1.  Runway Larger than a Utility Runway with a Visibility Greater than Three-Fourths Mile Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. Slopes upward thirty-four (34) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the end of and at the same elevation as the primary surface and extending to a horizontal distance of ten thousand (10,000) feet along the extended runway centerline. 
2.  Transitional Zone. One hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation. 
3.  Horizontal Zone. One hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation. 
4.  Conical Zone. Slopes upward and outward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone and at one hundred fifty (150) feet above the airport elevation and extending to a height of three hundred fifty (350) feet above the airport elevation. 
5.  Military Conical Zones. Slopes upward and outward twenty (20) feet horizontally for each foot vertically beginning at the periphery of the horizontal zone for a distance of four thousand (4,000) feet. 
D.  Use Restrictions; All Zones. Notwithstanding any other provisions of this section, no use may be made of land or water within any zone in such a manner as to create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communication between the airport and aircraft, make it difficult for pilots to distinguish between airport lights and other lights, result in glare in the eyes of a pilot using the airport, impair visibility in the vicinity of the airport or otherwise in any way create a hazard or endanger the landing, takeoff, or maneuvering of aircraft intending to use the airport. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in subsection C, all uses made of any land in any of the zone shall comply with all of the following performance standards, as applicable: 
1.  Outdoor Lighting. No use shall project lighting directly onto an existing runway or taxiway or into existing airport approach and landing paths except where necessary for safe and convenient air travel. Lighting for any new or expanded use shall incorporate shielding in their designs to reflect light away from airport approach and landing paths. No use shall imitate airport lighting or impede the ability of pilots to distinguish between airport lighting and other lighting. 
2.  Glare. No glare producing material, including but not limited to unpainted metal or reflective glass, shall be used on the exterior of structures located within airport approach and landing paths or on nearby lands where glare could impede a pilot's vision. 
3.  Industrial Emissions. No agricultural, industrial, mining or similar use, or expansion of an existing agricultural, industrial, mining or similar use, shall, as part of its regular operations, cause emissions of smoke, dust, or steam that could obscure visibility of pilots, except upon demonstration, supported by substantial evidence, that mitigation measures imposed as approved conditions will reduce the potential for safety risk or incompatibility with airport operations to an insignificant level. The review authority shall impose such conditions as necessary to ensure that the use does not obscure visibility. 
4.  Communications Facilities and Electrical Interference. 
a.  No use shall cause or create electrical interference with navigational signals or radio communications operated on the airport or operated between an airport and aircraft. Proposals for the location of new or expanded radio, radio-telephone, and television transmission facilities and electrical transmission lines shall be coordinated with FAA prior to approval. 
b.  Approval of cellular and other telephone or radio communication towers on leased property located within the airport zones shall be conditioned to require their removal within ninety (90) days following the expiration of the lease agreement. A bond or other security shall be required to ensure this result. Proof of as-constructed height shall be required to ensure the construction of the structure was done in compliance with the submitted plans and does not exceed the heights as noted in subsection C. 
5.  Fire and Explosion Hazards. No use or structure shall promote concentrations of flammable substances or materials. 
6.  Other Hazards to Aircraft Operations. In addition to the specific prohibitions stated in this subsection D, no use or structure shall otherwise endanger the landing, taking off, or maneuvering of aircraft. 
E.  Land Uses Within Airport Hazard Zones. 
1.  Applicability. 
a.  General Rule. The land use compatibility standards of this subsection E shall apply to all properties located in the specified airport zone. This section's land use compatibility standards restrict uses that may be hazardous to the operational safety of aircraft operating to and from the Covington Municipal Airport, and to limit population and building density in the runway approach areas, avoid concentrations of people, and create sufficient open space to protect life and property in case of accident. 
b.  Applicability of Regulations to Properties Located in More than One Zone. If a single parcel is located in more than one airport zone, the applicable zone use restrictions shall apply only to the portion of the property located in that zone. For example, if a property under single ownership is located half in the nonprecision instrument approach zone and half in the horizontal zone, the half located in the nonprecision instrument approach zone is subject to the use restrictions applicable in the nonprecision instrument approach zone, and the half located in the horizontal zone is subject to the applicable the horizontal zone use restrictions. 
c.  Use Restrictions in Nonprecision Instrument Approach Zone. Subject at all times to the height restrictions set forth in subsection C and the general performance standards in subsection D, areas with the nonprecision instrument approach zone shall comply with the following use restrictions: 
i.  Public assembly uses are prohibited. "Public assembly" uses include, but are not limited to, churches, hospitals, schools, theaters, stadiums, hotels, motels, campgrounds, and other structures or outdoor facilities where concentrations of people gather for purposes such as deliberation, education, shopping, business, entertainment, amusement, sporting events or similar activities, but excluding air shows. "Public assembly" uses do not include places where people congregate for relatively short periods of time, such as parking lots, or uses approved by the FAA in an adopted airport master plan. 
ii.  Multi-family residential uses, mobile home parks, and institutional living facilities such as nursing homes and senior assisted living facilities are prohibited. 
iii.  Dwellings on parcels less than two acres in size are prohibited. 
iv.  Uses that represent significant fire or explosion hazards, including fuel storage tank farms, above-ground fuel tanks, and gasoline stations, are prohibited. 
v.  Telecommunication and radio tower structures are prohibited. 
vi.  Approvals of wind turbines and above-ground, power-generating structures shall be conditioned on whether the equipment causes any hazard to the airport due to height, electromagnetic or other interference with air traffic communications, heat plumes, or other characteristics. 
d.  Use Restrictions in Horizontal Zone. The horizontal zone shall be subject only to height restrictions set forth in subsection C and the general performance standards in subsection D. 
F.  Nonconforming Uses. 
1.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require the removal, lowering, or other changes or alteration of any structure or tree not conforming to the said provisions as of the date of enactment of this section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of such nonconforming use. Neither shall anything contained herein require any change in the construction, alteration, or intended use of any structure, the construction or alteration of which was begun prior to the said enactment date, and is diligently prosecuted. 
2.  Notwithstanding subsection F.1. of this section, the owner of any existing nonconforming structure or tree shall be required to permit the installation, operation, and maintenance thereon of such markers and lights as shall be deemed necessary or desirable by the airport manager in order to indicate the presence of such airport hazards to the operators of aircraft in the vicinity of the airport. Such markers and lights shall be installed, operated, and maintained at the expense of the city. 
G.  Permits. 
1.  Permit Required-Application. No material change shall be made in the use of land and no structure or tree shall be erected, altered, planted or otherwise established in any zone created unless a permit has been applied for and approved by the city planning and zoning official; provided, however, that a permit for a tree or structure of less than seventy-five (75) feet in vertical height above the ground shall not be required in the area within a horizontal distance of four thousand two hundred (4,200) feet from each end of the runway except when such tree or structure, because of terrain, land contour, or topographic features, would extend above the height limit prescribed for the applicable zone. Each application for a permit shall be made in the form prescribed by the city planning and zoning official and shall indicate the purpose for which the permit is desired, with sufficient particulars for the city planning and zoning official to determine whether the resulting use, structure, or tree would conform to the provisions of this section. 
2.  Variances. Any person desiring to erect or increase the height of any structure, or permit the growth of any tree, or use his property in a manner other than in accordance with the provisions of this section may apply to the board of appeals and adjustments for a variance from such provisions as more particularly provided in Section 16.12.160 of this title. 
H.  Administration and Enforcement. The city planning and zoning department shall have primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section and shall have all requisite power and authority necessary to carry out such responsibility, including without limitation entry onto private property for inspections, issuance of administrative orders, and civil or criminal prosecution of violations of said provisions. 
I.  Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 16.04.100 of this title. Each violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. 8/6/18(2), § 1) 
Editor's note- Ord. dated 8/6/18, § 1, amended § 16.24.020 in its entirety to read as set out herein. Former § 16.24.020 pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord dated 6/30/08(part). 
16.24.030 - Walker's Bend overlay zoning district. 
A.  Findings of Fact. The mayor and council of the city find that residents of the Walker's Bend subdivision, as hereinafter defined, have requested an overlay zoning district be established for that neighborhood to govern and direct property maintenance, aesthetic issues, and architectural control through design guidelines and that establishment of such an overlay zoning district will promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of that neighborhood. 
B.  Purpose. The purpose of the Walker's Bend Overlay District is: 
1.  To promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of Walker's Bend; 
2.  To create a sense of place and neighborhood that is aesthetically appealing and environmentally responsible; 
3.  To encourage development of the Walker's Bend subdivision with consistent and harmonious landscaping and design standards so as to promote development of the Walker's Bend subdivision in accordance with the master plan presented by the original developer of such subdivision; which developer failed to establish such standards by restrictive covenants. 
C.  Walker's Bend Overly District. In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there is created and established an overlay zoning district (the "Walker's Bend Overlay District") incorporating all of that land described on that Final Plat of Walker's Bend prepared by John F. Brewer, III, last revised October 11, 2004, and recorded in the Office of the Newton County Clerk of Court at Plat Book 42, page 46 et seq., on October 21, 2004 which plat is by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
D.  Property Maintenance. All properly shall be maintained by its respective owners to the following standards: 
1.  Landscaping. Grass shall be cut on a regular basis, never allowing the length to exceed eight inches; ornamental plantings shall be properly maintained to typical industry standards; dead plant material shall be promptly removed. Ornamental plantings, excluding food-producing plants, may be watered with potable water only during the twelve-month period following initial planting and shall thereafter be watered only with non-potable water. 
2.  Paint. All exterior, painted surfaces shall be properly maintained through cleaning or repainting when appropriate. 
3.  Siding/Trim/Exterior Materials. Damaged or missing exterior siding, trim, shutters, etc. shall be promptly repaired or replaced. 
4.  Vehicles. Vehicles parked outside shall be properly registered and in working condition. 
5.  Outdoor Recreational/Play/Exercise Equipment. Any recreational, play, or exercise equipment kept outdoors shall be equipment specifically designed and intended for outdoor use and be kept in proper working condition. Broken equipment shall be promptly repaired, replaced or removed. 
6.  Pets. Pets kept outdoors shall be confined by fencing in an area appropriate for their size and breed and provided proper shelter, shade and water. Tethering of animals is not allowed. 
7.  Outdoor Laundry. The drying of laundry is allowed on appropriate clotheslines strung between wood, metal or masonry posts only. Laundry shall not be allowed to remain on the line for more than 24 hours at a time. 
8.  Antennas. Antennas visible from beyond any parcel shall be limited to one satellite dish receiver with a maximum diameter of thirty (30) inches or one VHF residential antenna. 
9.  Trash and Refuse. All trash and refuse shall be kept in proper containers and disposed of regularly. Trash containers shall be removed from the street frontage within twenty-four (24) hours following pickup and kept to the side or rear of the principal structure. 
10.  Outdoor Storage. Outdoor storage of household goods or equipment shall be confined to enclosures, storage sheds, outbuildings, etc. approved as set forth at subsection E of this Section 16.24.030. 
E.  Permits. 
1.  Permit Required; Application. In addition to permits otherwise required by ordinance, permits are required for fences, outbuildings, storage sheds, garages, and additions. Applications will be considered using the standards set forth in subsection F. of this Section 16.24.030. Permit applications are available at the Covington Planning and Zoning Office, 2116 Usher Street, Covington, Georgia 30014 during regular business hours. 
2.  Variances. Any person denied a permit for any of the above or who desires to use his property in a manner other than in accordance with the provisions of this section may apply to the board of appeals and adjustments for a variance from such provisions as more particularly provided in Section 16.12.160 of this code. 
F.  Exterior Element Approvals. The following exterior elements shall require an application for administrative approval by the planning and zoning director. The planning and zoning director shall review and decide upon each such application pursuant to the following applicable standards and shall make a written decision on each such application no later than thirty (30) days from the date such application was filed. Failure of the planning and zoning director to render a decision within such time shall be deemed approval of the application. All construction shall comply with the standards set forth in Marianne Cusato et al., Get Your House Right (2007) and all exterior siding material of residential structures shall be of brick, stone, wood, hardi-plank or other fiber-reinforced cement plank. Exterior materials of structures located within the mixed-use area shall be of brick, stone, stucco, wood, hardi-plank or other fiber-reinforced cement plank. Vinyl siding shall be prohibited through Walker's Bend. 
1.  Fences. Fences shall be wood, metal, or finished masonry only. No PVC, chain link, or plastic fencing shall be allowed. Fences located in the front yard and/or side yard of corner lots shall be no taller than thirty-six (36) inches. Privacy fences up to eight feet tall are allowed in the rear yard only. 
2.  Outbuildings/Sheds. The architectural character of outbuildings or sheds shall be consistent and/or compatible with the style, materials and detailing of the main dwelling on the property. All designs are subject to review by the planning and zoning director or designee of the planning and zoning director and must comply with the standards set forth in Marianne Cusato, et al., Get Your House Right (2007), a copy of which shall be available for public inspection at the Planning and Zoning Department, 2116 Usher Street, Covington, Georgia 30014 during regular business hours. 
G.  Design Criteria. 
1.  Architectural Design Guidelines. All construction shall comply with the following design guidelines. All applications for construction or other improvements as required by this chapter shall be reviewed by the planning and zoning director for compliance with such guidelines. The planning and zoning director shall review and decide upon each such application pursuant to the applicable standards set forth below and shall make a written decision on each such application no later than thirty (30) days from the date such application was filed. Failure of the planning and zoning director to render a decision within such time shall be deemed approval of the application. All designs are subject to review by the planning and zoning director or designee of the planning and zoning director and must comply with the standards set forth in Marianne Cusato, et al., Get Your House Right (2007), a copy of which shall be available for public inspection at the Planning and Zoning Department, 2116 Usher Street, Covington, Georgia 30014 during regular business hours. 
2.  Environmental Criteria. The city hereby adopts (a) the U. S. Green Building Council's (the "USBG") Leadership in Energy and Environmental Design ("LEED(tm)") Rating System, Version 3, (b) the LEED(tm) for Homes Rating System January 2008 Release, and (c) the EarthCraft House(tm) certification standards for residential construction. Copies of the foregoing three systems and standards shall be available for public inspection at the Planning and Zoning Department, 2116 Usher Street, Covington, Georgia 30014 during regular business hours. All applicable buildings shall be constructed such that they will achieve a LEED(tm) Certified (Basic) rating or an EarthCraft House(tm) certified rating. 
a.  Permits. Every applicant who files a permit application for construction of a building shall provide a completed LEED(tm) checklist or an EarthCraft House(tm) worksheet, on a form acceptable to the building official, that the criteria referenced at subsection G.1 of this Section 16.24.030 have been met. A permit shall not be issued unless such worksheet indicates that the proposed building will achieve enough points to attain LEED(tm) certified status or an EarthCraft House(tm) certification. No applicant shall be issued any permit until the building official is presented with (1) copies of the LEED(tm) checklist or an EarthCraft House(tm) worksheet; and (2) the registration of the proposed building with the USGBC or with EarthCraft House(tm). 
b.  Certificate of Occupancy. No permanent certificate of occupancy shall be issued unless and until the building official determines that verifiable documentation has been produced that affirms that the project as constructed is LEED(tm) or EarthCraft House(tm) certified. 
H.  Nonconforming Uses. 
1.  The provisions of this section shall not be construed to require the removal, or other changes or alteration of any building or structure not conforming to the said provisions as of the date of enactment of this section, or otherwise interfere with the continuance of such nonconforming characteristic(s). 
2.  Nonconforming buildings and structures shall be governed by the provision of Chapter 16.36 of this code. 
I.  Administration and Enforcement. The city planning and zoning department shall have primary responsibility for administration and enforcement of the provisions of this section and shall have all requisite power and authority necessary to carry out such responsibility, including, without limitation, entry onto private property for inspections, issuance of administrative orders, and civil or criminal prosecution of violations of said provisions, in accordance with Chapter 16.04 of this code. 
J.  Penalties. Violations of the provisions of this section shall be punished as provided in Section 16.04.110 of this code. Each violation shall be a separate offense. 
(Ord. dated 10/4/10, § 1) 
16.24.040 - Covington Town Center overlay zoning district. 
A.  General Provisions. 
1.  Findings of Fact. The mayor and council of the city find that Covington Town Center, as hereinafter defined, is a unique, individually planned development, which would otherwise not be allowed under the city's base zoning requirements but which would promote the general health, safety and welfare of the residents of the city. 
2.  Purpose. The standards and procedures of this overlay zoning district are intended to promote flexibility in design, allow planned diversification and integration of structures and uses, while at the same time providing the city with the authority to establish such limitations and regulations as it deems necessary to protect the public health, safety, and general welfare. 
3.  Covington Town Center overlay zoning district. In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there is created and established an overlay zoning district (the "Covington Town Center Overlay District") incorporating all of that land described on that plat of survey recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia, at Plat Book 51, page 104 et seq. on December 7, 2016, which plats are by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
4.  Master Developer. The Covington Town Center, LLC, a Georgia limited liability company, shall be known as the master developer of the Covington Town Center Overlay District. The master developer, or their assign, shall remain the master developer until such time as control is transferred to a master property owners' association. Once transfer has been legally established, the master property owners' association shall provide to the city the necessary documents showing the transfer of control and shall thereafter serve as master developer. 
5.  Phasing. Each phase of development of the Covington Town Center Overlay District shall be so planned and related to the previous phases of development, surrounding property, and availability of public facilities and services so that a failure to proceed with subsequent phases of the development will have no adverse impact on the completed phase(s) or surrounding properties. 
6.  Administrative Variances. In addition to those limited minor administrative variances from certain provisions of this zoning title which the planning and zoning director may generally approve as set forth at Section 16.12.150 of this zoning title, the planning and zoning director may grant the following limited additional administrative variances from the requirements of the site development standards set forth at subsection B.3. below and of the community development requirements set forth at subsection C below: 
a.  Any modification of the site development standards set forth at subsection B.3. below which does not exceed ten (10) percent of the requirement; provided that any requested modification of a setback where a property adjoining the setback is not included within the Covington Town Center Overlay District shall be subject to Section 16.12.150. 
b.  Any modification of the vegetative buffer requirements of the Community Development Requirements set forth at subsection C below; provided that any requested modification of a vegetative buffer where a property adjoining the vegetated buffer is not included within the Covington Town Center Overlay District shall be subject to Section 16.12.150. 
7.  Conceptual Development Plan. 
a.  Conceptual Development Plan Intent. The conceptual development plan establishes a general framework of areas within the Covington Town Center Overlay District that will be open to the public (public streets, open spaces, etc.) and those areas which will be private mixed use development blocks. The conceptual development plan, which was prepared by Thomas & Hutton Engineering, dated December 1, 2016 as modified July 3, 2018 and included in to the July 23, 2018 City Council meeting minutes, is available for inspection at the office of the planning and zoning director. 
b.  Modification to the Conceptual Development Plan. Deviation from the conceptual development plan may be necessary in the future. Deviations related to the development block pattern and public street layout may be approved by the planning and zoning director provided strict compliance with the conceptual development plan would cause undue and unnecessary hardship to the intent and the continued integrity of the Covington Town Center Overlay District. Deviations from the conceptual development plan modifying the location of proposed uses or conflicting with conditions of zoning shall require approval by the city council following recommendation of the planning commission. 
8.  General Provisions. 
a.  Introduction. The site development standards for the Covington Town Center Overlay District appear at subsection B.4 below. In addition to those standards, development within the Covington Town Center Overlay District shall comply with community development requirements set forth at subsection C below. 
b.  Preliminary Site Development Plans. Applicants seeking to subdivide or develop any tract or tracts within the Covington Town Center Overlay District shall be required to submit a Preliminary Site Development Plan for the tract(s) for approval to the Master Developer prior to submission to the city planning and zoning director of any subdivision plat or a site development plan required by Title 14. Subsequent subdivision of land and site development plans for such tract(s) shall be required and processed in accordance with Title 14, Development Regulations. The preliminary site development plan shall contain the following: 
i.  Total acreage. 
ii.  Identification of the development type: residential, office, retail, mixed use, etc. 
iii.  Number of proposed dwelling units and density, if applicable. 
iv.  Proposed square footages of non-residential development uses. 
v.  Buffers. 
vi.  Internal road system and proposed vehicular access points. 
vii.  Sidewalks or trails. 
viii.  Required and proposed parking summary. 
ix.  Any proposed phasing for the development of the tract. 
x.  Open space provided. 
c.  Private Review Body. The Master Developer shall establish its own development review body, its procedures and guidelines (including enforcement provisions) which shall be the responsibility of the master developer or its designated successor. In order to confirm compliance with the procedures and guidelines of the master developer, an application to the city for approval of a development related plan or site related work shall be accompanied by a notarized letter of approval from the master developer, or its designated successor. A development-related plan includes, but is not limited to, a preliminary site development plan, site plan, subdivision plat, recombination plat, signage and lighting. Site-related work includes, but is not limited to, land clearing and construction of infrastructure. Nothing contained herein shall be construed to impose any obligation on the city to administer or enforce the master developer's procedures and guidelines nor to preclude the city from accepting any application not accompanied by the approval of the master developer, or its designated successor. 
B.  Permitted Uses. 
1.  Uses. Except for the uses specifically added or excluded below, the allowed uses within the Covington Town Center Overlay District shall be those allowed in the underlying base corridor mixed use zoning district. 
2.  Additional Uses; Hotels and Motels/Extended Stay. "Hotel, extended stay" means any building containing six or more guestrooms rented or leased for sleeping purposes for periods of less than sixty (60) consecutive days but in excess of one week, and that contain kitchen facilities for food preparation, including, but not limited to, refrigerators, stoves, and ovens. Further, extended-stay hotels shall be classified as one of the following chain segments: upper midscale; upscale; upper upscale; or luxury as classified by the STR Chain Scales Report. No extended-stay hotels shall be constructed or thereafter operated unless the extended-stay hotel is classified in one of the applicable segments. For the purposes of this section, "the STR Chain Scales Report" means a report produced by Smith Travel Research, a leading lodging industry data and benchmarking firm, which is updated on an annual basis to reflect equivalent average daily rates (ADR) across lodging chains within a particular market or geography. 
a.  Regulations. 
i.  Extended-stay motels/hotels are limited to no more than fifty (50) guestrooms per acre; 
ii.  Each guest unit must contain a minimum square footage per unit of three hundred (300) square feet; 
iii.  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels/motels must be constructed on a tract of land containing at least two acres; 
iv.  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels/motels must contain an enclosed, heated and air-conditioned laundry space containing a minimum of three clothes washers and three clothes dryers for the use of guests; 
v.  Hotels, motels and extended-stay hotels/motels must provide a minimum of one thousand (1,000) square feet for recreational use by guests. In computing the one thousand (1,000) square-feet requirement, swimming pools, fitness or recreation centers and other recreational facilities may be used in determining the square footage required by this subsection; 
vi.  Management must be on the property twenty-four (24) hours a day, seven days a week; 
vii.  Daily maid service must be included in the standard room rate; and 
viii.  Parking areas must have security fencing and lighting with a minimum luminescence of one footcandle at pavement level. 
ix.  No guest shall register, reside in, or occupy any guest unit or guest units within the same extended-stay hotel/motel for more than sixty (60) consecutive days. 
b.  Change of Location or Name. 
i.  No applicant shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in, or carry on an extended-stay motel/hotel under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on the occupation tax certificate. 
ii.  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an extended-stay motel/hotel is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this chapter. 
iii.  Prohibited uses: 
(a)  Drug rehabilitation center or other facility for treatment of drug dependency; 
(b)  Halfway house; 
(c)  Residential mental health facility; 
(d)  Transitional housing facility; 
(e)  Automotive repair and maintenance; 
(f)  Home and garden equipment repair and maintenance; 
(g)  Pawn shops; 
(h)  Motor vehicle sales; 
(i)  Overnight commercial vehicle parking; and 
(j)  Single family detached dwellings. 
C.  Community and Site Development Standards. 
1.  General. The standards in this section apply to all development within the Covington Town Center Overlay District. 
2.  Residential Uses. To ensure a sustainable balance of a mix of uses throughout the Covington Town Center, residential shall not exceed three hundred fifty (350) total dwelling units. 
    Townhouses, and multi-family buildings shall only be allowed within the residential areas shown on the conceptual development plan dated July 3, 2018. Residential-Above-Commercial shall be allowed in all areas. If the three hundred fifty (350) unit cap is reached without using all the area shown as residential, the remaining undeveloped area shall revert to non-residential/mixed-use classification. 
a.  Townhouse dwellings shall be subject to the supplemental use provisions of Section 16.20.255. 
b.  Multifamily dwellings shall be subject to items A.4 through A.12 of the supplemental use provisions of Section 16.20.250. 
c.  Residential-Above-Commercial. The following shall apply to all residential above commercial: 
i.  The maximum density of residential-above-commercial shall not exceed ten (10) units per net acre. Non-residential density for mixed-use buildings shall not exceed thirty thousand (30,000) square feet of gross leasable floor area per net acre. Ground level retail shall be constructed prior to the completion of the upper level residential. 
ii.  With exception to pedestrian entrances and lobbies to residential uses only, in no case shall any residential uses be permitted on the first floor. 
iii.  The integration of residential and non-residential uses on the same floor, within the same building, shall be prohibited. 
iv.  Uses shall be mixed such that no time will residential uses be located below non-residential uses. 
v.  Exterior corridors that provided access to multiple units shall be prohibited. Stairways and elevator shafts shall be internal to all mixed-use buildings. 
d.  Multifamily, Residential-Above-Commercial, and Non-Residential Development Standards. 
Floor Area Ratio - All Uses (FAR) Building Coverage (Maximum %) Open Space Minimum Impervious Surface (Maximum % of Lot Area on Any Individual Development) Lot Size/Lot Width (Minimum) Front Yard Setback (Minimum) Rear Yard Setback (Minimum) Side Yard Setback (Minimum) [1] Height (Maximum) 1.0 80% 20% (Entire overlay district. See C.3 below) 90% n/a 20' 20' 10' or 0' for mixed use or non-residential 75'  
[1] Setbacks on side yard shall not be required on buildings that are planned to be constructed as a contiguous group of buildings. 
3.  Residential streets. As a planned development, all streets, drives, and alleys serving townhouse and multifamily buildings shall be designed and constructed to minimum city street standards, however said streets, drives, and alleys shall not be dedicated as public infrastructure and all maintenance and improvements shall be the responsibility of the master developer. All streets, drives, and alleys shall contain utility easements providing the utility owners and their designees the right and ability to perform necessary maintenance and improvements within said easements. 
4.  Open Space. The Covington Town Center Overlay District shall not have less than twenty (20) percent community open space as defined at Section 16.08.010. Individual developments or phases within the Covington Town Center Overlay District may be less than twenty (20) percent as long as the master developer, or its designated successor, provides the city with a notarized letter in conjunction with the development of such development or phase stating that the twenty (20) percent open space minimum will be provided within the entire Covington Town Center Overlay District and the planning and zoning director determines that such open space requirement is capable of being achieved. 
    The open space shown on the conceptual development plan is intended to be maintained in a natural but aesthetically pleasing way. The trails and pond areas shown are to be considered both a necessary infrastructure improvement, as well as, an amenity to be enjoyed by visitors of the property. In this regards, typical requirements for perimeter fencing around the ponds areas shall not be required. While the route may differ upon final design, the trail intent that is shown on the conceptual development plan shall be constructed along with the development of the mass grading and roadway infrastructure improvements. 
5.  Landscape and Buffers. The landscape plantings within the Covington Town Center Overlay District shall utilize the city's community tree species list for determining appropriate species for each tree size category. Relative size designations in this subsection 3 shall have the meaning ascribed in such list. 
6.  Exterior Roads and Perimeter Buffers. Where development is adjacent to Alcovy Road, City Pond Road or Highway 142, or any other perimeter property lines of the overlay district, a buffer, as defined at Section 16.40.020, twenty (20) feet in width shall be required along the length of the tract. The buffer shall also serve as a development setback. The intent of the buffer is to provide a visual softening, not complete screening, of the development in relationship to exterior properties. 
a.  In addition to the permitted screening items at Section 16.40.020, the exterior road and perimeter buffer may include visual screening, utilities, stormwater management/conveyance, and signage. 
b.  Such buffers shall not include parking or buildings. 
c.  A continuous planting of evergreen shrubs shall be required anywhere parking is visible from the adjacent exterior roads and perimeter properties. Such plantings shall be of a species that is capable of being maintained at thirty-six-inch minimum height within one year of plantings. A brick, stone or other similar material wall thirty-six (36) inches in height may be provided instead of the plantings as an alternate compliance. 
d.  Two large or medium species trees shall be included for every one hundred (100) feet of buffer length. For areas that have overhead utility conflicts that do not allow for planting large or medium species trees, four small trees for every one hundred (100) feet of buffer length shall be provided. 
e.  The preservation of existing vegetation is desirous and where sufficient amounts exist, no supplement plantings are required. For those areas with sparse vegetation supplemental plantings shall be required at the rate listed in subsections C and D above. 
7.  Internal Road Buffers. Where development is adjacent to an internal public road, a vegetative buffer ten (10) feet in width shall be required along the length of the tract. The buffer shall also serve as a development setback. A roadway cross-section with an example of this buffer, prepared by Thomas & Hutton Engineering and dated November, 2016, is available for inspection at the office of the planning and zoning director. 
a.  In addition to the permitted screening items at Section 16.40.020, the interior road buffer may include visual screening, utilities, stormwater management/conveyance, and signage. 
b.  Such buffers shall not include parking or buildings. 
c.  A continuous planting of evergreen shrubs shall be required anywhere parking is visible from an internal public road. Such plantings shall be of a species that is capable of being maintained at thirty-six-inch minimum height within one year of plantings. A brick, stone or other similar material wall thirty-six (36) inches in height may be provided instead of the plantings as an alternate compliance. 
d.  The internal roads will be designed to include street trees at a maximum of fifty (50) feet on center within the road right-of-way. Therefore, there is not a requirement to include trees within the ten-foot internal road buffers. 
e.  Street tree species shall not be mono-specie or mono-cultured when greater than six trees are planted. 
f.  Streetlights shall meet light levels defined by ANSI/IES standard RP-8-14 for medium collector roadways with R3 pavement classification. All roadway lighting systems shall be installed in accordance with the National Electric Safety Code (NESC) using wiring methods, poles and fixtures approved by the city of Covington Electric Department. 
8.  Parking Area Plantings. Parking within side, rear or front building setback areas shall be allowed. However, no parking shall occur within the required buffer areas. The following additional planting standards apply to all parking areas: 
a.  All parking areas shall have tree islands and parking lot perimeter planting areas adequately sized in order to provide a minimum of one tree for every seven parking spaces. Further, tree islands shall be provided at the end of all parking rows and in no case shall a parking space be greater than one hundred sixty-five (165) feet away from a tree. 
b.  Tree islands shall be ten-foot minimum width of plantable area. However, if a minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of pervious pavement is provided in the immediately adjacent parking spaces, this width may be reduced to five-foot-wide minimum. Depending on the design of the parking area, additional width may be necessary to meet the minimum permeable surface area requirements based on the tree size as listed in the tree canopy coverage section below. 
c.  Trees planted within parking areas shall consist of overstory trees chosen from the large species and medium species trees identified in the Covington Community Tree Species List. 
d.  A minimum of seventy (70) percent of the plantable area shall be covered with groundcover, sod, shrubs or other living plants. Large areas of mulch only will not be permitted. 
e.  Landscape strips separating head-to-head parking are encouraged to improve the aesthetics of an expansive parking area, to allow for bio-retention opportunities and to allow another opportunities for tree plantings to reduce the heat island effect, however, they are not required. 
9.  Tree Canopy Coverage. The overall Covington Town Center Overlay District shall meet a forty-five (45) percent tree canopy coverage. This standard shall apply to the entire overlay district and not on a parcel by parcel or development by development basis. However, no individual project shall provide less than ten (10) percent tree canopy coverage. Due to the nature of the site and the amount of grading that is expected, the majority of this requirement will be met through plant back on site. Therefore, there is not a minimum amount of existing tree canopy preservation that is required. The following additional planting standards apply to all areas of the site: 
a.  The permeable surface area required shall be: 
i.  Large tree-Two hundred (200) square feet. 
ii.  Medium tree-One hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
iii.  Small tree-One hundred (100) square feet. 
iv.  Very small tree-Fifty (50) square feet. 
b.  The canopy coverage credit shall be: 
i.  Large tree-One thousand six hundred (1,600) square feet. 
ii.  Medium tree-Nine hundred (900) square feet. 
iii.  Small tree-Four hundred (400) square feet. 
iv.  Very small tree-One hundred fifty (150) square feet. 
c.  The minimum caliper per species planted shall be: 
i.  Large canopy trees-Four inches in caliper measured six inches above ground. 
ii.  Medium canopy trees-Three inches in caliper measured six inches above ground. 
iii.  Small canopy trees-Two inches in caliper measured six inches above ground. 
iv.  Very small canopy trees-Two inches in caliper measured six inches above ground. 
v.  Multi-trunk trees-Four inches in caliper measured six inches above ground, the combination of all trunks. 
d.  Species composition: 
i.  Genus-Fifty (50) percent maximum. 
ii.  Species-Thirty (30) percent maximum. 
iii.  Small canopy trees-Twenty-five (25) percent maximum. 
iv.  Very small canopy trees-Twenty-five (25) percent maximum. 
10.  Service Areas, Utilities and Loading Docks. 
a.  Location. Refuse areas, storage, loading and commercial vehicle parking shall be located in a manner to minimize being visible from streets, sidewalks, trails and other pedestrian oriented amenities and infrastructure. 
b.  Dumpsters. 
i.  All dumpsters shall be screened from public view on three sides by a masonry wall enclosure that is a minimum of eight feet in height. The fourth side shall provide access by an opaque steel gate. 
ii.  The materials and paint color of the enclosure and gate shall be compatible with the principle structure it is an accessory to. 
iii.  Bollards shall be placed along the interior walls of the enclosure to prevent damage during servicing of the dumpster. 
iv.  Dumpsters shall be placed on concrete pads of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
v.  Restaurants and other food service establishments shall place dumpsters on concrete pads that are designed to slope into a drain that is equipped with a grease trap. 
c.  Utilities and Loading Docks. Utility facilities, loading docks and truck parking area shall be screened from public view using building mass, screen walls and/or landscaping. 
11.  Parking. 
a.  No parking area or structure shall be located within a required buffer. 
b.  Standard parking spaces shall be a minimum nine feet wide by eighteen (18) feet in depth. A maximum of twenty (20) percent of the provided spaces may be "compact" spaces which may be eight feet wide by sixteen (16) feet in depth. 
c.  Minimum drive aisle widths will vary based on the angle of parking spaces, one-way versus two-way traffic, etc. 
i.  One-way traffic-45-degree parking, 15-foot aisle width. 
ii.  One-way traffic-60-degree parking, 18-foot aisle width. 
iii.  Two-way traffic-60-degree parking, 24-foot aisle width. 
iv.  Two-way traffic-90-degree parking, 24-foot aisle width. 
d.  Maximum Parking Spaces by Type of Development. 
i.  Residential. Maximum of two parking spaces per bedroom 
ii.  Non-Residential. 
Type of Use [1] Maximum Number of Off-street Parking Spaces Commercial/retail 5 per 1,000 gross sq. ft. Office (all) 4 per 1,000 gross sq. ft. Restaurant 10 per 1,000 gross sq. ft. Hotel 1 space for each guest room or suite. Should a hotel provide additional uses, additional spaces may be provided at the ratios listed above.  
[1] For developments or buildings that contain multiple uses, the maximum number of allowed spaces shall be calculated based on the percentage of use proposed. Example: A use that has retail sales as well as a full service restaurant option would be considered both commercial/retail parking and restaurant parking. 
e.  The request to construct additional parking spaces above the maximum allowed shall first be made in writing to the master developer, or its designated successor. Following review by the master developer or its successor, or if the master developer or its designated successor does not respond within thirty (30) days, the request shall then be reviewed by the director of planning and zoning upon written application and proof of notice to the master developer. The director of planning and zoning may authorize an increase in the total number of parking spaces permitted as specified in subsection C of Section 16.44.010. 
f.  To the extent practical, parking rows shall be oriented perpendicular to business fronts allowing pedestrians to circulate down the drive lanes and a minimum of one accessible route shall be provided from the public entries of uses to an adjacent public right-of-way. 
g.  Parking areas shall be screened and planted as required elsewhere within this section. 
h.  Parking area lighting may be installed by the end user or leased by the city of Covington Utilities installed in accordance with the National Electric Code (NEC) or the National Electric Safety Code (NESC), respectively. At a minimum, parking area lighting shall meet light levels as defined by ANSI/IES standard RP-20-14. 
12.  Outdoor lighting. Outdoor lighting shall incorporate shielding in their designs to reflect light away from adjacent properties and streets. Due to the proximity to the Covington Municipal Airport, no use shall imitate airport lighting or impede the ability of pilots to distinguish between airport lighting and other lighting. 
D.  Signage. All signage shall follow the allowed signage and standards of Chapter 16.48, signs for approval processes. The following standards shall apply to the signage within the Covington Town Center Overlay: 
1.  Ground Signs Along Public Streets. 
a.  One sign structure per road frontage per parcel of up to forty (40) square feet per sign face, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed eighty (80) square feet for the first two hundred (200) linear feet of parcel road frontage. For each one hundred (100) linear feet of additional road frontage, twenty (20) additional square feet of sign face is allowed per sign face. However, no sign shall exceed a maximum of eighty (80) square feet per sign face (aggregate total of each sign not to exceed one hundred sixty (160) square feet) for any given sign. Each sign shall have a maximum height of eight (8) feet and a minimum setback of ten (10) feet. 
b.  One planned center ground sign shall be allowed per road frontage of the overall development to identify Covington Town Center, the maximum area per sign for the planned center ground signs shall be one hundred eighty (180) square feet per face, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed three hundred sixty (360) square feet. The maximum height of the planned center signs shall be twelve (12) feet and a minimum setback often ten (10) feet. 
c.  Ground signs shall be attached to a minimum one and one-half-foot-high permanent wall or base constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units. Upon development of the overall signage design standard, all ground signs along public roadways shall incorporate the standard wall or base element. 
d.  A minimum of one hundred (100) square feet of shrub and groundcover plantings shall be provided around each ground sign. 
e.  Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
f.  Height shall be as measured from the adjacent road finished grade elevation. However, should the existing ground at the sign area be above that of the adjacent road, the height shall be measure from the lowest elevation of the directly adjacent existing or proposed finished ground elevation. 
2.  Window Signs. Total signage shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the area of windows along the primary façade or facing the adjacent public road frontage. 
3.  Wall Signs. Each tenant shall have no greater than one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of tenant space per elevation. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
4.  Roof Signs. In lieu of a wall sign(s) a tenant or stand-alone building may erect one permanent roof sign per road frontage, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The height of the roof sign and supporting structure shall not exceed ten (10) percent of the building height upon which it is erected. 
b.  The maximum square footage of a roof sign shall be equivalent to that of the building's linear foot per road frontage. Under no circumstances shall a roof sign overhang the building upon which it is erected. 
c.  Signs located between the wall plate and curb on a mansard roof are considered wall signs. 
5.  Changeable Copy Signs. Changeable copy signs are permitted. They shall be an integral part of the permitted ground sign and shall not exceed twenty-five (25) percent of the permitted ground sign, sign face. When a light emitting diode (LED) board is used such sign shall not be animated, flash, blink or vary in light intensity and shall hold a fixed message for one minute at a time and change messages in less than three seconds. No changeable copy sign shall give off light which glares, blinds or has any other adverse effects on traffic or adjacent properties and shall contain a default setting that shall display a dark, blank screen should a malfunction occur. LED-type signs shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.30 footcandle (under measurement conditions) above ambient light levels as measured from seventy-five (75) feet. 
6.  The signs allowed under Section 16.48.050, additional allowable signs shall be allowed following the standards provided within that section. 
7.  Temporary construction signage shall be allowed at the following rate on each parcel of record: 
a.  Sixteen (16) square feet for the first two hundred (200) linear feet of street frontage. 
b.  Eight (8) additional square feet for each additional one hundred (100) linear feet of street frontage. 
c.  The maximum allowable temporary construction signage per individual parcel is sixty-four (64) square feet. 
d.  The maximum height of a temporary construction sign is eight (8) feet. 
e.  Temporary construction signs shall be setback a minimum of ten (10) feet from the right-of-way. 
f.  All temporary construction signs shall be removed from the parcel it is erected upon prior to the issuance of the first certificate of occupancy for a structure upon the parcel. 
g.  A temporary construction sign shall be defined as a sign placed upon any parcel pursuant to this provision of this subsection regardless of the content or message displayed upon such sign. 
E.  Buildings and Building Design. Unless otherwise provided in this Section, the following regulations shall apply to all non-residential buildings in the Covington Town Center Overlay District: 
1.  Building Materials and Design. 
a.  No exterior wall or facade of any building visible from any public street shall have the appearance of a metal building. Such exterior walls and facades shall be constructed of brick, glass, wood, stucco, stone or cement-based siding. 
b.  Building materials for facades of buildings oriented to public streets shall be constructed of brick, stone (natural or artificial), textured concrete masonry units, wood, stucco, cement-based siding, or glass. Polyvinyl chloride building products are prohibited. 
2.  Orientation of Building. 
a.  Delineation of building floors at the third story above sidewalk level and lower shall be executed through windows, belt courses, cornice lines or similar architectural detailing. 
b.  All buildings shall have their primary facade oriented substantially towards the main public streets or internal private drives or streets to which the building relates and is adjacent. Buildings located on outparcels situated between two streets, whether public or private, may orient the primary facade toward either such street provided that the other facades that are visible from a public street shall be architecturally compatible with the primary facade. 
c.  The primary pedestrian access to all sidewalk level uses and business establishments with public or private street frontage, or parking lot frontage shall be directly accessible and visible from the sidewalk adjacent to such street or parking lot. 
d.  No barbed wire, razor wire, chain link fence or similar elements shall be visible from any public plaza, ground level or sidewalk level outdoor dining area or public right-of-way. 
3.  Building Scale. 
a.  Discontinuous Building Massing. Every building shall reduce its perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. Building walls exceeding one hundred (100) continuous horizontal linear feet shall utilize offsets, such as projections, recesses, and changes in floor level, to add architectural interest and variety, and to relieve the negative visual effect of a simple long wall. 
b.  Variation in Building Silhouettes. Variation in the roofline of buildings and offsets in pitched roofs and gables shall be required. Parapets in building masses exceeding one hundred (100) continuous linear feet shall be varied in height and projection and shall use decorative elements such as crown moldings, dental, brick soldier courses, or similar detail. 
4.  Storefront Requirements for Non-residential and Mixed-use Buildings. 
a.  Where there are ground floor nonresidential uses within a mixed use building, non-residential use shall be provided for a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet from any building facade abutting a sidewalk that is accessible to the public whether it is on a public street or within a development that is open to the public. 
b.  The length of facade without intervening fenestration, architectural detailing or entryway shall not exceed thirty (30) feet. 
c.  All building facades that contain a public entrance shall include fenestration into their design. The minimum square feet of fenestration shall be equivalent to sixty-five (65) percent of the length of the façade in which the public entrance is located. A maximum of fifteen (15) percent of provided fenestration treatment shall be permitted to utilize architectural detailing in place of glass to meet the fenestration treatment requirements. All fenestration treatments shall be visually and architecturally consistent and compatible with each other. The director of planning and zoning may consider fenestration amounts that differ from the standards above based upon the use, visibility from public areas, and other architectural treatments proposed on the structure. 
    Example: A non-residential building has two facades that each contain a public entrance, the primary facade is six hundred eighty-five (685) linear feet and the secondary façade is one hundred fifty (150) linear feet. The primary façade shall contain 445.25 square feet (685 × 65% = 445.25) of fenestration and the secondary façade shall contain 97.5 square feet (150 × 65% = 97.5) of fenestration. No other facades contain a public entrance therefore fenestration is not required. 
d.  Fenestration shall not utilize painted glass, reflective glass or other similarly treated or opaque windows. Entrances, windows, and product display windows, are counted towards fenestration requirements. Shuttered windows may be considered based on the elements of the overall design of the building. 
5.  The master developer shall develop additional design guidelines, restrictions and covenants that shall apply to all uses within the Covington Town Center Overlay District. Upon development, such guidelines, restrictions and covenants shall be publicly recorded in the office of the clerk of Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia. A copy of recorded guidelines shall be provided to the director of planning and zoning. 
(Ord. dated 1/18/17(1), § 1; Ord. dated 8/6/18(3), § 1) 
16.24.050 - Clark's Grove overlay zoning district 
A.  Findings of Fact. The mayor and council of the city find that Clark's Grove is a master planned community that began through a community charrette in the year 2000 to be a traditional mixed use neighborhood and which was originally zoned in 2001 as a traditional neighborhood planned unit development pursuant to the city's zoning ordinance then in effect. This overlay zoning district is substantialy similar to the terms of the 2001 traditional neighborhood planned unit development for Clark's Grove and shall govern architectural control through design guidelines and that establishment of such an overlay zoning district will authorize the continuation of the Clark's Grove master plan which will promote the general health, safety and welfare of residents of the city. 
B.  Purpose. The standards and procedures of this overlay zoning district are intended to allow the master plan to proceed and build out as originally developed, to promote flexibility in design, allow diversification and integration of structures and uses. 
C.  Clark's Grove Overlay Zoning District. In order to carry out the provisions of this section, there is created and established an overlay zoning district (the "Clark's Grove overlay district") incorporating all of that land described on that final subdivision plat of Clark's Gove Unit One recorded in the office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia, at Plat Book 39, page 2 et seq. on December 19, 2002, final subdivision plat of Clark's Grove Unit 1.5 recorded in ofice of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia at Plat Book 44, page 164 et seq. on March 17, 2006, final subdivision plat of Clark's Grove Phase 2-A recorded in office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia at Plat Book 51, page 250 et seq. on October 20, 2017 and survey of 22.21 acres recorded in office of the clerk of the Superior Court of Newton County, Georgia at Plat Book 52, page 85 et seq. on August 3, 2018, which are by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. References herein to "Clark's Grove" shall refer to the property within the Clark's Grove overlay district as shown and described on such recorded plats. 
D.  Definitions. 
1.  As used when italicized in this zoning application, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth below: 
a.  "Building" means principal building. 
b.  "Building height" means that, in addition to the definition set forth in Chapter 16, Section 16.08.010 of this zoning ordinance, the height shall also be measured in the number of stories and shall not include a raised basement or inhabited attic; each story shall not exceed fourteen (14) feet clear. When measured utilizing the number of stories, masts, belfries, clock towers, chimney flues, water tanks, or similar structures shall not be included in height calculations. In addition, the roof surface shall not be included in height calculations, provided that the roof surface does not project more than twenty-one (21) feet above the combined maximum height for the permitted number of stories. 
c.  "Dwelling" means, in addition to the definition set forth in Chapter 16, Section 16.08.010 of this zoning ordinance, a building housing one family in a permanent manner which may include not more than two boarders or lodgers. 
d.  "Front" means the portion of a lot, building or yard adjacent to the frontage line. 
e.  "Front façade" means the portion of the building closest to the frontage line. 
f.  "Frontage line (FL)" means the line separating a lot from a street or privately-held park and open space contiguous to said lot, provided that such park and open space fronts and is within one hundred (100) feet of a public right-of-way along a street. 
g.  "Frontage setback (FS)" means a line generally parallel to the frontage line between which line and the frontage line no building or outbuilding may be erected, altered or extended, with the exception of arcades, stoops, bay windows, open porches, decks and balconies. 
h.  "Lane" shall mean a twenty-four (24) feet wide mid-block right-of-way with a ten (10) feet wide paved area. 
i.  "Multi-Family dwelling" means "multi-family dwelling" as defined in Chapter 16, Section 16.08.010 of this zoning ordinance. 
j.  "Outbuilding" means an ancillary building, usually located towards the rear of the lot, on the same lot as the principal building, which may house not more than one family and not more than two boarders or lodgers. 
k.  "Park(s) and open space" shall be a use zone with no buildings or outbuildings located within it other than those housing public restrooms or public, unheated structures such as gazebos and picnic facilities. 
l.  "Principal building" means the main building on the lot, always located towards the frontage line. 
m.  "Rear" means that portion of a lot, building, outbuilding, or yard adjacent to the rear lot line. 
n.  "Rear setback, building (RSB)" means a line generally parallel to the rear lot line between which line and the rear lot line no building may be erected, altered or extended, and between which line and the frontage line no outbuilding may be erected, altered or extended. 
o.  "Rear setback, outbuilding (RSO)" means a line generally parallel to the rear lot line between which line and the rear lot line no outbuilding may be erected, altered or extended. 
p.  "Regulating plan" means the regulating plan for Clark's Grove prepared and dated June 2001 for Clarks Grove LLC by Duany Plater-Zyberk and Tunnell-Spangler and Associates, a copy of which is on file at city hall and the planning and zoning office, which map is by this reference incorporated herein and made a part hereof. 
q.  "Side setback (SS)" means a line generally parallel to the side lot line between which line and the side lot line no building or outbuilding may be erected, altered or extended. 
r.  "Street" means "street" or "square drive" as identified on Attachment D: Thoroughfare Standards or Clark Street to the extend the right-of-way of Clark Street is adjacent to property subject to this overlay zoning district. 
s.  "T3 Sub-urban" shall be a use zone and shall be subject to the regulations herein. Corresponding zoning district is Neighborhood Residential 3 (NR-3). 
t.  "T4 Urban General" shall be a use zone and shall be subject to the regulations herein. Corresponding zoning district is Neighborhood Residential 3 (NR-3). 
u.  "T5 Urban Center" shall be a use zone and shall be subject to the regulations herein. Corresponding zoning district is Neighborhood Mixed Use (NM). 
v.  "Use Zone" means an area governed by the regulations set forth herein and limited to the indicated T3, T4, T5 and Parks and Open Space designations. 
E.  General. Use zones, street network, lane location, street type, and parks and open space locations set forth within this document shall reflect and be substantially similar to the use zones, street network, lane location, street type, and parks and open space locations identified on the regulating plan. 
F.  Urban Standards. 
1.  Regulations shown on Attachment A: Urban Standards shall govern lot configuration, building height, building placement, building elements, parking placement, and trash container placement within the indicated use zones. 
2.  Within the T4 and T5 use zones and in addition to the parking placement regulations set forth in Attachment A: Urban Standards, parking and drive areas shall be prohibited between the building and the street and shall only be accessed through a lane as shown on the regulating plan. 
3.  No driveway apron or driveway shall be greater than twelve (12) feet in width when located between a building and the street. 
4.  Within the T3 use zone parking may be accessed from the adjacent street, but shall not be located between the building and the street. 
G.  Architectural Code. 
1.  The following building types and general uses are defined and permitted within Clark's Grove subject to the urban standards shown on Attachment A: Urban Standards: 
a.  "Villa" means a detached dwelling located on its own lot, which may include a detached outbuilding. 
b.  "House" means a detached dwelling located on its own lot, which may include an attached or detached outbuilding. 
c.  "Cottage" means a detached dwelling located on its own lot or sharing a lot with other cottages, which may include an attached or detached outbuilding. 
d.  "Sideyard house" means a dwelling located on its own lot and in a building with a zero-foot side setback on one side, which may include an attached or detached outbuilding. 
e.  "Patio house" means a dwelling or multi-family dwelling located in a building with a zero-foot side setback on both sides and which surrounds one or more private courtyards. 
f.  "Rowhouse" means "townhouse" as defined in Chapter 16, Section 16.08.010 of this zoning ordinance, which may include an attached or detached outbuilding. 
g.  "Flexhouse" means a building located on its own lot and housing one dwelling and with a ground floor along the street frontage which may be occupied by commercial uses. 
h.  "Apartment building" means a multi-family dwelling. 
i.  "Commercial building" means a building housing exclusively commercial uses. 
2.  The permission of building types within use zones is limited to that shown more specifically in Attachment B: Architectural Code. 
H.  Architectural Standards. All buildings and outbuildings within Clark's Grove shall comply with the all of the architectural standards shown in Attachment C: Architectural Standards. 
I.  Landscaping Standards. 
1.  Street trees are required on all streets and shall be planted in the ground an average of thirty (30) feet on center along a given street. 
2.  Trees shall have a minimum planting area of twenty-five (25) square feet. 
J.  Thoroughfare Standards. 
1.  All sidewalks shall be located within the public right-of-way (R.O.W.). 
2.  Regulations shown on Attachment D: Thoroughfare Standards shall govern all aspects of thoroughfare design within the public right-of-way. 
3.  Along a minimum of one side of Clark Street a multi-use trail serving bicycles and pedestrians shall be provided and shall have a minimum width of eight feet. 
K.  Density. Multifamily is a permitted in the Neighborhood Mixed Use zoning district, shown as the T5 zone on the regulating plan, at a maximum density of exceed forty-five (45) units per acre. 
L.  Additional Standards. 
1.  Street trees shall be located between the curb and the sidewalk and shall be a minimum of three (3.0) inches in caliper measured thirty-six (36) inches above ground. 
2.  Shrubs and hedges located between the frontage setback and the frontage line shall be trimmed to a maximum height of thirty-six (36) inches above the adjacent sidewalk. 
3.  Fenestration shall be provided for a minimum of forty (40) percent of the width of the building façade closest to the frontage setback and shall: 
a.  Be measured at a height above the finished floor elevation equal to one-half of the floor-to-floor distance. 
b.  Not utilize painted glass, reflective glass or other similarly treated or opaque windows. 
c.  Include entrances in fenestration requirements. 
4.  All primary building entrances on front façades, including porches, steps and doors for pedestrians to access all ground level uses and business establishments with street frontage, shall: 
a.  Face and be visible from the street. 
b.  Be directly accessible with a paved walkway and visible from the sidewalk. 
5.  An address number shall be located directly above or beside the primary building entrance, shall be clearly visible from the sidewalk and shall be a minimum of six inches in height. 
6.  Buildings with multi-family uses at the ground level shall meet the following regulations: 
a.  All primary pedestrian entrances not adjacent to a public sidewalk shall be linked to the public sidewalk with a pedestrian walkway a minimum of five feet wide. 
b.  All such buildings with more than four residential units that are adjacent to the sidewalk shall have individual entrances to such units directly accessible from the sidewalk and shall open directly onto the adjacent sidewalk, park, plaza, terrace or porch adjacent to the sidewalk. 
7.  Fences and walls shall meet the following regulations: 
a.  For residential uses adjacent to the sidewalk, fences and walls (excluding retaining walls) shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height when located between the building or outbuilding and the street. 
b.  For non-residential uses adjacent to the sidewalk, fences are prohibited when located between the building and the sidewalk except where specifically required in the City of Covington Code. 
c.  Retaining walls located adjacent to a sidewalk along a street shall not exceed a height of two feet unless existing topography requires retaining walls of two or more feet in height. 
d.  Fences and walls located between the building or outbuilding and the side lot line and not exceeding six feet in height may be erected, but shall not be permitted between the primary building and the street. 
8.  No barbed wire, razor wire, chain link fence or similar elements shall be visible from any park or open space identified on the regulating plan or any public right-of-way. 
9.  Within no use zones shall parking or garage doors be closer to the street than the façade line is. 
10.  Within the T4 and T5 use zones, all commercial buildings shall provide bicycle/moped parking facilities at a ratio of at least one bicycle/moped parking space for every twenty (20) automobile parking spaces. 
11.  Within the T4 and T5 use zones, all multi-family buildings shall provide bicycle/moped parking facilities at a ratio of at least one bicycle/moped parking space for every five multi-family units. No multi-family building shall have fewer than three bicycle/moped parking spaces. 
12.  Bicycle/moped spaces shall be located within the public right-of-way a maximum distance of one hundred (100) feet of the building entrance, or shall be located at least as close as the closest automobile space, except for handicapped parking spaces. Each space shall include a metal anchor sufficient to secure the bicycle/moped frame when used in conjunction with a user-supplied lock. 
Attachment A: Urban Standards 
T3 Sub-Urban 
(NR-3) T4 Urban General 
(NR-3) T5 Urban Center 
(NM) Lot Configuration Minimum lot width: 60 feet 36 feet 18 feet Maximum lot width: none 72 feet 72 feet Minimum lot depth: 120 feet 80 feet 80 feet Lane required along rear lot line: No Yes Yes Alley required along rear lot line: No No No Building Height Building maximum: 2.5 floors 2.5 floors 5 floors Building minimum: 1 floor 1 floor 2 floors Outbuilding maximum: 2 floors 2 floors 5 floors Outbuilding minimum: none none none Building Placement Minimum front setback (FS): 24 feet 12 feet 0 feet Maximum front setback (FS): None 24 feet 12 feet Minimum rear setback, building (RSB): 24 feet 5 feet 3 feet Minimum rear setback, outbuilding (RSO): 3 feet 3 feet 3 feet Side setback (SS): Minimum 6 feet on both 0 feet on both; or minimum 6 feet on both; or 0 feet on one side and minimum 12 feet on the other 0 feet, or minimum 6 feet Maximum lot coverage: 65% 65% 65% Building Elements Stoops, bay windows, open porches, decks and balconies may encroach into the front setback and side setback a maximum of: 12 feet To frontage line To frontage line Arcades may encroach into the sidewalk only when extending to the curb and shall have a minimum width of: Arcades prohibited Arcades prohibited 0 feet Trash Container Placement Trash containers shall not be closer than the following distance from the frontage line: 32 feet 38 feet 32 feet  
  
Attachment B: Architectural Code 
Building types within Clark's Grove are limited to the indicated use zones. 
Building Type T3 Sub-Urban (NR-3) T4 Urban General (NR-3) T5 Urban Center (NM) Villa Yes No No House Yes Yes Yes Cottage No Yes Yes Sideyard house No Yes Yes Patio house No Yes Yes Rowhouse No Yes Yes Flexhouse No Yes Yes Apartment building No No Yes Commercial building No Yes Yes  
  
Attachment C: Architectural Standards 


Attachment D: Thoroughfare Standards 
Thoroughfare types within Clark's Grove are shown on the regulating plan and defined below. 
As Identified on Regulating Plan ST 50-26 SQ 41-17 SQ 51-27 General Type: Street Square drive Square drive Movement: Slow movement Slow movement Slow movement Design speed: 20 MPH 20 MPH 20 MPH R.O.W. width: 50 feet 41 feet 51 feet Cartway Pavement width: 26 feet 17 feet 27 feet Traffic flow: Two ways One way Two ways Number of parking lanes: One side alternate One side One side Parking lane width: 7 feet 7 feet 7 feet Curb types: Raised Raised Raised Curb radius: Maximum 15 feet Maximum 15 feet Maximum 15 feet [Planting] Zone Planter width: 7 feet 5 feet 5 feet Planter type: Continuous Individual Individual Bicycles Bike way type: Bike route Optional bike route Optional bike route Bike way width: 8 feet 8 feet, if provided 8 feet, if provided Sidewalks Sidewalks on: Both sides One side One side Sidewalk width: 5 feet 12 feet 12 feet  

(Ord. date 9/4/18, § 1) 
Chapter 16.28 - CIVIC DESIGN 

16.28.010 - Civic design provisions. 
    The regulations set forth in this chapter shall govern the urban and civic design aesthetics and building form in all zoning district. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.28.020 - Building design. 
    The following regulations shall apply to buildings in any CR, TCR, NM, CM or TCM district. 
A.  Building Materials and Design. 
1.  No exterior wall or facade of any metal building visible from any public street shall have the appearance of a metal building. Such exterior walls and facades shall brick, glass, wood, stucco, stone or cement-based siding. 
2.  Building materials for facades of buildings oriented to public streets shall be constructed of brick, stone, or textured concrete masonry units, stucco, or glass. Up to fifty (50) percent of facades of residential buildings also may be constructed with wood siding or similar material approved by the planning and zoning director. 
B.  Relationship of Building to Street. 
1.  Delineation of building floors at the third story above sidewalk level and lower shall be executed through windows, belt courses, cornice lines or similar architectural detailing. 
2.  All buildings shall have their primary facade directly fronting and facing a public or private street. 
3.  The primary pedestrian access to all sidewalk level uses and business establishments with public or private street frontage shall be directly accessible and visible from the sidewalk adjacent to such street. 
4.  No barbed wire, razor wire, chain link fence or similar elements shall be visible from any public plaza, ground level or sidewalk level outdoor dining area or public right-of-way. 
5.  Drive-through service windows, drive-in facilities, drives and surface parking facilities shall not be located between a building and the adjacent public street. Provided, however, that the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to a location at which any building situated thereon fronts on an adjacent street the posted speed limit for which is forty-five (45) miles per hour or greater. 
C.  Building Scale. 
1.  Discontinuous Building Massing. Every building shall reduce its perceived height and bulk by dividing the building mass into smaller scale components. Building walls exceeding one hundred (100) continuous horizontal linear feet shall utilize offsets, such as projections, recesses, and changes in floor level, to add architectural interest and variety, and to relieve the negative visual effect of a simple long wall. 
2.  Variation in Building Silhouettes. Variation in the roofline of buildings and offsets in pitched roofs and gables shall be required. Parapets in building masses exceeding one hundred (100) continuous linear feet shall be varied in height and projection and shall use decorative elements such as crown moldings, dental, brick soldier courses, or similar detail. 
3.  Building Step Backs. Buildings in excess of fifty (50) feet in height shall be required to step back that portion of the building greater than fifty (50) feet in height a minimum linear distance of ten (10) feet away from the building facade located below the fifty (50) foot height plane. 
D.  Storefront Requirements. 
1.  Ground-floor nonresidential uses shall provide said uses for a minimum depth of twenty (20) feet from any building facade along the public sidewalk. 
2.  The length of facade without intervening fenestration, architectural detailing or entryway shall not exceed twenty (20) feet. 
3.  Fenestration treatment shall be provided for a minimum of sixty-five (65) percent of the length of all street frontages. A maximum of fifteen (15) percent of said fenestration treatment shall be permitted to utilize architectural detailing in place of glass materials to meet the fenestration treatment requirements. All fenestration treatments shall be visually and architecturally consistent and compatible with each other. 
4.  Fenestration shall not utilize painted glass, reflective glass or other similarly treated or opaque windows. Entrances may be counted towards fenestration requirements. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 2/4/13(2), § 1; Ord. dated 7/15/14, § 1) 
16.28.030 - Streetscape dimensions. 
A.  Private lanes, drives or streets used to meet any of the street requirements of this title shall meet the dimensional requirements set forth in the Street Type Dimensions Table. 
B.  Streets designated as freeways shall not be regulated by the Street Type Dimensions Table. 
C.  All public streets within the city shall be officially designated on the city of Covington street plan map by street type. All streets, and development and landscaping thereon, shall meet dimensional requirements set forth in the following Street Type Dimensions Table. 
D.  See the Space Dimensions Table in Section 16.16.030 for dimension requirements for densities, maximum heights, side and rear yards and other lot calculations as regulated by zoning districts. 
Street Type Dimensions Table Minor Streets Subdivision Streets, Loop Streets & Cul-de-Sacs Arterials & Collectors Major Thoroughfares & Downtown Streets Landscape Zone (minimum, in ft.) 3' 5' 5' 5' Sidewalk Clear Zone (minimum, in ft.) 5' 5' 6' 10' Building Facade Height (minimum, in ft.) 15' 15' 20' 25' Front Yard (minimum, in ft.) 10' 25' 20' 20'  
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.28.040 - Blocks. 
A.  The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
1.  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the types of use contemplated. 
2.  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions. 
3.  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic. 
4.  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
B.  Blocks in NR1, NR2 or NR3 districts shall not be greater than one thousand eight hundred (1,800) feet in length, or less than six hundred (600) feet in length. In blocks over one thousand (1,000) feet long, the planning and zoning director may, when existing or proposed public gathering places so justify, require public crosswalks across the block. 
C.  Blocks in NR1, NR2 or NR3 districts shall be wide enough to provide two tiers of lots, except where fronting on arterials, collectors or major thoroughfares or prevented by topographical conditions or size of the property, in which case the planning commission may require and/or approve a single tier of lots of minimum depth. 
D.  Development in NR1, NR2 or NR3 districts that abuts undeveloped NR1, NR2 or NR3 property shall provide one local street connection to the adjacent property for each eight hundred (800) feet of shared property line. 
E.  Development in CR, TCR, NM, CM or TCM districts, with more than six hundred (600) feet of frontage along a single street shall be divided by streets into blocks having a maximum length of six hundred (600) feet, as measured from street curb to street curb. 
F.  Streets used to divide properties into blocks shall meet all of the street and sidewalk designations of this zoning ordinance. 
G.  Opportunities for inter-parcel vehicle access points between all contiguous tracts in any CR, TCR, NM, CM, TCM, M1 or M2 district shall be provided. 
H.  A cul-de-sac street that ends within one hundred (100) feet of an adjacent collector, arterial or major thoroughfare street shall provide a five-feet wide sidewalk in a ten (10) feet wide easement connecting the sidewalk on the cul-de-sac to the sidewalk on the adjacent collector, arterial or major thoroughfare street. 
I.  Gates and security arms shall be prohibited from crossing any public street or sidewalk. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.28.050 - Sidewalks. 
A.  Sidewalks. 
1.  Public sidewalks shall be located along both sides of all streets and shall have minimum widths as specified in the Street Type Dimensions Table. Sidewalks shall consist of two zones: a landscape zone and a sidewalk clear zone. 
2.  Landscape zones shall be located immediately adjacent to the curb and shall be continuous. This zone may be used for street trees, street lights, benches, planters, trash receptacles, bicycle parking racks and other street furniture, pedestrian lights, landscaping, or sod. Additional pavement or other similar elements shall be permitted only as approved by the planning and zoning director. 
3.  Sidewalk clear zones shall be located immediately contiguous to the landscape zone and shall be continuous. Said zone shall be hardscape, and shall be unobstructed for a minimum height of eight feet. Special paving within the sidewalk clear zone shall be permitted only as approved by the planning and zoning director. 
4.  For specific street tree planting requirements, see Title 14: Chapter 14.28 Tree Preservation. 
5.  Required tree plantings may be planted in the adjacent front yard when extreme conditions prevent the planting of street trees within the landscape zone and only as approved by the planning and zoning director. 
6.  Outdoor Dining. Outdoor dining may encroach into the sidewalk clear zone when the following criteria are met: 
a.  Shall provide a minimum of six feet wide of unobstructed sidewalk clear zone area; 
b.  No permanent structure or ornamentation shall be located within the area where encroachment is permitted and no element shall be attached to the sidewalk in any way; 
c.  At such time as the outdoor dining use is discontinued, sidewalks shall comply with all requirements of this chapter; and 
d.  Outdoor dining may be separated from the sidewalk only with movable planters, fencing or similar nonfixed barriers provided they do not exceed a height of thirty-six (36) inches including any plant material. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.28.060 - Front yards. 
A.  Front yards shall have the minimum dimensions specified in the Section 16.28.030 Streetscape Dimensions Table. 
B.  The square footage contained within the front yard which meets open space criteria may be counted towards the open space requirements. 
C.  Landscape zones and sidewalk clear zones shall be permitted within the front yard. 
D.  Front yards for buildings in which the predominant use is nonresidential shall ensure pedestrian access from the adjacent sidewalk clear zone to the required primary pedestrian entrance of the building and may also include fountains, pedestrian furniture, public art, plazas and similar elements. 
E.  Front yards for buildings in which the predominant use is residential shall be landscaped with the exception of terraces, porches, stoops and walkways, which may occupy a maximum of one-half of the front yard area. Said elements may be required to be set back from the edge of the adjacent sidewalk for the safe and convenient location of public utilities. 
F.  Lots less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in total lot area in NM, CM or TCM districts shall be permitted to have automobile parking located in parking lots within the front provided such parking lots are limited in area to a maximum of thirty (30) percent of the total lot. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 16.32 - STANDARDS APPLYING TO ALL DISTRICTS 

16.32.010 - General provisions. 
    The regulations set forth in this zoning ordinance within each district shall be minimum regulations and shall apply uniformly to each class or kind of structure or land, except as otherwise provided. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.020 - ADA compliance. 
    In addition to the regulations of this zoning ordinance, the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) Accessibility Guidelines for buildings and facilities shall also apply. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.030 - Applicability to land, buildings and open space. 
    No building, structure, land, or open space shall hereafter be used or occupied and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved, or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations herein specified for the district in which it is located. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.040 - Buildings under construction. 
    Nothing in this zoning ordinance shall require any change in the construction or intended use of a building which is legally under construction or for which a building permit has been lawfully issued as of the effective date of this zoning ordinance and the construction of which is diligently pursued under the terms of the permit(s) issued until completion. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.050 - Business license requirements. 
    All uses requiring an occupation tax and business license pursuant to Title 5 shall comply with all such licensing requirements and shall not be considered lawful uses under this title if in violation of such licensing requirements. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.060 - Classification of streets. 
    For purposes of this zoning ordinance, all of the streets, roads and highways in the city of Covington except where otherwise noted, are classified as minor streets, cul-de-sacs, subdivision streets, arterial streets, collector streets, loop streets, major thoroughfares and downtown streets as shown on the city of Covington street plan map. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.070 - Fence and hedges. 
A.  Corner Visibility. On corner lots within all zoning districts, no fence, shrubbery, or other obstruction to traffic line of sight vision shall exceed a height of two and one-half feet within the triangular area formed by the intersection of right-of-way lines at two points measured twenty (20) feet along the property line from the intersection. Within said triangle there shall be no sight obscuring wall, fence or foliage higher than thirty (30) inches above grade or in the case of trees, foliage lower than eight feet. Vertical measurement shall be made at the top of the curb on the street or alley adjacent to the nearest side of the triangle or if no curb exists, from the edge of the nearest traveled way. 
B.  Measurement Rule. Heights of fences, hedges, and other continuous foliage shall be measured from the adjacent top of the street curb, surface of an alley, or the official established grade thereof, whichever is higher. Along interior lot lines, the measurement shall be from the average grade of the lot line of the parcel on which the fence is located. 
C.  Exceptions. The mayor and council may approve, or may direct as a condition for granting approval, that fences or plantings of a height in excess of these regulations be placed as shielding between different uses, or between like uses upon agreement between the parties affected thereby, provided that no such approval shall have the effect of reducing corner visibility as provided for herein. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.080 - Front yard setbacks for dwellings. 
    The front yard setback requirements for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average existing building setback line on lots located wholly or in part within one hundred (100) feet on each side of such lot, within the same block, and fronting on the same side of the same street as such lot, is less than the minimum front yard setback required. In such cases the front yard setback on such lot may be no less than the average of the existing setbacks on the aforementioned lots, or within ten (10) feet of the street right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.090 - Height and density. 
    No building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to exceed the height or bulk limits of this zoning ordinance; to accommodate or house a greater number of families; to occupy a greater percentage of lot area; to have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards, or other open spaces than herein required; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this zoning ordinance. 
    The height limitations of this zoning ordinance shall not apply to religious institution spires, belfries, cupolas, domes, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, derricks, conveyors, flag poles, radio or television towers, or aerials within all CR, TCR, NM, CM, TCM, M1 and M2 districts. The maximum height allowed for these elements shall be the maximum height allowed in the designated zoning district plus an additional fifteen (15) percent of the maximum height allowed in the designated zoning district. See also airport related provisions. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.100 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Section 2 of an ordinance adopted July 7, 2011, repealed § 16.32.100, which pertained to inoperative vehicles, and derived from an ordinance adopted June 30, 2008. Similar provisions can be found in § 8.16.010. 
16.32.110 - Lot reduction prohibited. 
    No lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yards, lot area per dwelling unit or other requirements of this zoning ordinance are not maintained. Yards or lots created after the effective date of this zoning ordinance shall meet at least the minimum requirements established by this zoning ordinance. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for a public purpose. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.120 - Measurement of distance. 
    All distance measurements of this title that do not specify the method of measurement shall be measured in a straight line from the nearest property line to the nearest property line. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.130 - One principal residential building on a lot. 
    Only one permitted principal use, and its authorized accessing use(s), shall be authorized per lot, unless multiple or mixed uses are specifically authorized on the same lot elsewhere in this zoning ordinance. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.140 - Permitted encroachments upon required setbacks. 
    The following setback encroachments are permitted: 
A.  Cornices, eaves, chimneys, porches, bay windows, or other similar architectural features may extend into the required front, side and rear yard provided such extensions do not exceed three feet. Decks and patios may extend into the side or rear yard no closer than ten (10) feet from any property line. Steps and landings may extend into the required setbacks provided such extensions do not exceed ten (10) feet for the front yard, three feet for the side yard and no closer than ten (10) feet from the property line in the rear yard. 
B.  When a canopy is utilized in connection with a commercial or industrial use in districts where such uses are permitted, such canopy may occupy a portion of the required yard setback adjacent to streets, subject to the following provisions: 
1.  No portion of a canopy shall be closer than ten (10) feet from any street right-of-way line when measured vertically, nor closer than ten (10) feet from the face of the curb of the street. 
2.  No canopy shall occupy more than fifty (50) percent of a required yard over which it extends. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.150 - Permit issuance. 
    All applications and permits shall be reviewed by the appropriate city authority within the applicable time limits set forth herein. If no time limit is specified, such application or permit shall be reviewed and decided upon within thirty (30) days unless the applicant agrees to an extension of time in writing. Applications and permits not decided upon within time limits specified shall be deemed approved. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.160 - Sight obscuring container enclosures. 
    Trash and recycling dumpsters must be enclosed on three sides by a decorative wall or opaque fence. The height shall be equal to or higher than the trash or recycling dumpster. Temporary construction trash and recycling dumpsters which are not enclosed shall be permitted up until such time as the certificate of occupancy is granted. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.170 - Street frontage requirement. 
    Every building hereafter erected or moved shall be on a lot adjacent to a public street and all structures shall be so located on lots as to provide safe and convenient access for servicing, fire protection, and required off-street parking. 
    In the event a land locked lot exists, as of the effective date of this zoning ordinance, the property owner shall be entitled to only one building permit, provided: 
A.  No other principal building exists or is being constructed on said property; 
B.  No other valid building permit has been issued prior to the effective date of this zoning ordinance and is currently valid; 
C.  The property was and continues to be under single ownership since the effective date of this zoning ordinance; 
D.  The property owner has acquired a twenty (20) foot access easement to a publicly maintained street, and said easement has been duly recorded and made part of the property deed; and 
E.  In the event said property is divided, no additional permits will be issued. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.180 - Substandard lots of record. 
    Any lot of record existing at the time of adoption or amendment of this zoning ordinance, which has an area or width which is less than required by this zoning ordinance, shall be subject to the following exceptions and modifications. 
A.  Adjoining Lots. When two or more adjoining and vacant lots within a non-approved development with continuous frontage are in a single ownership at the time of application, and such lots have a frontage or lot area less than is required by the district in which they are located, such lots shall be re-platted so as to create one or more lots which conform to the minimum frontage requirements of the district. 
B.  Lots Not Meeting Minimum Lot Size Requirements. When a lot has an area or frontage which does not conform to the requirements of the district in which it is located, but was a lot of record at the effective date of this zoning ordinance, such lot may be used for any use allowed in the zoning district in which it is located provided that all other requirements of this zoning ordinance are met. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.190 - Truck stops prohibited. 
    Truck stops are prohibited. Furthermore, no adjoining or adjacent uses shall be physically connected or used so as to effectively create a truck stop. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.200 - Unsafe buildings. 
    Nothing in this zoning ordinance shall prevent the strengthening or restoring to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by proper authority. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.210 - Uses requiring occupation tax and business license. 
    All uses requiring an occupation tax and business license pursuant to Title 5 shall be located in a zoning district that permits such business activity in accordance with the Permitted Uses Table of Section 16.16.020. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.32.220 - Walls and fences. 
    The setback requirements of this zoning ordinance shall not prohibit any necessary retaining wall or fence except that in a NR1, NR2 or NR3 zoning district: 
A.  Front yard fences and walls shall not exceed forty-two (42) inches in height and shall not extend into the public right-of-way. 
B.  Front yard fences shall be within six inches of the property line and shall not be made of wire, woven metal, or chain link unless located on property of an agricultural or undeveloped use or of a lot size larger than three acres. 
C.  Ornamental or decorative fences constructed of brick, stone, stucco, split rail, wood or wrought iron and not constructed of exposed block, tires, junk or other discarded material shall be permitted within the front yard setback. 
D.  No fence or wall shall exceed eight feet in height within a rear or side yard. 
E.  Retaining walls located adjacent to a sidewalk along a public street shall not exceed a height of two feet and the combined height of a fence where otherwise authorized and retaining wall shall not exceed a height of five feet, unless existing topography prohibits retaining walls of a lesser height. Retaining walls shall be from finished poured concrete or shall be faced with stone, brick or smooth stucco. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 16.36 - NONCONFORMING SITUATIONS 

16.36.010 - General provision. 
    Within the zoning districts established by this title, or in other provisions or amendments, there exist lots, uses of land, uses of land and buildings, uses of land and structures, and characteristics of buildings and structures that were lawful before this title was adopted, but that would be prohibited under the terms of the adopted this title or future amendment. Such nonconforming situations are declared to be incompatible with authorized and permitted uses and regulations within the district(s) involved. It is the intent of the city to require the cessation of certain of these nonconformities, and to allow others to continue, on a limited basis, until they are otherwise removed or cease. It is further the city's intent that nonconformities not be used as grounds for adding other buildings, structures, or uses of land prohibited by this title, and that no such building, structure, or use of land shall be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.020 - Nonconforming use of land. 
    The legal nonconforming use of land may be continued, but no such nonconforming use of land which has been discontinued for a continuous period of six months shall be re-established unless such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the property. Such nonconforming use of land shall not be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.030 - Reversions and changes. 
A.  A legal nonconforming lot of record in a NR1, NR2 or NR3 district may be used for one single-family residence. 
B.  Any nonconforming use, use of land or building in combination, use of land and structure in combination, nonconforming lot of record, or nonconforming characteristic ("nonconforming situations") that is changed to a conforming state shall not be permitted to revert to a nonconforming situation. 
C.  No nonconforming situation shall be changed to another nonconforming situation. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.040 - Nonconforming use of land and buildings in combination and nonconforming use of land and structures in combination. 
    The following regulations apply to the nonconforming use of land and building(s) in combination and the nonconforming use of land and structure(s) in combination: 
A.  Such uses of land and buildings or land and structures may be continued, but no such use which has been discontinued for a continuous period of six months shall be re-established unless such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the property. 
B.  Such uses of land and buildings or land and structures, or any such building or structure, shall not be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
C.  A nonconforming use of a building may be extended into those interior parts of a building which were manifestly designed for such use prior to the enactment of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.050 - Nonconforming characteristics of buildings and structures. 
    No building or structure with nonconforming characteristics which is occupied by a conforming use shall be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner that increases the degree of nonconformity. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.060 - Nonconforming uses requiring special use permit. 
    No nonconforming use, building or structure requiring a special use permit, including any use, building or structure that was authorized as of right prior to the adoption of this chapter but would require a special use permit upon the adoption of this title, shall be enlarged, expanded, moved, or otherwise altered in any manner except after application for and approval of the now-required special use permit. Normal repair and maintenance of buildings and structures is authorized without the need for a special use permit. No such use, building, or structure that has been discontinued for a continuous period of six months shall be re-established unless such cessation is a direct result of governmental action impeding access to the property. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.070 - Reconstruction. 
    Any building or structure constituting a nonconforming use of land and building(s), nonconforming use of land and structure(s), or building or structure with nonconforming characteristics that has been damaged by fire or other cause, may be reconstructed to its previous nonconforming characteristics and used as it was prior to damage if said reconstruction is completed within one year of the date of the damage, except that if said building or structure has been declared by the director to have been damaged to an extent exceeding sixty (60) percent of its fair market value at the time of destruction, then any repair, reconstruction or new construction shall conform to all of the requirements of the district in which said building or structure is located. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.080 - Buildings and structures. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall prevent the strengthening or restoration to a safe condition of any part of any building or structure declared unsafe by the director. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.090 - Buildings and structures where construction has begun. 
    To avoid undue hardship, nothing in this chapter shall be deemed to require a change in the plans, construction, or designated use of any building or structure for which a development or building permit was lawfully applied for or issued, prior to the effective date of this title or amendment thereto, provided: 
A.  Such permit or approval has not by its own terms expired prior to such effective date. 
B.  Actual building construction is commenced prior to the expiration of such permit or approval. 
C.  Actual building construction is carried on pursuant to said permit or approval and limited to and in strict accordance with said permit or approval. 
D.  No renewals or extensions of said permit or approval shall be authorized. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.100 - Area extensions prohibited. 
    A nonconforming use, or building or structure in combination with a use, or building or structure with nonconforming characteristics, shall not be extended or enlarged beyond the area of use or beyond the conforming size, height, or other dimensions or characteristics of the building or structure as it existed on the date of adoption of this title or amendments applicable thereto. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.36.110 - Sign provisions. 
    Nonconforming situations relating to signs shall be governed by Chapter 16.48. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 16.40 - OPEN SPACE, BUFFERS AND SCREENING 

16.40.010 - Open space. 
A.  Open Space General Requirements. 
1.  Open space shall be required as established in the Space Dimension Table (Chapter 16.16). 
2.  Required yards and requirements for sidewalk zones and landscape zones which are constructed on private property may be counted towards open space requirements. No more than thirty-five (35) percent of a combination of the side and rear yards may consist of a concrete, asphalt or gravel driveway or parking area and the remaining percentage shall be grass or landscaped areas. 
3.  Open space may also include balconies, roof-top terraces, front yards, planted areas, fountains, parks, plazas, trails and paths, hardscape elements related to sidewalks and plazas, and similar features which are located on private property. Open space shall not include areas devoted to public or private vehicular access. 
B.  Open Space Implementation and Maintenance. 
1.  Implementation. All open space including buffers, setbacks, sidewalk clear zones, sidewalk zones and public spaces shall be fully implemented prior to occupancy and if not completed, the occupancy permit shall not be issued. 
2.  Maintenance. The owner shall provide adequate maintenance of the open space improvements for a minimum of one year from the date of issuance of the certificate of occupancy. The city shall inspect landscape improvements at least once during this period to ensure that the approved plan has been fully implemented and maintained. When a private property owner provides landscaping within the public right-of-way and the landscaping dies within a one-year period, such landscaping shall be replaced within a reasonable time for planting by the owner at the owner's sole expense. 
C.  Relocation of Minimum Open Space Requirements. At the option of the property owner, up to fifty (50) percent of a development's required open space may be relocated to an off-site parcel within the city provided the following criteria are met: 
1.  The receiving parcel is in accordance with the comprehensive plan as being a designated recipient parcel; and 
2.  The receiving parcel contains the required amount of open space and said open space in the receiving parcel is located adjacent to and visible from a public street and accessible to the public during normal city park hours. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.40.020 - Buffer required. 
A.  Buffers shall be as provided in the Buffer Specification Table below. Screening required within buffers shall be set forth in the said schedule of required buffers and is intended to provide separation of spaces without necessarily eliminating visual contact between the spaces, and may consist of existing vegetation, planted vegetation, a landscaped earth berm, a decorative wall, a wood fence, or a combination of the above. 
Buffer Specification Table NR1 NR2 NR3 CR TCR NM CM TCM M1 M2 Contiguous with a NR1 or NR2 district (Max, in feet) N/A N/A N/A 20' 20' 20' N/A N/A 30' 40' Contiguous with a NR3 district (Max, in feet) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 30' 40' Contiguous with a CR or TCR district (Max, in feet) N/A N/A N/A N/A N/A 20' 20' N/A 30' 40'  
B.  Location of Buffers. Required buffers shall be located along the interior or street lot lines nearest the adjacent streets, land uses, or zoning designations except where such lot lines are intersected by crossing accessways or utility easements, or by a joint parking area. Buffers shall not be located on any portion of an existing or proposed street right-of-way or easement. 
C.  Use of Buffer. Provided the required buffer width and screening is maintained, a buffer may contain utilities, pedestrian and bicycle paths, and other minor or passive uses compatible with the general separation of land uses. Buffers shall not be used for temporary or permanent parking or loading. 
D.  Responsibility for Buffer. Where vacant lots located in different zoning districts are adjacent, the first such lot to be developed shall provide the buffer required next to the adjacent vacant land. At the time it is developed, the second such lot shall provide all additional screening and/or land necessary to provide the total buffer required between the developed land uses. 
E.  Where a buffer meeting the requirements of this section is provided on an adjacent lot, the screening and/or land within that buffer may be counted as contributing to the total buffer required between the adjacent existing land use and the proposed land use. 
F.  Other Required Screening. In addition to the buffer screening required above, a fence may be installed to substitute for planting in conformity with regulations which shall be promulgated by the planning and zoning director when land area is limited. Such screening devices may include solid decorative brick walls, wood fences, berms, or tight evergreen hedges which shall reach the necessary height appropriate to its screening function within two years of planting, or a combination of the said devices. Regulations governing such substitutions shall be maintained permanently as a public record in the planning and zoning office of the city, and copies of same shall be made available to the public without charge at said address during office hours. 
G.  Dumpster Screening. 
1.  All dumpsters shall be enclosed with a wall of equal or greater height on three sides by a masonry wall enclosure that is a minimum of eight feet in height, accessed by an opaque steel gate the material of which shall be similar to the material on the outside of the main building. 
2.  Dumpsters shall be placed in the rear yard and may be located five feet from the property line if the adjoining property is zoned NM, CM, TCM, M1 or M2 and five feet from all applicable buffers if the adjoining property is zoned NR1, NR2, NR3, CR or TCR. 
3.  Dumpster Pad. 
a.  Dumpsters shall be placed on concrete pads of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
b.  Restaurants and other food service establishments shall place dumpsters on concrete pads that are designed to slope into a drain that is equipped with a grease trap. 
H.  Mechanical Systems Screening. Accessory mechanical systems and features including air and heating systems shall not be visible from the public right-of-way. 
I.  Alternative Buffers and Screening. In lieu of compliance with the buffers and screening requirements, the planning commission may approve an alternative buffers and screening plan upon the submission of a detailed plan and specifications for landscaping and screening which will afford a degree of buffering and screening equivalent to or exceeding that provided by the foregoing requirements. 
J.  Existing Vegetation. Existing vegetation shall be retained and maintained whenever possible so as to permit such vegetation to contribute to buffer and screening requirements. 
K.  Maintenance of Landscaping. All landscaping and screening providing required buffering and screening shall be maintained so as to continue their effectiveness. 
L.  Uses Requiring Fences in Commercial and Industrial Areas. In any district where reference is made requiring adequate screening of a specified operation, such screening shall be a wall or fence of solid appearance or tight evergreen hedge not less than six feet in height for such uses as junkyards, lumberyards, sanitary landfills, manufacturing plants where outside storage is used, commercial kennels and auto service garages where auto storage is provided outside of buildings. 
M.  Administration, Inspection, and Enforcement. 
1.  All of the provisions of this section shall be administered and enforced by the planning and zoning director, whose duties shall include developing and maintaining specific regulations to give effect to the intent of this section, rendering interpretations as to the requirements of this section, inspecting buffers and enforcement of all provisions of this section. 
2.  All questions arising in connection with the administration and enforcement of this section shall be presented first to the planning and zoning director and then to the board of appeals and adjustments on appeal from decisions of the planning and zoning director, pursuant to Section 16.12.180(A). 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.40.030 - Transitional heights and yards. 
A.  Transitional Heights. 
1.  Transitional Height Planes. A transitional height plane is an imaginary plane having a vertical component and angular component specifically designed to restrict the maximum height of all parts of buildings or structures within CR, TCR, NM, CM, TCM, M1 and M2 zoning districts and their relationship to adjoining NR1, NR2 and NR3 districts. Transitional height planes shall comply with the following components and regulations: 
a.  A vertical component measured at the required setback adjoining the common property line by a thirty-five (35) foot vertical distance above the finished grade; and 
b.  An angular component extending inward over an adjoining CR, TCR, NM, CM, TCM, M1 and M2 district at an angle of forty-five (45) degrees, and; 
c.  Such vertical and angular component calculations shall be made on a point-by-point basis and not average grade. 
d.  No portion of any structure shall protrude through the transitional height planes specified in subsection (A)(2) below. 
2.  Where CR, TR, NM, CM, TCM, M1 or M2 districts adjoin NR1, NR2, and NR3 districts without an intervening street, height within this district shall be limited by the transitional height plane requirements. 
B.  Transitional Yards. 
1.  Where CR, TR, NM, CM, TCM, M1 or M2 districts adjoin NR1, NR2, and NR3 districts without an intervening street, a minimum twenty (20) feet wide transitional yard, in addition to other required yards and setbacks, that is continuous along said adjoining boundary shall be required. A transitional yard is required which shall not be used for the purpose of parking, paving, loading, servicing or any other activity with the exception of private alleys or drives up to ten (10) feet in width. Such yards shall be planted as approved by the planning and zoning director and maintained as a landscaped strip. 
2.  Where CR, TR, NM, CM, TCM, M1 or M2 districts adjoin NR1, NR2, and NR3 districts and contain a building, structure, or use located in both zoning districts, a transitional yard is not required, provided that the portion of the building, structure, or use within twenty (20) feet of such designations shall only contain principal or accessory uses and structures permitted in such district. 
3.  Screening. In addition to the above transitional yard requirements, permanent opaque walls six feet in height shall be provided and shall be maintained in sightly condition. In lieu of compliance with the wall requirements, the planning commission may approve an alternative screening plan upon the submission of a detailed plan and specifications for landscaping and screening which will afford a degree of buffering and screening equivalent to or exceeding that provided by the foregoing requirements. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 16.44 - PARKING AND LOADING[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note- Ord. dated May 2, 2016(2), §§ 1, 2, repealed Ch. 16.44 in its entirety and enacted a new Ch. 16.44 to read as set out herein. Former Ch. 16.44, §§ 16.44.010-16.44.040, pertained to similar subject matter and derived from Ord. dated June 30, 2008 (part); Ord. dated Feb. 4, 2013(2), § 2; Ord. dated July 15, 2014, § 2; Ord. dated Sept. 15, 2014(3), § 1. 

16.44.010 - Off-street automobile parking spaces. 
A.  Off-Street Automobile Parking Spaces. 
1.  The following are the maximum number of permitted off-street parking spaces for the land or building uses specified. There shall be no minimum requirements for parking. 
a.  One- and two-family dwellings and all other residential uses. One and one-half parking space per bedroom. 
b.  All other uses. One parking space per two hundred (200) square feet of floor area. 
2.  For authorized uses not specifically mentioned, off-street parking facilities shall be in accordance with a use which the planning and zoning director considers similar in type. 
3.  When units of measurements determining the maximum number of parking spaces result in a fractional space, any fraction shall allow one parking space. 
4.  Off-street parking spaces shall be located within a rear or side yard, unless otherwise provided in this title. Off-street parking spaces shall not be permitted in any front yard or a required side yard except that uncovered parking may be located within a required side yard and limited front yard parking shall be permitted according to Section 16.28.060F. of this code. Provided, however, that the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to a lot at which any building situated thereon fronts on an adjacent street the posted speed limit for which is forty-five (45) miles per hour or greater. Where uncovered parking is located within a required side yard, said yard shall be not less than ten (10) feet wide. Residential off-street parking spaces shall consist of a parking strip, parking bay, driveway, garage, or combination thereof and shall be located on the premises they are intended to serve. 
    For those locations where parking abuts upon a public or private street, a decorative masonry wall or evergreen hedge screen of thirty (30) to forty-two (42) inches in height and a minimum of twelve (12) inches in width, or other comparable evergreen plantings approved by the planning department director, shall be established parallel to and not nearer than two feet from the right-of-way line. Screen plantings shall be of such size and number to provide the required screening within twelve (12) months after installation. The area between the wall or hedge screening and the street line shall contain the ten (10) foot wide landscape strip as required in the parking lot landscaping, Section 14.28.260 of this code. All vegetation shall be maintained in good condition, and the required wall or hedge screening shall be designed to allow for free and unimpeded access to the site and sidewalk by pedestrians. 
    In all areas, pedestrian access via sidewalks shall be provided from the front of the building(s) to all parking areas and to the road and public sidewalk. Adequate signage directing vehicular traffic to the rear of the building shall also be provided. Parking area(s) shall be lined with overstory trees at not more than fifty (50) foot on center and at least four-inch diameter at breast height at the time of planting. 
5.  Lots containing less than five thousand (5,000) square feet in total lot area in the NM, CM, or TCM districts shall be permitted to have automobile parking located in parking lots within the front provided such parking lots are limited in area to a maximum of thirty (30) percent of the total lot. 
6.  The storage of merchandise, motor vehicles for sale, trucks or the repair of vehicles is prohibited in areas designated as off-street parking. 
B.  Bicycle Parking. No project in a CR, TCR, NM, CM or TCM district shall have fewer than three bicycle parking spaces nor be required to exceed a maximum of thirty (30) spaces. 
C.  Allowance of Additional Parking Spaces. The planning and zoning director may authorize an increase in the total number of parking spaces permitted on a site when all of the following conditions are met: 
1.  The request for additional parking shall show that the increase is justified on the basis of characteristics unique to the specifically proposed use in contrast to the characteristics of other uses; 
2.  Adequate land area for meeting the basic parking requirements is located on the lot, whether at grade or in parking decks; and 
3.  The planning and zoning director shall provide an applicant a written response to any request for an increase in parking space, stating specific reasons for the decision to grant or deny the request. 
D.  Off-Street Parking Spaces, Layout, Standards, Construction and Maintenance. Wherever off-street parking is provided, such off-street parking lot shall be laid out, constructed and maintained in accordance with the following standards and regulations: 
1.  No parking lot shall be constructed prior to the issuance of a permit for such construction. Applications for such permits, along with two sets of the applicable construction drawings showing compliance with this section, shall be submitted to the engineering department of the city. 
2.  Paving Materials for Parking Lots. 
a.  All parking areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete, similar smooth material or pervious materials approved by the engineering department director. 
    For properties within the M-1 and M-2 zoning districts, customer and employee parking shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or similar smooth material or pervious materials approved by the engineering department director. A gravel surface may be used for commercial vehicle and heavy equipment parking. Impervious surface calculations shall apply to gravel surface parking unless designed, constructed and maintained to pervious surface standards. 
b.  Pervious Paving. Recommended pervious paving materials include those described in Volume 2-Technical Handbook of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (First Edition, August 2001), a copy of which is maintained in the city's engineering department office at 2116 Stallings Street in Covington, as the porous concrete or modular porous paver systems under the limited application stormwater structural controls. 
c.  Paving areas shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
3.  All spaces shall be provided adequate access by means of maneuvering lanes. Backing directly onto a street from an off-street parking space shall be prohibited. 
4.  Adequate ingress and egress to the parking lot by means of clearly limited and defined drives shall be provided for all vehicles. Ingress and egress to a parking lot lying in an area zoned CR, TCR, NM, CM, TCM, Ml or M2 shall not be across land zoned NRl, NR2 or NR3. 
5.  All maneuvering lane widths shall permit one-way traffic movement, except that the ninety (90) degree pattern may permit two-way movement. 
6.  The centerline of each entrance to and exit from any off-street parking lot located in an area zoned CR, TCR, NM, CM, TCM, Ml or M2 shall be at least twenty-five (25) feet from the nearest boundary line of any adjacent property located in a NRl, NR2 or NR3 district. 
7.  Screening. The off-street parking area shall be provided with a continuous and obscuring wall not less than four feet and six inches in height measured from the surface of the parking area. This wall shall be provided on all sides where the adjacent zoning district is NRl, NR2, NR3, CR or TCR district and shall be subject further to the requirement that when a front yard setback is required, all land between said wall and the front property line or street right-of-way line shall be kept free from refuse and debris and shall be landscaped with deciduous shrubs, evergreen materials and ornamental trees. The ground area shall be planted and kept in lawn. All such landscaping and planting shall be maintained in a healthy, growing condition, neat and orderly in appearance. 
8.  The entire parking area, including parking spaces and maneuvering lanes, required under this section, shall be provided with asphaltic or concrete surfacing in accordance with specifications approved by the engineering department director. The parking area shall be surfaced within one year of the date the building permit is issued. Off-street parking areas shall be drained so as to dispose of surface water accumulated in the parking area in such a way as to preclude drainage of water onto adjacent property or toward buildings, and plans shall meet the approval of the engineering department director. 
9.  Parking facilities shall have adequate lighting if the facilities are to be used at night. All lighting used to illuminate any off-street parking area shall be so installed as to be confined within and directed onto the parking area only. 
a.  Lighting shall be designed to preclude light spillover onto adjacent properties. All lighting shall be fully shielded, have recessed luminaries or be cut-off luminary fixtures mounted in such a manner that the cone of light is directed downward and does not cross any property line of the site. 
b.  Only incandescent, florescent, metal halide, low-pressure sodium or color-corrected, high-pressure sodium may be used. The same type of lighting must be used for the same or similar types of lighting on any one site. 
10.  Garage doors for single-family attached or detached uses shall be oriented to the side or rear yard, or shall be set back at least forty (40) feet behind the front facade of the residence. The requirements of the foregoing sentence shall not apply to residential homes within subdivisions developed in accordance with a preliminary plat approved prior to the effective date of this section. 
11.  In all cases where a wall extends to an alley which is a means of ingress and egress to an off- street parking area, it shall be permissible to end the wall not more than ten (10) feet from such alley line in order to permit a wider means of access to the parking area. 
12.  The board of appeals and adjustments, upon application by the owner of the off-street parking property, may modify the yard or wall requirements of this section where compliance would not serve the best interests of the city or the property owner. 
(Ord. dated 5/2/16(2), § 1) 
16.44.020 - Off-street loading and unloading. 
    Whenever the normal operation of any development requires that goods, merchandise or equipment be routinely delivered to or shipped from the development, a sufficient off-street loading and unloading area shall be provided as follows: 
A.  Loading dock approaches shall be paved with an asphalt or Portland cement binder so as to provide a permanent, durable and dustless surface. 
B.  Retail Business. One space for each ten thousand (10,000) square feet of floor area or fraction thereof. 
C.  Bus and Truck Terminals. Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses and trucks to be stored or to be loaded or unloaded at the terminal at any one time. 
D.  All spaces in Ml manufacturing and wholesale shall be provided in the following ratio of spaces to floor: 
Gross Floor Area Required (in square feet) Loading and Unloading Space Required in Terms of Square Feet of Usable Floor Area 0-1,400 None 1,401-20,000 1 space 20,001-100,000 1 space plus one space for each 20,000 square feet in excess of 20,001 square feet 100,001 and over 5 spaces  
E.  Location of Off-Street Loading Spaces. All required off-street loading spaces shall be located on the same lot as the building which they are intended to serve or on an adjacent lot where such spaces are shared with the use occupying said adjacent lot. 
F.  Permanent Reservation. Areas reserved for off-street loading in accordance with the requirements of this title shall not be reduced in area or changed to any other use unless the permitted use which such areas served is discontinued or modified, except where equivalent loading space is provided and approved by the planning and zoning director. 
(Ord. dated 5/2/16(2), § 1) 
16.44.030 - Parking lot layout and design. 
A.  For Uses Other Than Single-Family. 
1.  Automobile parking shall be prohibited from being located between any building street frontage and the adjacent public street. Provided, however, that the foregoing prohibition shall not apply to a location at which any building situated thereon fronts on an adjacent street the posted speed limit for which is forty-five (45) miles per hour or greater. 
2.  All parking areas shall be paved with asphalt, concrete or pervious materials approved by the engineering department director. 
3.  Paving areas shall be of sufficient size and strength to support the weight of service vehicles. 
4.  To the extent practicable, adjacent parking lots in NM, CM or TCM districts shall be interconnected and shall provide for future interconnectivity. 
5.  Pedestrian Circulation. Parking areas shall be designed to facilitate safe and convenient use by pedestrians. Developments shall provide designated pedestrian pathways or sidewalks connecting the front entrance of the principal building to the sidewalk along the abutting street, including marked crosswalks across interior driveways. 
6.  Wheel bumpers shall be placed at the head of all parking spaces that abut a landscape strip or sidewalk. When wheel bumpers are adjacent to a sidewalk, a two-foot extension of the sidewalk shall be permitted to be substituted in the place of the required wheel bumpers. 
7.  No parking area may be used for the sale, repair, dismantling, servicing or long-term storage of any vehicles or equipment. 
8.  All surface parking provided in excess of one hundred (100) percent of the minimum number of off-street parking spaces required by type of permitted use shall be "Grasscrete" or "Grasspave" or other porous paving or grass paving systems and as approved by the engineering department director. Pervious paving materials shall include those described in Volume 2- Technical Handbook of the Georgia Stormwater Management Manual (First Edition, August 2001) as the porous concrete or modular porous paver systems under the limited application stormwater structural controls. 
9.  For specific parking area landscaping requirements, see Title 14: Chapter 14.28 Tree Preservation. 
B.  Parking Decks and Parking Structures. 
1.  Parking deck facades shall conceal automobiles from visibility from any public right-of-way or private drive or street that are open to the general public, and shall have the appearance of a horizontal storied building. 
2.  Internal and external ramps associated with parking decks shall be concealed from visibility from any public right-of-way or private drive or street that are open to the general public. 
(Ord. dated 5/2/16(2), § 1) 
16.44.040 - Driveways and curb cuts. 
A.  All sidewalk paving materials shall be continued across any intervening driveway at the same prevailing grade and cross slope as on the adjacent sidewalk clear zone. A corresponding interior sign or painted bar on the driveway shall be provided adjacent to the sidewalk paving as it intersects the driveway which shall communicate that vehicles must stop or yield for the intervening sidewalk. 
B.  No more than one curb cut shall be permitted for each residentially used parcel or in an area zoned NR-1, NR-2, NR-3, NM or TCM along the same road frontage unless otherwise permitted by the city engineer who shall make a decision based upon existing and proposed sight distance, topography, existing public utility infrastructure location and sound engineering principals. 
    Parcels in an area zoned CR, CM, M1 or M2 with a street frontage greater than four hundred (400) feet shall be permitted more than one curb cut provided that curb cuts are spaced a minimum of three hundred seventy-five (375) feet apart. Parcels that are zoned non-residential and have more than one street frontage may have one curb cut located on each street frontage. At no such time shall a curb cut for a non-residentially zoned parcel be allowed within two hundred (200) feet from the intersection of two or more public streets. 
C.  Driveway curb cut widths shall be a maximum of twenty-four (24) feet for two-way entrances and twelve (12) feet for one-way entrances, unless otherwise required by the Georgia Department of Transportation or allowed by engineering department director. For the purposes of this section, two curb cuts serving two one-way driveways shall only be counted as one curb cut provided that each curb cut does not exceed one lane in width. 
D.  Driveway curb cuts shall not be permitted on any street that functions as an arterial, collector or major thoroughfare streets when access may be provided from a side or rear street located immediately adjacent to a contiguous property, with the exception of hotel patron drop-off drives. 
E.  Driveways, except for a driveway to reach the side yard or rear yard or an on-site parking facility, are not permitted between the sidewalk and a building, and shall be perpendicular to any adjacent street. 
F.  A common or joint driveway may be authorized by the planning and zoning director upon a finding that it will decrease traffic congestion consistent with this title. 
G.  All developments shall have pedestrian walkways a minimum width of five feet connecting ground level parking lots or decks to the public sidewalks and to all building entrances. 
(Ord. dated 5/2/16(2), § 1) 
Chapter 16.48 - SIGNS 

16.48.010 - Purpose and intent. 
    It is the purpose of the city council in enacting this chapter to provide standards to safeguard life, public health, property and welfare by regulating the location, size, illumination, erection, maintenance and quality of materials of all signs. More specifically, signs have a powerful impact on the aesthetic environment of the community, and it is the further purpose of this chapter to encourage an aesthetically attractive environment, while allowing sufficient opportunities for communications to serve business and comply with the federal and state constitutions and laws. Signs create visual clutter and therefore should be regulated in their size, location, construction and illumination. Signs can detract from the beauty of a neighborhood and lower property values. In seeking to comply with federal and Georgia law, the city council has determined the following: large billboards are, as the U.S. Supreme Court has recognized, an aesthetic harm; the Georgia Supreme Court has upheld sign regulations on the basis of aesthetics and preserving the beauty of environment; and, judicial decisions of the Eleventh Circuit have recognized that portable signs are visual clutter and a potential traffic hazard. These holdings support the constitutionality of this chapter, as intended by the city. 
    Many signs can also be a hazard and negatively impact traffic safety by distracting drivers and blocking views of other vehicles and dangers, by making intersections more treacherous, and by making it difficult to see oncoming traffic when entering a roadway. Therefore, it is also the purpose of this chapter to prevent those harms by regulating signs to safe locations, safe sizes, with proper and safe illumination and construction. (Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1) 
16.48.020 - Scope of regulations. 
    It shall be unlawful for any person to erect, construct, enlarge, move, alter, or convert any sign or cause the same to be done within the city except in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
    Nothing herein shall be construed to permit display of any message which is obscene, illegal or speech which is otherwise unprotected under the First Amendment of the United States Constitution. Nothing herein shall be construed to prohibit a prosecution for violation of a criminal statute by the city or other duly constituted government authority or a civil action by the city or other private person or entity. (Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/3/10, §§ 2-5) 
16.48.030 - Definitions. 
    Except as specifically defined herein, all words used in this chapter have their customary dictionary definitions. Words in the present tense include the future, words in the singular include the plural number, and words in the plural include the singular. In addition to the words and terms elsewhere defined in this chapter or otherwise in this code, the following words and terms, as used herein, shall have the following meanings unless the context or use indicates another or different meaning or intent: 
    The word "shall" is mandatory and not discretionary. 
    The word "may" is permissive. 
    The phrase "used for" shall include the phrases "arranged for," "designed for," "intended for," "maintained for," and "occupied for." 
    The word "structure" includes the word "building." 
    "Abandoned sign" means any sign that contains or exhibits broken panels, visible rust, visible rot, damaged support structures, holes on or in the sign structure, broken, missing, loose or bent parts, faded or flaking paint, non-operative or partially non-operative illumination or mechanical devices or which is otherwise dilapidated, unsightly or unkempt. 
    "Animated sign" means a sign that has moving parts or includes action, motion, or color changes, or the optical illusion of action, motion, or color changes, including signs using electronic ink, signs set in motion by movement of the atmosphere, or made up of a series of sections that turn, including any type of screen using animated or fading displays. Changeable copy signs, including signs with scrolling displays, otherwise meeting the standards of Section 16.48.040F., are excluded from the definition of animated sign. 
    "Area of sign" or "sign area" means the area within a continuous perimeter enclosing the limits of written representation, emblem or any figure or similar character, together with any frame or other material or color forming an integral part of the display or used to differentiate a sign from the background against which it is placed, excluding the necessary supports or uprights on which a sign is placed; provided, however, that an open space contained within the outer perimeter of the display face of a sign or between any component, panel, strip or figure of any kind composing the display face shall be included in the computation of the area of the sign, whether or not such open space is enclosed by a frame or border. 
    "Balloon" means a sealed, nonporous, flexible bag or character designed to be inflated with air or a gas; such as, but not limited to, helium. 
    "Banner" means a temporary sign of lightweight fabric, plastic or similar material designed to be hung either with or without a frame for other structure, with characters, letters, illustrations or ornamentation. Flags meeting the definition of this section shall not be considered banners. 
    "Building facade" or "face" means the portion of any exterior elevation of a building extending from grade to the top of the parapet wall or eaves and the entire width of the building elevation fronting a public street, excluding alleys and lanes. 
    "Building frontage" means the length of an outside building wall facing a street. 
    "Building lot" means that area of land that includes all of the land area improved and/or utilized as part of the same development. The foregoing definition expressly excludes a separate lot of land under the city's subdivision regulations contained in this title that has been developed as a separate, freestanding commercial or professional facility with separate parking facilities and is clearly independent of the adjoining developments. For example, the building lot of a shopping center would include the total area including the parking lot, drives, walks, open areas, common areas, and all connecting or adjacent buildings that are part of a common scheme of development, but would expressly exclude the "outlots" of a shopping center that were conveyed by fee simple title or long-term ground lease to third parties for the development of a freestanding commercial or professional establishment such as a bank, restaurant or similar facility having its own parking and other amenities. 
    "Building official" means the director of inspections of the city or his authorized representative. 
    "Canopy sign" means a sign imposed upon or painted on any roof-like structure either permanently or temporarily extended over a sidewalk or walkway. Such signs may be mounted flush or suspended. 
    "Changeable copy sign" means a sign that is capable of changing the position or format of word messages or other displays on the sign face or change the visible display of words, numbers, symbols and graphics by the use of a matrix of electric lamps, movable discs, movable panels, light apertures or other methods, provided these changes are actuated by either a control mechanism or manually on the face of the sign. Changeable copy signs, including signs with scrolling displays, otherwise meeting the standards of Section 16.48.040F. are excluded from the definition of animated sign. No animated sign may be utilized as a changeable copy sign. 
    "City" means the city of Covington, Georgia, and the geographic area included within the corporate limits of the city of Covington. 
    "Code" means the Covington Municipal Code as amended from time to time by the governing authority of the city. 
    "Copy" means the wording or graphics on a sign surface, in either permanent or removable form. 
    "Detached sign" see ground sign. 
    "Directional sign" means a sign within a commercial or industrial district identifying the entrance to a premises or directions to various premises, amenities or other facilities within a planned center. 
    "Directory sign" means a sign containing information relative to the location, distance to, entrance to, and exit from structures or land use activities. 
    "Flag" means any fabric banner or bunting containing distinctive colors, patterns or symbols, used as a symbol of a government, political subdivision or other organization. 
    "Flashing sign" means a sign, the illumination of which is not kept constant in intensity at all times when in use, and which exhibits sudden or marked changes in lighting effects. 
    "Fluorescent color" means a color that is intense, brilliantly colored and apparently giving off light, often described as day-glow colors. 
    "Governing authority" means the mayor and council of the city. 
    "Ground sign" means a sign securely affixed to an independent support structure that is permanently attached to the ground and wholly independent of any building for support. Ground signs include signs mounted on poles as well as monument signs. 
    "Height" as applied to a sign, means the vertical distance between the highest part of the sign or its supporting structure, whichever is higher, and a level plane going through the nearest point of the vehicular traffic surface of the adjacent improved public right-of-way, other than an alley. In the event a sign is equal distance from more than one improved public right-of-way, none of which are alleys, the highest point shall be used. Where the elevation of the ground at the right-of-way line nearest the sign is equal to or greater than five feet below the vehicular traffic surface, the permitted height of the sign may be established as a variance to this chapter, limited, however, to the least variation required to place the applicant's signage in a similar position to other allowable signage. 
    "Illuminated sign" means a sign electrically illuminated directly or indirectly. 
    "Inflatable" means a nonsealed flexible bag or character designed to be inflated and caused to remain in such state of inflation by the continued use of a mechanical device; such as, but not limited to, a fan, pump or generator. 
    "Mobile sign" means a sign which is attached to, mounted on, pasted on, painted or drawn on any vehicle, whether motorized or drawn, which is placed, parked or maintained at one particular location for the express purpose and intent of promoting a message. 
    "Monument sign" means a ground sign mounted directly upon the ground and not attached to or a part of or supported by a building and designed in such a manner that the base of the sign face is flush with the supporting solid base which is flush with the ground. The base shall be at least as wide as the sign. 
    "Nonconforming sign" means a sign legally erected prior to the effective date of this chapter which fails in one or more respects to comply with all provisions of this chapter. 
    "Official sign" means any sign posted by or at the direction of a governmental entity. 
    "Pennant" means any lightweight plastic, fabric or other material, suspended from a pole, rope, wire or string, often in series, designed to move in the wind. 
    "Permanent sign" means any sign attached securely to a building, wall, canopy, roof or the ground by means of concrete, bolts, metal braces or treated wood or cedar, and continuing in the same state or without essential change to the sign structure. 
    "Permit" means a certificate issued by the city allowing the erection, construction or placement of a sign. 
    "Planned center" or "strip shopping center" means a group of stores, offices or businesses, occupying distinct and separate spaces that are open to the public and combined into one building complex on one lot with dedicated access to each such space through a common lobby or directly from the exterior of the complex. 
    "Portable signs" means signs which are attached to vehicles, trailers, movable structures or attached to sign structures which are not permanently anchored into the ground, or any sign which may be transported or is designed to be transported. 
    "Prohibited sign" means any sign prohibited by Section 16.48.080. 
    "Projecting sign" means a sign which is attached to the building wall and which extends more than eighteen (18) inches from the face of such wall. 
    "Public service sign" means any sign erected and maintained by public officials or public agencies. 
    "Roof sign" means a sign that is mounted on the roof of a building or which is wholly dependent upon a building for support and which projects above the point of a building with a flat roof, the eave line of a building with a gambrel, gable or hip roof. 
    "Rotating sign" means a sign which is designed to revolve by means of electrical power. 
    "Sail sign" means a piece of cloth, varying in size, shape, color, and design, attached at one edge to a staff or cord for the entire vertical length of the cloth, and used as a means of conveying a message. 
    "Sandwich sign" means a freestanding portable sign, also referred to as an "A-frame sign" that has two sides, hinged or otherwise fastened together at the top and supported by opening the sides from one another at the base, similar to a ladder, so that the sign, when opened, becomes self-supporting. 
    "Setback" means the distance from a property line to the nearest part of a building structure or sign, as measured perpendicularly to the property line. 
    "Sign" means a device, fixture, placard, structure or representation that uses any display of color, form, graphic, illumination, image, letters, shapes, symbol or writing for visual communication which is used for the purpose of bringing the subject thereof to the attention of others. For purposes of this chapter, the term "sign" shall include the structure upon which the face is located. 
    "Sign face" means the portion of a sign on which words, shapes or images are displayed. 
    Sign, Attached. "Attached sign" means any sign attached to, applied on or supported by any part of a building (such as roof, wall, window, canopy, awning, arcade or marquee) which encloses or covers usable space. 
    Sign, Box/Cabinet. "Box/cabinet sign" means a sign being flat in appearance with little or no depth dimension. Box signs include flat signs either internally or indirectly illuminated and with or without a frame. 
    Sign, Channel Letter. "Channel letter sign" means a sign where the letters or symbols are comprised of a U-shaped aluminum channel, with plastic front faces, which are individually cut and form letters spelling out a word or words or symbol(s) to be used to form a message. 
    "Sign clearance" means the vertical distance from the established finished grade of the sidewalk or ground to the lower edge of a sign. 
    "Sign, light emitting diode (LED) means any electronically controlled sign utilizing light emitting diode technology to form some or all of the sign message, whether that message is moving or stationary. This type of sign includes any sign that uses LED technology of any kind, whether conventional (using discrete LEDs), surface mounted (otherwise known as individually mounted LEDs), transmissive, organic light emitting diodes (OLED), light emitting polymer (LEP), organic electro polymer (OEL), or any other similar technology. For purposes of this chapter, an LED sign meeting standards of this chapter as a changeable copy sign is permitted. 
    "Sign, neon" means an illuminated sign containing a glass tube filled with neon or phosphorus, which is bent to form letters, symbols or other shapes and which tubing forms all of a portion of the visible element of the message. Neon tubes hidden behind opaque sign faces and utilized for internal illumination of the sign face do not constitute neon signs. 
    "Sign, wall" means a sign attached to or painted on the exterior wall of the building and erected parallel to the building face. For purposes of computing sign area, the total lettering or other representation on one facade of a building or structure shall constitute one wall sign, provided that where multiple premises share one building facade, the signage utilized for each separate premises shall be computed based on the total building facade attributable to those premises. 
    "Signable area" means that area of the facade of a building up to the roofline, free of windows and doors or major architectural detail, to which a sign may be attached or erected; provided, however, that the "signable area" for a facia sign shall be further restricted to the horizontal area along the building facade below any upper story windows unless there is adequate space between windows and rooftop when a principal use structure is greater than one story in height. 
    "Standard informational sign" means a sign with an area not greater than six and one-half square feet, with a sign face for short-term use, containing no reflective elements, flags, or projections, and which, when erected, stands at a height not greater than three feet, and which sign is mounted on a wooden stake or metal frame with a thickness or diameter not greater than one and one-half inches. 
    "Streamer" see definition of pennant. 
    "Street frontage" means the length of a property line along the street on which it borders. 
    "Temporary sign" means a display, informational sign or banner with or without a structural frame, not permanently attached to a building, structure or the ground, and intended for a limited period of display. 
    "Tenant frontage" means the horizontal distance in feet between the left side wall and the right side wall or building end of a tenant space fronting a street or common parking area. 
    "Trailer sign" means any sign attached to a trailer. 
    "Vehicular sign" means any sign attached to a vehicle except for work vehicles of a business or organization or common carriers used primarily for daily transportation of employees, equipment or goods. 
    "Wall sign" means a single-faced sign which is in any manner attached or fixed flat to an exterior wall of a building or structure and which projects no more than eighteen (18) inches from the exterior wall of a building. Individual letters in addition to the "box type" (i.e., letters and symbols on an attached backing) sign may also be installed and constitute a wall sign. Such a sign may be constructed without constituting an encroachment into a required side or front yard setback line. For the purposes of this section, this term includes fascia sign. 
    "Window sign" means any sign painted on, attached to or placed in a window so that it is readable to vehicular traffic and pedestrians passing by on the exterior of the building. 
    "Zoning district" means the use classification of parcels of land as defined under the zoning ordinance. 
    "Zoning ordinance" means the official zoning ordinance of the city codified at this title of the Covington Municipal Code. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 3/1/10, § 1; Ord. dated 5/3/10, § 6 (Exh. B); Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5-19-14, § 1) 
16.48.040 - Signs regulated by zoning district. 
    Types of signs and regulatory aspects of those signs, allowed per zoning district shall be as follows: 
A.  Signs Permitted in the TCR, CR, NR1, NR2 and NR3 Zoning Districts. 
1.  The aggregate sign area of all signs on a parcel zoned TCR, CR, NRl, NR2, and/or NR3 shall not exceed sixteen (16) square feet; provided that during the period of time commencing with opening of qualifying for elections and concluding with the final determination of all contests and issues resolved by that election, an unlimited number of standard informational signs may be erected. 
2.  No sign shall be erected to a height greater than four feet. 
3.  Ground signs are allowed subject to the limitation of one per road frontage. Internal illumination is prohibited. Such sign(s) may be illuminated with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent properties. 
4.  All signs erected shall be supported by independent means by use of a wooden stake or metal frame inserted directly into the ground. 
5.  Parcels may contain standard informational signs, subject to the aggregate sign area allowance, without a permit fee, placed so that they are located entirely on private property. 
6.  Window signs are allowed subject to the limitation of one per dwelling not to exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of the window. 
7.  No sign erected in the TCR, CR, NR1, NR2 and/or NR3 zoning district shall be illuminated except as permitted in subsection A.3. above. 
B.  Signs Permitted in the TCM Zoning Districts. 
1.  Ground Signs. One sign structure per road frontage per lot of up to forty (40) square feet per sign face with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed eighty (80) square feet with a maximum height of six feet and a minimum setback of ten (10) feet. Ground signs shall be attached to a permanent wall or base constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
2.  Window Signs. Total signage shall not exceed fifteen percent (15%) of the area of windows facing the road frontage. 
3.  Wall Signs. One wall sign per road frontage for each tenant no greater than one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of tenant space frontage shall be permitted. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
4.  Canopy Signs. One per establishment not to exceed eight square feet made onto the canopy material. 
5.  Projecting Signs. One per building, not to exceed six square feet. Minimum clearance of seven feet six inches, measured from the bottom of the sign, is required above any pedestrian way. 
6.  Sandwich or A-Type Signs. One per establishment not to exceed eight square feet per sign face and four feet in height. Sandwich signs may be placed directly in front of the building, but not in the public right-of-way, and may not impede the flow of pedestrian traffic. Such signs must be removed between the hours of ten p.m. and seven a.m. 
C.  Signs Permitted in the NM Zoning Districts. 
1.  Ground Signs. One sign structure per road frontage per lot of up to forty (40) square feet per sign face, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed eighty (80) square feet and with a maximum height of eight feet and a minimum setback of ten (10) feet. Ground signs shall be attached to a permanent wall or base constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
2.  Window Signs. Total signage shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of windows facing the road frontage. 
3.  Wall Signs. One wall sign per road frontage for each tenant no greater than one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of tenant space frontage shall be permitted. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
D.  Signs Permitted in the CM Zoning Districts. 
1.  Ground Signs. One sign structure per road frontage per lot of up to one hundred (100) square feet per sign face, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet and with a maximum height of eight feet and a minimum setback of ten (10) feet. If the lot contains a principal building or planned center of over fifty thousand (50,000) square feet, the maximum area per sign shall be one hundred twenty (120) square feet per face, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed two hundred forty (240) square feet. Ground signs shall be attached to a permanent wall or base constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
2.  Window Signs. Total signage shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of windows facing the road frontage. 
3.  Wall Signs. Each tenant shall have no greater than one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of tenant space per elevation. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
4.  Roof Signs. In lieu of a wall sign(s) a tenant or stand-alone building may erect one permanent roof sign per road frontage, the following standards shall apply: 
a.  The height of the roof sign and supporting structure shall not exceed ten percent (10%) of the building height upon which it is erected. 
b.  The maximum square footage of a roof sign shall be equivalent to that of the building's linear foot per road frontage. Under no circumstances shall a roof sign overhang the building upon which it is erected. 
c.  Signs located between the wall plate and curb on a mansard roof are considered wall signs. 
E.  Signs Permitted in the M-1 and M-2 Zoning Districts. 
1.  Ground Signs. One sign structure per road frontage per lot of up to one hundred (100) square feet per sign face with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed two hundred (200) square feet, with a maximum height of eight feet and a minimum setback of ten (10) feet. If the lot contains a principal building of over sixty-five thousand (65,000) square feet, the maximum area per sign face shall be one hundred fifty (150) square feet, with an aggregate total of each sign not to exceed three hundred (300) square feet. Ground signs shall be attached to a permanent wall or base constructed of brick, stone or textured concrete masonry units. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
2.  Window Signs. Total signage shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the area of windows facing the road frontage. 
3.  Wall Signs. Each tenant shall have no greater than one square foot of sign area per one linear foot of tenant space per elevation. Illumination; signs may be illuminated internally or with external lighting fixtures provided that fixtures are directed away from streets and adjacent property. 
F.  Changeable Copy Signs. Changeable copy signs are permitted in the CM, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts. They shall be an integral part of the permitted ground sign and shall not exceed twenty-five percent (25%) of the permitted ground sign, sign face. When a light emitting diode (LED) board is used such sign shall not be animated, flash, blink or vary in light intensity and shall hold a fixed message for one minute at a time and change messages in less than three seconds. No changeable copy sign shall give off light which glares, blinds or has any other adverse effects on traffic or adjacent properties and shall contain a default setting that shall display a dark, blank screen should a malfunction occur. LED-type signs shall not operate at brightness levels of more than 0.30 footcandle (under measurement conditions) above ambient light levels as measured from seventy-five (75) feet. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. of 5-19-14, §§ 2A.1., 2B.5.) 
16.48.050 - Additional allowable signs. 
    The following signs are also allowable, as stated: 
A.  The following signs are subject to a permit: 
1.  Subdivision Entrance Signs. Two single-faced monument-style signs or one double-faced sign shall be permitted at every entrance to any residential subdivision, apartment complex, or other similar residential development. Such signs shall not exceed eight feet in height and twenty-four (24) square feet per face. All sign structures shall be constructed of brick, stone, textured concrete masonry units or equivalent architectural material. Internal illumination is prohibited. 
2.  Commercial/Office/Industrial Entrance Signs. Two single-faced, monument-style signs or one double-faced sign shall be permitted at every entrance to any commercial, office or industrial planned development. Such signs shall not exceed eight feet in height and twenty-four (24) square feet per face. All sign structures shall be constructed of brick, stone, textured concrete masonry units or equivalent architectural material. Internal illumination is prohibited. 
B.  The following signs are allowed but require no permit: 
1.  Official signs meeting the standards of this chapter or the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, a copy of which is maintained for public inspection in the planning department of the city. 
2.  Any sign not visible from the outside of a structure or to passing members of the public. 
3.  Directional signs, for example; exit/entrance, shipping/receiving or other directional information, not to exceed six square feet per sign face in area and four feet in height. The aggregate square footage of such signs on a single parcel shall not exceed forty-eight (48) square feet. 
4.  Signs on courtesy benches and trash cans on private property are only permissible in the CM zoning district, and such signs shall not extend beyond nor be larger than the bench or trash can to which they are affixed. 
5.  The aggregate of standard informational signs on property zoned TCM, NM, CM, M-1 and/or M-2 shall not exceed twenty (20) square feet; provided that during the period of time commencing with opening and qualifying for elections and concluding with the final determination of all contests and issues resolved by such elections, an unlimited number of standard informational signs may be erected. 
C.  Banner signs up to sixteen (16) square feet in sign area may be displayed per location in the CR, NM, TCR and TCM zoning districts. No banner shall be attached to a utility pole or light pole. 
D.  The following types of signs may be displayed in the CM, M-1 and M-2 zoning districts: 
1.  One banner up to sixteen (16) square feet in sign area may be displayed per location. No banner may be attached to a utility pole or light pole, or 
2.  One freestanding sail sign up to sixteen (16) square feet in sign area may be displayed per tenant. No sail sign shall exceed sixteen (16) feet in height, as measured from ground level at the point where its base is mounted. 
(Ord. dated 4/15/13(1), §§ 2, 3; Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1) 
16.48.060 - Reserved. 
Editor's note- Ord. dated April 15, 2013(1), § 1, repealed § 16.48.060 in its entirety, which pertained to temporary signs requiring permit and derived from Ord. dated Nov. 21, 2011, § 1; Ord. dated May 3, 2010, § 7; Ord. dated June 30, 2008 (part). 
16.48.070 - Standards. 
A.  Content. Any sign, display or device allowed under this chapter may contain any commercial or noncommercial message, except that such messages cannot depict obscenity, as defined by O.C.G.A. Section 16-12-80. 
B.  Location. All signs must be placed on private property, except signs erected on public property by an authorized governmental unit. No sign shall be located closer than ten (10) feet from the back of the curb of a public roadway, nor be located closer than ten (10) feet from the public right-of-way, whichever is farther from the street, unless otherwise noted. No sign shall encroach on or hang over any public right-of-way. 
C.  Number. For the purposes of determining the number of signs, ground signs shall be equal to the number of sign structures. All other nonground signs shall be considered to be a single display surface or display device containing elements organized, related and composed to form a unit. Where matter is displayed in random manner without organized relationship of elements, each such element shall be considered to be a single sign. 
D.  Illumination. Flashing, blinking or otherwise varying illumination is not permitted. 
    No external or internal illumination that causes confusion with or distraction from any traffic signal or safety device shall be permitted. 
E.  Corner Visibility. No sign or sign structure (above a height of three feet) shall be maintained within fifteen (15) feet of the intersection of the extended right-of-way lines of two streets, or of an intersection of a street right-of-way with a railroad right-of-way. 
F.  Fire Safety. No sign or sign structure may be erected or maintained which obstructs any fire escape, ventilation, door or hydrant; nor shall any sign or sign structure be attached to a fire escape. (Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/3/10, § 8) 
16.48.080 - Prohibited signs. 
    The following types of signs are prohibited: 
A.  Sidewalk, A-type, sandwich or curb-type signs, except as permitted in Section 16.48.040 of this chapter; 
B.  Swinging or projecting signs, except as permitted in Section 16.48.040 of this chapter; 
C.  Animated signs; 
D.  Flashing, blinking signs or signs of varying light intensity, or signs containing exposed neon tubing, provided that signs allowed under the Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices, a copy of which is maintained for public inspection in the office of the city planning and zoning department, when operated in accordance with said manual are exempt from this restriction in the interest of public safety; 
E.  Signs which contain or are in imitation of an official traffic sign or signal, or which can be confused with an official traffic sign; 
F.  Signs attached to any street signs or markers, traffic control signs or devices, or attached to or painted on any pole, post, tree, rock, shrub, plant or other natural object or feature; 
G.  Rotating signs; 
H.  Signs not in good repair, specifically including any sign which is in a state of disassembly or any sign which has its internal lighting exposed to view for more than one week; 
I.  Signs attached to any vehicle or trailer where such vehicle or trailer is parked directly adjacent to or close to the street near the business referenced by the sign on the vehicle or trailer and such vehicle or trailer is left in such location for more than eight hours, provided that where the vehicle is fully licensed and regularly driven in the conduct of the business and no parking is available near the business in a less visible location, this restriction shall not apply; 
J.  Pennants and streamers; 
K.  Portable signs of any size moved in and out on a daily basis, except as permitted in Section 16.48.040 of this chapter. 
L.  Signs emitting any sound, smoke or vapor. 
    The city shall be empowered to remove or cause to be removed at the owner's expense all prohibited signs as provided in Section 16.48.110 of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/19/14, § 3) 
16.48.090 - Procedures. 
A.  Sign Permit. 
1.  A sign permit is required before a sign may be erected, an existing sign may be enlarged, relocated or improvements costing sixty percent (60%) or more of the sign's total replacement value are made. All signs using electrical wiring and connections shall require an electrical permit issued pursuant to the provisions of Section 15.04.020 C.1.c. of the Code. 
2.  A sign permit shall be issued by the building official or his designee when the plans and specifications for the proposed sign or part thereof conform in all respects to the applicable provisions of this chapter and the city building code, as certified by the building official or his designee. Applications for such permits shall be accompanied by all the information required under Section 16.48.090 B. of this chapter and such other information as the building official or his designee may require in the exercise of sound discretion to determine compliance with the provisions of this chapter. Standardized sign plans may be filed with the building official in fulfillment of this requirement, although site plans to determine the location of a sign shall be filed with each application. 
3.  Each sign application shall contain an agreement to indemnify and save the city harmless from all damages, demands or expenses which may in any manner be caused by the sign or sign structure. 
4.  Every sign constructed, erected or maintained for which a permit is required by this section shall be plainly marked with the name of the person, firm or corporation erecting and maintaining such sign, and shall have the number of the permit issued for said sign by the building official or his designee affixed on the framework of the sign in such a manner that the information contained therein shall be readily accessible, legible and durable. 
B.  Application. Applications for sign permits required by this section shall be filed by the sign owner or owner's agent with the building official or his designee, upon forms provided by the city. The application shall describe and set forth the following and any additional information pertinent to the sign application as may be requested by the building official or his designee in order to determine compliance with this chapter: 
1.  The type of the sign as defined by this chapter; 
2.  A site plan, drawn to scale, showing the location of the sign, and construction plan describing the material the sign is to be constructed from; 
3.  Elevation drawing, drawn to scale, showing the height and dimensions of the sign face; 
4.  The street address or other acceptable means of location of the property upon which subject sign is to be located and the proposed location of the sign on the said property; 
5.  The square foot area per sign and a description (square footage, height and use) of existing signage on the property; 
6.  The name(s) and address(es) of the owner(s) of the real property upon which the subject sign is to be located; 
7.  Written consent of the owner, or owner's agent, granting permission for the placement, replacement and maintenance of the sign; 
8.  The name, address, and phone number of the sign contractor. 
C.  Expiration Date. A sign permit shall become null and void if the sign for which the permit was issued has not been completed within six months after the date of issuance; provided, however, that one six-month extension of the permit shall be granted if an additional permit fee has been paid prior to the expiration date of the initial permit. 
D.  Processing of Application. Upon receipt of a properly completed application for a sign as permitted under the provisions of this chapter, the city shall commence review of a permit application no later than ten (10) working days after the date of its submission. A copy of any application for a sign permit within the TCR and TCM zoning districts shall be transmitted by the building official to the main street manager for comment and review. The main street manager shall have ten (10) days from the receipt of the application to submit comments. Review by all city officers shall be completed and the permit shall be issued or denied no later than the thirtieth day after the date of its submission. A permit shall be denied if the applicant, landowner, or lessee violates or fails to comply with any provisions of this chapter in either the application or the physical standards governing the sign. All applications meeting the standards of this chapter shall be granted. 
E.  Fees. No permit shall be issued until the appropriate application, including exact dimensions, and area of the proposed sign has been filed with the building official or his designee and applicable fees have been paid in accordance with a fee schedule adopted from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/3/10, § 9; Ord. dated 6/1/15(1), § 2) 
16.48.100 - Construction and maintenance. 
A.  All signs for which a permit is required, together with all their supports, braces, guys, and anchors shall be kept in constant repair and, unless constructed of galvanized or noncorroding metal, shall periodically be given an appropriate protective coating. The area immediately in front of all freestanding signs shall be maintenance free of high weeds and debris. 
B.  It shall be the duty of the building official or his designee to periodically inspect every sign for which a permit is required in order to determine that each meets the requirements set forth in this chapter. 
C.  The person or entity holding a sign permit shall be required to remove or have removed from the premises discarded or unusable paper, sign faces, parts and debris resulting from the changing of the advertising copy or message or maintenance of any approved sign or sign structure. 
D.  No sign permittee shall allow such sign(s) to fall into a state of disrepair. Upon written notice from the building official, any sign which is torn, tattered, broken, dismantled or otherwise in a state of visual and/or structural dilapidation or disrepair should be removed from its premises or replaced by the responsible party. Any sign or sign structure that has been vandalized shall be cleaned, repaired and/or removed by the owner upon written notice from the building official. The building official shall include in the notice the time limit within which compliance is required based on the amount of work to be done, but in no event "shall such time period be less than one working week or more than thirty (30) days." 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/19/14, § 4) 
16.48.110 - Enforcement. 
A.  Building Official and/or His Authorized Representative. All of the provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official or his designee and shall include issuing permits, inspecting signs, and enforcement of all provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Removal. 
1.  The building official may order the removal of any sign found to be in violation of this chapter. Notice specifying the violation and necessary corrective action shall be given to the permit holder, then to the owner of the sign. If the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, notice shall be given to the sign erector and owner of the property on which the sign is located and/or any other party that procured the erection of the sign. The notice shall contain the time frame within which desired work is to be completed and shall be based upon the amount of work to be performed, but in no event shall such time period be less than one working week or more than 30 days. Notice of violation shall be hand-delivered or mailed via first class mail to the appropriate party. In the event the appropriate party fails to comply with the notice within the time period prescribed, the building official shall issue a removal order. 
2.  An aggrieved party may appeal either the notice of violation or the removal order within ten (10) days from the date that such notice or order was issued by filing a written notice of appeal with the municipal court clerk. Such appeal shall be as provided in Section 16.12.180 of this title, provided that the final determination of any appeal shall be made in no more than sixty (60) days from the date of filing a notice of appeal. If the sign is not removed within thirty (30) days after the order of removal (or thirty (30) days after the date of decision on any appeal becomes final), the city code enforcement personnel shall remove the sign or cause the sign to be removed and shall collect the cost thereof as provided below in subsection D of this section. 
C.  Removal Without Notice. City code enforcement personnel or any other agent of the city having jurisdiction under the circumstances may remove or direct the removal of any sign erected or maintained in violation of this chapter, without giving notice to any party, if: 
1.  The sign is upon the public right-of-way or upon other public property; or 
2.  The sign poses an immediate threat to the life, health or safety of any member of the public. 
D.  Costs of Removal. 
1.  Any sign which is erected in violation of this chapter, other than a sign subject to the provisions of subsection B. of this section, is declared to be a nuisance and the costs of removal of same shall be at the sign owner's expense. 
2.  Removal of any sign without notice, as provided in subsection C of this section, shall be without liability to the city, its elected officials, officers, agents, servants or employees. The permit holder shall be primarily responsible for the costs of such removal. If there is no current permit holder for such sign, then the sign owner shall be responsible. If the sign owner cannot be found or cannot be determined, then the costs of removal shall be the responsibility of the sign erector and/or property owner or any other party that procured erection of the sign. If payment or arrangement to make payment for the costs of such removal is not made within sixty (60) days after the receipt of a statement for same, the city code enforcement personnel shall certify the amount thereof for collection to the city attorney. In the event that a sign that is removed as provided in this section remains unclaimed for more than one hundred twenty (120) days from the date of removal, the sign shall be disposed of in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 44-14-411 et seq. 
E.  Invalid Permits. The building official or his designee may issue a removal order when it has been determined that a permit was improperly issued, that the permit was issued on the basis of misstatement of fact or fraud, that the sign has not been constructed in compliance with this chapter or with the specifications of the application or site plans, that the sign permit has expired or that the sign is otherwise not in compliance with this chapter. In the event a sign is not removed within ten (10) days next following receipt of a removal order by the owner of such sign or property, the building official or designee may institute such legal proceedings hereunder against the property owner, sign owner, lessee, sign erector or a combination of the above as may be required to effect removal of such sign. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 5/3/10, §§ 10, 11; Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. dated 5/19/14, § 5A., B.) 
16.48.120 - Fines and penalties. 
A.  Citations. Without limitation, sign erectors, sign owners, and such other responsible parties may be cited to appear in Covington Municipal Court for the violation of any provisions of this chapter. 
B.  Penalties. Any person, firm or corporation, whether acting as principal, agent, employee or in any other capacity, who is convicted of violation of the provisions of this chapter may be punished as provided in Chapter 1.12 of this code. (Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1) 
16.48.130 - Inspection. 
    In accordance with Section 15.04.020 (Administrative procedures for enforcement of state minimum standards codes) of this code, enforcement personnel are empowered to enter into or inspect any building, structure, or premises upon which a sign subject to this chapter is located for the purpose of inspecting the sign, its structural and electrical connections, and to ensure compliance with the provisions of this chapter. (Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. dated 8/16/10, § 1) 
16.48.140 - Nonconforming signs. 
A.  Signs which do not comply with this chapter and were legally placed before the effective date of this chapter shall become nonconforming with respect to the requirements set forth herein. However, signs which were illegally erected, established or maintained with respect to the applicable requirements of prior ordinances shall be removed or brought into compliance herewith as soon as practicable, but within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this chapter. Nonconforming signs made of paper, cloth or other nondurable material, all temporary signs other than those permitted herein, and any signs that are not affixed to a building or the ground or are located within a public right-of-way, shall be removed as soon as practicable but within thirty (30) days from the effective date of this chapter. Upon failure to comply with the requirements of this chapter, the building official may cause the removal of any nonconforming sign at the expense of the owner, as provided in subsection 16.48.110 D.1 of this chapter. 
B.  A nonconforming sign shall not be replaced by another nonconforming sign except that the substitution or interchange of poster panels, painted boards or demountable material on nonconforming signs shall be permitted. Provided, however, that in the event a nonconforming sign is destroyed by an act of God, the owner of the sign may repair or replace the sign. In making such repair or replacement, the owner shall make the sign conforming if physically possible. If not physically possible to make the sign conform to the requirements of this chapter, the sign may nevertheless be repaired or replaced, provided the replacement or repair does not extend the natural life of the sign as it existed before the damage or destruction occurred. 
C.  Minor repairs and maintenance of nonconforming signs such as repainting, electrical repairs and neon tubing shall be permitted. However, no structural repairs or changes in the size or shape of the sign shall be permitted except to make the sign comply with the requirements of this chapter. 
D.  Each sign which exists at the effective date of this chapter shall be registered by its owner with the building official or his designee. 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1) 
16.48.150 - Appeals and variances. 
A.  Procedure Upon Denial. Upon denial of an application for a sign permit, the applicant shall be given written notice stating the reasons for the denial. Within fifteen (15) days of issuance of the denial decision, an applicant may appeal the denial decision utilizing the procedures of Section 16.12.180 of this chapter, provided that a final decision on any such appeal shall be made, put in writing with reasons stated therein, and served either personally or by first-class mail on the appellant within sixty (60) days of the date notice of appeal was filed. 
B.  Variances. 
1.  Variances may be granted from the provisions of this chapter by the procedures set forth in subsection B. of Section 16.12.170, provided that any final decision on a variance application shall be reached no later than 60 days after application for variance was received, and provided further that the variance decision shall be reduced to writing. Variances authorized by the board of appeals and adjustments shall be limited to the following hardship stipulations: 
a.  Where visibility of a conforming sign from the proposed street and within fifty (50) feet of the proposed sign would be substantially impaired by existing trees, plants, natural features, signs, buildings or structures on a different lot; and 
i.  Placement of the sign elsewhere on the lot would not remedy the visual obstruction; 
ii.  Such visibility obstruction was not created by the owner of the subject property; and 
iii.  The variance proposed would not create a safety hazard to vehicular traffic or pedestrians. 
2.  Variances shall be limited to the minimum relief necessary to overcome the hardship. No variances shall be granted to allow a greater number of signs than would be allowed if the hardship did not exist. No variance shall transfer to a new owner or occupant of the property. 
3.  Variance procedures shall apply both to signs which are nonconforming as of the effective date of this chapter and to new signs erected thereafter. 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1; Ord. of 5-19-14, §§ A., B.) 
16.48.160 - Severability. 
    Should any provision of this chapter be declared by a court of competent jurisdiction to be invalid, such decision shall not affect the validity of this chapter as a whole or any provision thereof other than the provision specifically declared to be invalid. The city council hereby declares that it would have passed Chapter 16.48 and each section, sentence, clause and phrase hereof, irrespective of the fact that any one or more subsections, sentences, clauses, or phrases be declared illegal, invalid, or unconstitutional. 
(Ord. dated 11/21/11, § 1) 
Chapter 16.52 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION 

16.52.010 - Purpose of historic preservation. 
    In support and furtherance of its findings and determination that the historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and that the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people; and 
    In order to further stimulate revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and to protect and enhance local historical and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby enhance the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant statutory provisions; and 
    In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same; 
    The city council declares it to be the purpose and intent of this chapter to establish a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures and objects having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, the following terms and words are defined as follows: 
    "Building" means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel, business or similar structure, and may refer to an historically related complex or group of such structures. 
    "Certificate of appropriateness" means a document showing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
    "Commission" means the Covington historic preservation commission created pursuant to this chapter. 
    "Excavation" means to hollow out or dig out earth in preparation for construction of a building or structure. 
    "Exterior architectural features" means the architectural style, design and arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including without limitation the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant fixtures, features, details or elements relating to such building, structure or object. 
    "Historic district" means an area designated by the city council as an historic district pursuant to the criteria established in Section 16.52.120 of this chapter. 
    "Historic property or landmark" means a building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, designated by the city council as an historic property or landmark pursuant to the criteria established in Section 16.52.120 of this chapter. 
    "Material change in appearance" means a change that will affect only the exterior architectural features of a historic property or of any structure, site, or work of art within a historic district and may include any one or more of the following: 
1.  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape, or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details, or elements; 
2.  Demolition of a historic property; 
3.  Commencement of excavation; 
4.  A change in the location of advertising on any historic property visible from the public right-of-way; or 
5.  The erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any building or other structure within a designated historic district, including walls, fences, steps, and pavements, or other appurtenant features of a building or structure, except exterior paint alterations. 
    "New construction" means construction of any building or structure upon any property within an historic district or designated historic property. 
    "Object" means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historic or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
    "Site" means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historic occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historic or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
    "Structure" means a thing constructed of independent and interrelated parts, such as a building or bridge. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.030 - Creation. 
    There is created a commission whose title shall be "Covington historic preservation commission." 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.040 - Commission position. 
    The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city, and may be consulted by the planning commission concerning plans and actions affecting historic properties and districts. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.050 - Commission members-Number, appointment, terms and compensation. 
    The commission shall consist of nine members appointed by the mayor and council. All members shall be residents of the city, a majority of whom shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience, education or aptitude in history, architecture or historic resource preservation. 
    Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: three members for one year; three members for two years; and three members for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. Active participation and attendance at scheduled meetings, unless excused, is a requisite for continuing membership. 
    The mayor and city council may also appoint an advisory committee to assist the commission in research and public education. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.060 - Commission's powers. 
    The commission shall be authorized to: 
A.  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
B.  Recommend to the mayor and city council specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
C.  Review applications for certificates of appropriateness, and consult with applicants with respect to same and grant or deny such applications in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
D.  Recommend to the mayor and city council that the designation of specific places, districts, sites, buildings, structures or objects as an historic property or as an historic district be revoked or removed; 
E.  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
F.  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act, O.C.G.A. Section 44-10-1, et seq.; 
G.  Conduct educational programs or general activities on preservation of historic properties; 
H.  Make such investigations and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with experts, which the mayor and city council or the commission may deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
I.  Seek out local, state, federal or private finds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the mayor and city council concerning the most appropriate use of any funds acquired; 
J.  Submit to the Division of Historic Preservation of the Department of Natural Resources a list of designated historic properties or historic districts and submit nominations of properties to be included in the National Register of Historic Places; 
K.  Employ persons to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
L.  Receive donations, grant funds or gifts for acquiring, preserving or restoring historic properties and negotiate the sale of historic properties. The commission shall not have the power to obligate the city without prior consent from the mayor and city council; 
M.  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and, with the consent of the city council, enter into agreements; 
N.  Seek professional technical advice from sources other than its membership on any application for designation as an historic district or historic property or for a certificate of appropriateness; and 
O.  Develop and promulgate administrative guidelines to facilitate the exercise of the commission's authority and responsibilities under the provisions of this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.070 - Commission's rules and standards. 
    The commission shall develop (i) by-laws and rules and standards for the transaction of its business, (ii) design guidelines and criteria for historic districts and historic properties, including any variations applicable to each historic district, (iii) guidelines and criteria for consideration of applications for certificates of appropriateness, and (iv) rules and procedures for amendments thereto. The guidelines for consideration of application for certificates of appropriateness approved by the commission shall provide that the commission shall approve any application for certificate of appropriateness and issue such certificate if it finds that the proposed material change in appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the esthetic, historical, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. The guidelines shall further provide that, in making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the historical and architectural value and significance, architectural style, general design, arrangement, texture, and material of the architectural features involved, and the relationship thereof to the exterior architectural style and pertinent features of other structures in the immediate neighborhood. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.080 - Conflicts of interest. 
    The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest, open meetings and open records laws set forth in Georgia statutes applicable to local governing bodies. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.090 - Authority to receive funding. 
    The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall insure that such funds do not displace appropriated government funds. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.100 - Commission's mandate and recommendations. 
    The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources with the city. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.110 - Documentation of proposed designation. 
A.  Prior to recommendation of proposed designated historic districts or properties to the mayor and city council for designation, the commission shall prepare and submit to the mayor and city council a nomination report consisting of: 
1.  A physical description; 
2.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
3.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing or noncontributing) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; 
4.  A statement justifying district or individual property boundaries; and 
5.  Representative photographs. 
B.  Not later than thirty (30) days prior to any recommendation of an ordinance for such designation the commission shall submit a copy of the nomination report to the Division of Historic Preservation of the Georgia Department of Natural Resources. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.120 - Criteria for selection of historic districts. 
    Properties which qualify for designation as historic districts are geographically definable areas which contain buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features, or a combination thereof, which: 
A.  Have special character or special historic or aesthetic value or interest; or 
B.  Represent one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the city, county, state or region; and 
C.  Cause such areas by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the city. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.130 - Boundaries of historic district. 
    Boundaries of historic districts shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts, shall be shown on the city's official zoning map as well as the tax maps of the city, and shall be specifically delineated in any notice published in connection with the designation process. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.140 - Classification of properties within historic districts. 
    Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as: 
A.  Contributing. Contributes to the historic district as provided in Section 16.52.150 of this chapter and is at least fifty (50) years old. Provided, however, that properties which meet the criteria set forth in National Register Bulletin No. 22, Guidelines for Evaluating and Nominating Properties That Have Achieved Significance Within the Last 50 Years (Gov. Doc. 129.76/3:22) may also qualify as contributing properties. 
B.  Noncontributing. Does not contribute to the historic district as provided in Section 16.52.150. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.150 - Criteria for selection of historic properties or landmarks. 
    Historic properties or landmarks may be buildings, structures, sites, or objects including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the United States, the state of Georgia, Newton County, or the city, for one of the following reasons: 
A.  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
B.  It is one of few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
C.  It is a place or structure associated with an event or person of historic or cultural significance to the city, Newton County, the state of Georgia, or the region; or 
D.  It is a site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the city, Newton County, the state of Georgia or the region. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.160 - Application for designation of historic districts or historic properties. 
    Designations of historic districts or historic properties may be proposed by the mayor and city council, the commission. Property owners, neighborhood associations or historical societies may also apply to the commission to propose a designation of an historic property or historic district. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.170 - Required components of a designation ordinance. 
    An ordinance designating any historic property or district shall: 
A.  List each property in a proposed historic district or describe the proposed individual historic property; 
B.  Set forth the names of the owner(s) of the designated property or properties; 
C.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
D.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.180 - Public hearing. 
    The commission shall hold a public hearing on any proposed designation of any historic district, property or landmark. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive weekly issues in the official publication of the city during the three calendar weeks next preceding the week in which such hearing is scheduled. Written notification of the hearing shall be mailed by United States mail to the owner and occupant of such property or landmark not less than ten (10) not more than twenty (20) days prior to the date of the public hearing. A notice sent via the United States mail to the last known owner of the property at the address shown in the Newton County tax records and a notice sent via United States mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute due legal notification to the owner and occupant, respectively. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.190 - Recommendations on proposed designations. 
    A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within fifteen (15) days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a nomination report transmitted to the mayor and city council. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.200 - City council action on commission recommendation. 
    Following receipt of the commission's recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.210 - Notification of adoption of ordinance. 
    Within thirty (30) days next following the adoption of an ordinance for designation, the owners and occupants of each designated historic property, and the owners and occupants of each structure or site located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation, which notification shall apprize the owners and occupants of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the designated historic property or within the designated historic district. A notice sent via United States mail to the last known owner of the property as shown on the Newton County tax digest and a notice sent via United State mail to the address of the property to the attention of the occupant shall constitute due legal notification to the owner and occupant. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.220 - Notification of other agencies regarding designation. 
    The commission shall notify the planning and zoning department of the city of the adoption of ordinance for designation. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.230 - Moratorium on alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. 
    During the period an ordinance for designation as an historic district or an historic property is being considered, the commission shall have the power to declare a moratorium on alteration or demolition of such property. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.240 - Approval of alterations in historic properties or districts. 
    After the designation by ordinance of an historic property or of an historic district no material change in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or noncontributing property within such historic district, shall be made or building permit issued for same unless or until a certificate of appropriateness has been obtained from the commission. The building official may issue a certificate of appropriateness exemption for the erection, alteration, restoration, or removal of any accessory structures, fences, walls, steps and pavements or in cases where the building official finds that no material change in appearance is involved. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.250 - Submission of plans. 
    An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be made on a form provided by the commission or staff and shall be accompanied by such drawings, photograph, plans and documentation as required by the commission. The application shall be filed with the planning and zoning office not less than thirty (30) days prior to the next regularly scheduled meeting. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.260 - Interior alterations. 
    In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangements or uses having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.270 - Public hearing on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices and right to be heard. 
    At least fifteen (15) days prior reviewing an application for a certificate of appropriateness, the commission shall cause to be erected in a conspicuous place on the property in question, a sign which shall read substantially as follows: 
Notice to the Public 
 The owner of this property has filed an application for a Certificate of Appropriateness with the City of Covington Historic Preservation Commission. A public (insert hearing or meeting) will be held at the Covington Planning and Zoning Office located at 2116 Stallings Street, Covington, Georgia, on (insert date) at (insert time). All interested parties should attend. 
    The applicant and interested parties shall be given an opportunity to be heard before the historic preservation commission. In cases where the commission deems it necessary, it may hold a public hearing concerning the application. In addition to posting the aforementioned sign, notices of such public hearing shall be published and mailed to the applicant and owners of property within three hundred (300) feet from any boundary of the subject property within the same time and in the same manner as provided in Section 16.12.070(D)(2) and (D)(3) of this title. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.280 - Commission action on applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
A.  The commission may approve, reject or modify an application for issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. 
B.  The commission shall issue a certificate of appropriateness for proposed changes in appearance if such changes conform in design, scale, building material, setback and site features to the United States Secretary of the Interior's Published Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings or such other guidelines as may from time to time be adopted pursuant to Section 16.52.070 of this chapter. 
C.  A decision by the commission approving or denying an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation on of a building, structure, site or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest on of such property's contribution to its present setting; 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what effect of those plans will have on the character of the surrounding area; 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity; and 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the property. 
D.  A decision by the commission approving or denying an application for a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of a building, structure, site, object or landscape feature shall be guided by: 
1.  Its historic, scenic or architectural significance; 
2.  Its importance to the ambiance of an historic property or district; 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such property because of its design, texture, material, detail or unique location; 
4.  Whether the property is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or city; 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what effect such use would have on the character of the surrounding area; 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the property from collapse; and 
7.  Whether the property is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
E.  A decision by the commission approving or denying an application for a certificate of appropriateness for proposed new construction shall be guided by: 
1.  The relationship of the proposed construction to the existing and historic character of the public streetscape; 
2.  Visual compatibility with existing buildings in the immediate neighborhood; 
3.  Adherence to vernacular building traditions of Covington; and 
4.  Whether the property is a site as defined in this chapter. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.290 - Hardship. 
    When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner or occupant of a specific property, the commission shall have the power to: 
A.  Vary or modify strict adherence to said provisions, or to interpret the meaning of said provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship; provided such variances, modifications or interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, such that the architectural or historical integrity or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done; and 
B.  Grant variances or impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in the commission's judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter when such hardship is not the result of such owner's or occupant's action or failure to act. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.300 - Approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
A.  The commission shall have forty-five (45) days after the filing of an application to approve or deny the issuance of a certificate of appropriateness. Written notice of such issuance or denial shall be sent by first class United States mail to the applicant. 
B.  Failure of the commission to act within said forty-five (45) day period shall constitute approval of the application, and no other evidence of approval shall be required. 
C.  Final Action. Evidence of approval shall be by certificate of appropriateness issued by the preservation commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent to the applicant and all other persons who have filed a written request for such notice with the preservation commission. 
    In the event the preservation commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so, and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The preservation commission may suggest alternative courses of action if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
    In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure, which would require the issuance of a permit of any kind, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the preservation commission shall be binding upon the planning and zoning department and no permit shall be issued. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.310 - Conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
    All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. The city shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter, or to prevent any other illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.320 - Expiration of certificates of appropriateness. 
    A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction or other activity authorized thereunder is commenced within six months of the date of issuance. Certificates of appropriateness shall be valid for a period of eighteen (18) months from the date of issuance and may be renewable for good cause shown at the commission's discretion. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.330 - Acquisition property. 
    The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council, when reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, negotiate for the acquisition of such property or any interest therein by the city by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.340 - Appeals. 
    Any person adversely affected by the action of the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such recommendations to the mayor and city council. Written notice of such appeal must be filed in the office of the city clerk within thirty (30) days next following the date such action is taken by the commission, and a hearing on such appeal shall be held not later than the second regularly scheduled meeting of the mayor and city council next following the filing of such appeal. It shall be the responsibility of the city clerk to place said hearing on the appropriate meeting agenda and to provide the appellant with written notice of the hearing date and time by first class mail deposited with the U. S. Postal Service not later than five calendar days prior to said hearing date unless the appellant executes and delivers to the city clerk a written waiver of said notice. The city may approve, modify, or reject the decision made by the commission. Appeals from decisions of the city pursuant to this chapter may be taken to the superior court of Newton County, Georgia, in the manner provided by law for appeals from convictions for municipal ordinance violations. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.350 - Ordinary maintenance or repair. 
    Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on an historic property to correct deterioration, decay or damage, or to sustain the existing form, which does not involve a material change in design, building material or outer appearance thereof, shall not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.360 - Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
    Owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
A.  The commission shall monitor the condition of designated historic properties to determine whether they are being provided with ordinary maintenance and repair. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a building's structural system shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
B.  If the commission determines that a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair has occurred, it shall provide written notice by first class United States mail to the owner of the property, setting forth the steps necessary to remedy such failure and the owner shall have one hundred twenty (120) days from receipt of such notice in which to complete the required maintenance or repairs. 
C.  If the required maintenance or repair has not been completed within the said one hundred twenty (120) day period the matter shall be referred to the city housing inspector. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.370 - Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. 
    Nothing in this chapter shall be construed as exempting property owners from compliance with existing city building and zoning codes, or as preventing any property owner from making any use of his property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.380 - Penalties. 
    Violations of any provisions of this shall be punished in the manner provided in Section 1.12.010 of this code. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.390 - Severability. 
    In the event that any section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase of this chapter shall be declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional, such adjudication shall in no manner affect the other sections, sentences, clauses, or phrases of this chapter, which shall remain in full force and effect, as if the section, subsection, sentence, clause or phrase so declared or adjudged invalid or unconstitutional were not originally a part thereof. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.52.400 - Defense indemnification. 
    Subject to the limitations of O.C.G.A. Section 45-9-21(b), the city council shall undertake to defend all civil, criminal, or quasi-criminal actions brought or maintained against members of the commission arising out of the performance of their duties reasonably connected therewith, whether based upon negligence, violation of contract rights, or violation of civil, constitutional, common law, or statutory rights and shall indemnify members of the commission against personal liability for damages arising from such actions. 
    The city council shall reimburse reasonable costs of defense incurred by any commission member charged with any criminal offense enumerated in O.C.G.A. Section 45-9-21(c) arising out of the performance of his duties if such person is found not guilty of such crime or if the against such person are dismissed or nolle prossed. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
Chapter 16.56 - TELECOMMUNICATIONS STRUCTURES 

16.56.010 - Purpose. 
    The purpose of this chapter is to provide requirements for the siting of all wireless, cellular, television and radio telecommunications support structures and antennas; to encourage the location of support structures in nonresidential areas; to minimize the total number of support structures within the community necessary to provide adequate personal wireless services to residents of the city of Covington; to encourage the joint use of new and existing support structure sites among service providers; to locate telecommunications support structures and antennas in areas where adverse impacts on the community are minimized; to encourage the design and construction of support structures and antennas to minimize adverse visual impacts; and to enhance the ability of the providers of telecommunications services to deliver such services to the community effectively and efficiently. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.56.020 - Definitions. 
    For the purpose of this chapter, certain terms used herein shall be defined as follows: 
    "Alternative support structure" means clock support structures, bell support structures, church steeples, light/power poles, electric transmission support structures, signs, water storage tanks, and similar natural or man-made alternative-design mounting structures that camouflage or conceal the presence of antennas or support structures. 
    "Antenna" means any exterior apparatus designed for wireless telecommunication, radio, or television communications through the sending and/or receiving of electromagnetic waves. 
    "Base station" means a structure or equipment at a fixed location that enables FCC or authorized wireless communications between user equipment and a communications network. The term does not encompass a support structure as defined in this subpart or any equipment associated with a support structure. 
    "Co-location" means the placement of the antennas of two or more service providers upon a single support structure or alternative support structure. 
    "Department" means the city of Covington planning and zoning department. 
    "FAA" means the Federal Aviation Administration. 
    "FCC" means the Federal Communications Commission. 
    "Geographic antenna placement area" means the general vicinity within which the placement of an antenna is necessary to meet the engineering requirements of an applicant's cellular network or other broadcasting need. 
    "Governing authority" means the mayor and council of the city of Covington. 
    "Height," when referring to a support structure or other structure, means the distance measured from ground level to the highest point on the support structure or appurtenance. 
    "Preexisting support structure and antennas" means structures as set forth in Section 16.56.030(E) of this chapter. 
    "Scenic views" means those geographic areas containing visually significant or unique natural features, as identified in the city of Covington comprehensive plan. 
    "Substantial change" means a modification which substantially changes the physical dimensions of an eligible support structure by meeting any of the following criteria: 
1.  For support structures other than support structures in the public rights-of-way, it increases the height of the support structure by more than ten (10) percent or by the height of one additional antenna array with separation from the nearest existing antenna not to exceed twenty (20) feet, whichever is greater. For other eligible support structures, it increases the height of the structure by more than ten (10) percent or more than ten (10) feet, whichever is greater. Changes in height should be measured from the original support structure in cases where deployments are or will be separated horizontally, such as on buildings' rooftops; in other circumstances, changes in height should be measured from the dimensions of the support structure or base station, inclusive of originally approved appurtenances; 
2.  For support structures other than support structures in the public rights-of-way, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the support structure that would protrude from the edge of the support structure more than twenty (20) feet, or more than the width of the support structure at the level of the appurtenance, whichever is greater; for other eligible support structures, it involves adding an appurtenance to the body of the structure that would protrude from the edge of the structure by more than six feet; 
3.  For any support structure or base station, it involves installation of more than the standard number of new equipment cabinets for the technology involved, but not to exceed four cabinets; or, for support structures in the public rights-of-way and base stations, it involves installation of any new equipment cabinets on the ground if there are no pre-existing ground cabinets associated with the structure, or else involves installation of ground cabinets that are more than ten (10) percent larger in height or overall volume than any other ground cabinets associated with the structure; 
4.  It entails any excavation or deployment outside the current site; 
5.  It would defeat the concealment elements of the eligible support structure; or 
6.  It does not comply with conditions associated with the siting approval of the construction or modification of the eligible support structure or base station equipment, provided however that this limitation does not apply to any modification that is non-compliant only in a manner that would not exceed the thresholds identified in paragraphs 1., 2., 3. or 4. of this [definition]. 
    "Support structure" means any structure that is designed and constructed primarily for the purpose of supporting one or more antennas, including self-supporting lattice support structures, guy support structures, or monopole support structures. The term includes radio and television transmission support structures, microwave support structures, common-carrier support structures, cellular telecommunication support structures, man-made trees (with accessory buildings/structures) and other similar structures. 
    "Visual quality" means the appropriate design, arrangement and location of support structures in relation to the built or natural environment to avoid abrupt or severe differences. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. dated 4/1/19, § 1) 
16.56.030 - Applicability. 
A.  No support structure or antenna shall be located in the city of Covington except as set forth in this chapter. Except as set forth in subsection D herein, the provisions, requirements and limitations of this chapter shall govern the location of all wireless telecommunication, cellular telecommunication, television, microwave or radio transmission support structure or antenna installed within the jurisdiction of the governing authority. If any provisions in other chapters of the zoning ordinance conflict with this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall apply. 
B.  Height Limitations. Height limitations applicable to buildings and structures set forth elsewhere in the zoning ordinance shall not apply to support structures and antennas which comply with this chapter. 
C.  Governmental Exemption. Except as otherwise specifically provided for in this chapter, the provisions of this chapter shall not apply to the governing authority's properties, facilities or structures. 
D.  Amateur Radio-Receive-Only Antennas. This chapter shall not apply to any support structure, or the installation of any antenna, that is seventy-five (75) feet or less in height and is owned and operated by a federally-licensed amateur radio station operator from the operator's residence, or is used exclusively as a receive-only antenna; provided, however, only one such support structure or antenna per residence shall be exempt from this chapter. 
E.  Pre-existing Support Structures and Antennas. Any support structure or antenna for which a permit has been properly issued prior to the effective date of this chapter shall not be required to meet the provisions of this chapter, other than Section 16.56.040 subsections E (except subsection (E)(6), G, H, K, L, M and Section 16.56.090. Any such support structures or antennas shall be referred to in this chapter as "pre-existing support structures" or "pre-existing antennas." Provided, however, that the placement of antennas on any nonconforming structure shall not create a vested right for the continued use of the structures should the nonconforming use cease. If an additional antenna is co-located upon a pre-existing support structure or alternative support structure after adoption of this chapter, then the requirements of Section 16.56.040 subsections E (except subsection (E)(6), G and H shall be met as part of the permitting process. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.56.040 - General provisions. 
A.  Principal or Accessory Use. A support structure and/or antenna is considered a principal use if located on any lot or parcel of land as the sole or primary structure, and is considered an accessory use if located on a lot or parcel shared with a different existing primary use or existing structures. An existing use or structure on the same lot or parcel shall not preclude the installation of an antenna or support structure. For purposes of determining whether the installation of a support structure or antenna complies with zoning district requirements, including but not limited to setback, buffer and other requirements, the dimensions of the entire lot or parcel shall control, even though the antenna or support structure may be located on a leased area within such lot or parcel. Support structures that are constructed, and antennas that are installed, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter shall not be deemed to constitute the expansion of a nonconforming use or structure. 
B.  Five-Year Plan and Inventory of Existing Sites. To facilitate the co-location of antennas and future land use planning, each applicant seeking to locate a new support structure, alternative support structure or antenna, or modify any such existing structure, shall provide to the planning and zoning director an inventory of its existing support structures or alternative support structures, existing support structures or alternative structures to be upgraded or replaced, and proposed support structures or alternative structures to be constructed in the next five years following the date of the application. The planning and zoning director shall provide the city of Covington board of tax assessors with a copy of the inventory. 
2.  The inventory shall include all such structures owned or leased by the applicant that are within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; within Newton County; and, within a neighboring county which currently is capable of providing coverage or capacity within the city of Covington, and shall include specific information about the location (latitude and longitude coordinates), height, design, support structure type and general suitability for antenna co-location of each support structure or alternative structure, and other pertinent information as may be required by the planning and zoning director. 
3.  If the applicant does not know specific future support structure and antenna site locations but does know of areas where telecommunications facilities will be needed within the next five years to provide service, the applicant shall list the assessor's blocks contained within the geographic service area and identify each geographic service area with a number that will correspond to the future telecommunication facility site. 
4.  The planning and zoning director may share the location of existing telecommunication facility sites with other applicants seeking to locate support structures or antennas within the jurisdiction of the governing authority; provided, however that the department is not, by sharing such information, in any way representing or warranting that such sites are available or suitable. The location of any proposed telecommunication facility sites will be protected as privileged information if the applicant so requests and it is considered as such under the applicable laws and legal authority. 
C.  Co-location-Design Requirements. In addition to all applicable building and safety codes, all support structures shall be designed to accommodate the co-location of cellular telecommunication antennas according to the following: 
1.  For support structures up to ninety (90) feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology; 
2.  For support structures ninety (90) feet to one hundred fifty (150) feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least three providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater; 
3.  For support structures one hundred fifty (150) feet to two hundred (200) feet in height, the structure and fenced compound shall be designed to accommodate at least four providers or the maximum number of users as determined by the most current technology, whichever is greater; 
4.  No support structure shall exceed two hundred (200) feet in height. 
D.  Co-location-Availability of Suitable Existing Structures. No new support structure shall be permitted unless the applicant demonstrates to the satisfaction of the planning and zoning director and governing authority that no existing support structure or existing alternative support structure can accommodate the applicant's proposed antenna. The applicant shall submit an inventory of all support structures or alternative support structures located within one-half mile of the proposed location. All evidence submitted shall be signed and sealed by appropriate licensed professionals or qualified industry experts. All required evidence must be submitted with the application. Evidence submitted to demonstrate that no existing support structure or other structure can accommodate the proposed antenna shall consist of one or more of the following: 
1.  No existing support structures or suitable alternative support structures are located within the geographic antenna placement area required to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
2.  Existing support structures or structures are not of sufficient height to meet the applicant's engineering requirements; 
3.  Existing support structures or structures do not have sufficient structural strength to support the applicant's antenna and related equipment; 
4.  The applicant's proposed antenna would cause electromagnetic interference with the antenna(s) on the existing support structures or structures, or the antenna on the existing support structures or structures would cause interference with the applicant's proposed antenna; 
5.  The cost or contractual provisions required by the support structure owner to share an existing support structure or alternative support structure or to adapt an existing support structure or alternative support structure for sharing exceed the cost of new support structure development. Specific cost information must be submitted if this justification is to be relied upon; and 
6.  The applicant adequately demonstrates that there are other limiting factors that render existing support structures and structures unsuitable, other than economic reasons. If the requirement of co-location will cause additional expense to the applicant, all such costs must be specifically shown. 
E.  Aesthetics. The guidelines set forth in this subsection shall govern the design and construction of all support structures, and the installation of all antennas governed by this chapter. 
1.  Support structures and/or antennas shall either maintain a galvanized steel or concrete finish or, subject to any applicable standards of the FAA, be painted a neutral color so as to reduce visual obtrusiveness. 
2.  At all support structure sites, the design of all buildings and related structures shall use materials, colors, textures, screening, and landscaping that will blend the support structure facilities to the natural setting and building environment. Any equipment or cabinet that supports telecommunication facilities must be concealed from public view and made compatible with the architecture of the surrounding structures or placed underground. Equipment shelters or cabinets shall be screened from public view by using landscaping or materials and colors consistent with the surrounding backdrop. The shelter or cabinet must be regularly maintained. 
3.  For antennas installed on a structure other than a support structure, the antenna and supporting electrical and mechanical ground equipment shall be of a neutral color so as to make the antenna and related equipment visually unobtrusive. 
4.  Support structures shall not be artificially lighted, unless required by the FAA or other applicable authority. If the lighting is required, the governing authority may review the available lighting alternatives and approve the design that would cause the least disturbance to the surrounding views. 
5.  No signage or other identifying markings or signs shall be permitted upon any support structure or alternative support structure within the city of Covington. 
6.  To the extent practical, telecommunication facilities shall not be placed in a direct line of sight with historic or scenic view corridors as designated by the governing body or by any state or federal law or agency. 
7.  Access to the support structure site shall be restricted so as to minimize visibility of the access. Where possible, existing roads shall be used. Where no roads exist, access shall follow the existing contours of the land. 
8.  Such other additional requirements as the planning and zoning director shall reasonably require to minimize the visual impact of the site on the surrounding area. 
F.  Setbacks and Separation. The following setbacks and separation requirements shall apply to all support structures. 
1.  Support structures shall be setback a distance equal to the height of the support structure from its base to any public right-of-way or occupied structure, or property line of the lot or parcel containing the support structure. 
2.  Guy-wires and accessory buildings and facilities shall meet the minimum accessory use location and setback requirements. 
3.  In zoning districts other than M1 and M2, support structures shall not be located closer than two thousand (2,000) feet from any existing support structure. 
4.  In the event an applicant clearly demonstrates that, given the structural failure characteristics of an alternative structure design, the required setbacks are excessive and unduly burdensome, the applicant may request the setbacks be reduced. In determining whether setbacks shall be reduced, consideration shall be given to both the danger from structure collapse and falling debris, such as ice, from a structure. 
G.  Security Fencing/Anti-climbing Devices. All support structures and supporting equipment shall be enclosed by fencing not less than six feet in height and shall also be equipped with appropriate anti-climbing devices. Fencing shall be of chain link, wood or other approved alternative. 
H.  Landscaping. The following requirements shall govern landscaping surrounding all support structures. 
1.  Where adequate vegetation is not present, support structure facilities shall be landscaped with a landscaped strip of plant materials which effectively screens the view of the support structure compound. Landscaped strips shall be a minimum of ten (10) feet in width and located outside the fenced perimeter of the compound. 
2.  Existing mature tree growth and natural landforms on the site shall be preserved to the maximum extent possible. Where natural vegetation around the perimeter of the site would provide an adequate visual screen, an undisturbed buffer may be utilized. The applicant shall provide a site plan showing existing significant vegetation to be removed, and vegetation to be replanted to replace that lost. 
3.  Landscaping shall be maintained by the provider and shall be subject to periodic review by the planning and zoning director to assure proper maintenance. Failure to maintain landscaping shall be deemed a violation of this chapter. 
I.  Maintenance Impacts. Equipment at a transmission facility shall be automated to the greatest extent possible to reduce traffic and congestion. Where the site abuts or has access to a collector or local street, access for maintenance vehicles shall be exclusively by means of the collector or local street, utilizing existing access to the property on which such facility is to be located, where possible. 
J.  Review of Support Structure and Antenna Erection by the Airport Authority. If, upon receipt of an application for the erection of any support structure or alternative support structure governed by this chapter, the department deems that the proposed structure may interfere with or affect the operation of existing or proposed airport facilities, a copy of the application shall be submitted by the planning and zoning director to the airport authority for review and recommendation. 
K.  Federal Requirements. All support structures must meet or exceed current standards and regulations of the FAA, the FCC, and any other agency of the federal government with the authority to regulate support structures and antennas. If such standards and regulations are changed, the permittee or the lessee of the support structure and antenna governed by this chapter shall bring such support structure and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards or regulations within six months of the effective date of such standards and regulations unless a more or less stringent compliance schedule is mandated by the controlling federal agency. Failure to bring such support structure and/or antenna into compliance with such revised standards and regulations shall be deemed to be a declaration of abandonment of the support structure and constitute grounds for the removal of the support structure or antenna at the owner's, permittee's, or lessee's expense. 
L.  Building Codes-Safety Standards. To ensure the structural integrity of support structures, the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee of a support structure or alternative support structure shall ensure that it is maintained in compliance with standards contained in applicable local building codes and the applicable standards for support structures that are published by the Electronic Industries Association, as amended from time to time. If, upon inspection, the department concludes that a support structure fails to comply with all applicable codes and standards, or constitutes a danger to persons or property, then upon receipt of written notice by the owner, permittee or lessee of the support structure, said party shall have fifteen (15) days to bring the support structure into compliance with such standards. Failure to bring such support structure into compliance within fifteen (15) days shall be deemed a declaration of abandonment of the support structure and constitute grounds for removal of the support structure. Prior to the removal of any support structure, the department may consider detailed plans submitted by the owner, permittee or subsequent lessee for repair of substandard support structures, and may grant a reasonable extension of the above referenced compliance period. 
M.  Change of Ownership Notification. Upon the transfer of ownership of an interest in any support structure, alternative support structure, or lot upon which such a structure has been erected, the support structure permittee shall notify the planning and zoning director of the transaction in writing within thirty (30) days. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.56.050 - Application procedures. 
A.  Pre-Application Consultation. Prior to submitting an application for a permit for any telecommunication facility, the applicant is strongly encouraged to consult with planning and zoning director and review the city of Covington's inventory of potentially available sites for co-location. 
B.  General Application Requirement. Application for a permit for any telecommunication facility shall be made to the department by the person, company or organization that will own and operate the telecommunications facility. The planning and zoning director is authorized to develop application forms to assist in providing the required information and facilitate the application process. Except for a co-location information submittal, the following information shall be submitted at the time the application is submitted. The application will not be considered complete and will not be accepted unless accompanied by all required information at the time of submittal. 
1.  A survey, sealed by a surveyor registered in the state of Georgia, showing the location of all lot lines, leased areas, easements, access points, structures, screening and landscaping existing on site. 
2.  Site plan or plans to scale specifying the location of telecommunications facilities, transmission building and/or other accessory uses, access, parking, fences, landscaped areas, and adjacent land uses. Applicants shall submit both a paper location map and a digitized location map in a format compatible with the GIS software currently utilized by the city of Covington. 
3.  Scaled elevations showing the impact of the proposed support structure or antenna. 
4.  Landscaped plan to scale indicating size, spacing and type of plantings required in Section 16.56.040(H). 
5.  A full description of the environment surrounding the proposed telecommunications facility, including any adjacent residential structures and districts, structures and sites of historic significance, streetscapes or scenic view corridors. 
6.  Information and drawings showing that the proposed facility and support structure satisfy the aesthetic requirements of Section 16.56.040(E). 
7.  A description of anticipated maintenance needs for the telecommunications facility, including frequency of service, personnel needs, equipment needs, and traffic, noise or safety impacts of such maintenance. 
8.  Report from a professional qualified engineer licensed in the state of Georgia, or other appropriate qualified industry expert, documenting the following: 
a.  Support structure or antenna type, height, and design; 
b.  Engineering, economic, and other pertinent factors governing selection of the proposed design; 
c.  Total anticipated capacity of the telecommunications facility, including numbers and types of antennas which can be accommodated; 
d.  Evidence of structural integrity of the support structure or alternative support structure; 
e.  Structural failure characteristics of the telecommunications facility and demonstration that site and setbacks are of adequate size to contain debris; and 
f.  Certification that the antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
9.  The identity of a community liaison officer appointed by the applicant to resolve issues of concern to neighbors and residents relating to the construction and operation of the facility, including name, address, telephone number, facsimile number, and electronic mail address. Identification of the geographic service area for the subject installation, including a map showing the site and the nearest or associated telecommunications facility sites within the network. Describe the distance between the telecommunications facility sites. Describe how this service area fits into and is necessary for the service network, such as whether such antenna or support structure is needed for coverage or capacity. 
10.  If the proposed site is in a residential zoning district, applicant must describe why an alternate nonresidential site was not proposed by identifying: 
a.  What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure such an alternate site and why such efforts were unsuccessful; 
b.  Why such an alternate site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible; and 
c.  How and why the proposed site is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area. 
11.  The planning and zoning director will review with special care justifications that appeal only to undue expense and/or to undue difficulties in entering into a lease agreement. The department shall carefully weigh such claims, and the evidence presented in favor of them, against a project's negative impacts at the proposed site. 
12.  The applicant must provide a utilities inventory showing the locations of all water, sewage, drainage and power line easements impacting the proposed support structure site. 
13.  The original signature of the applicant. The applicant must provide a signed, notarized statement of all owners of the subject property authorizing the filing of the application, and where applicable, the signed and notarized affidavit of the owner(s) of the subject property authorizing an applicant or agent to act on their behalf in the filing of the application. The application also shall contain the mailing address and phone number of any applicant or agent who is authorized to represent the owner of the subject property. Where applicable, the applicant shall also provide a copy of any lease agreements with the owner of the subject property. 
14.  The applicants proposed five-year plan, and other information required by Section 16.56.040(B). 
15.  The inventory of existing support and alternative support structures required by Section 16.56.040(D). 
16.  Evidence demonstrating specifically that no existing support or alternative support structure can accommodate the proposed antenna, under Section 16.56.040(D). 
17.  If the proposed antenna height exceeds the limitations of Section 16.56.080, the applicant must describe why an antenna complying with that height standard is not feasible by showing: 
a.  What good faith efforts and measures were taken to secure an alternate site and why such efforts were unsuccessful; 
b.  Why an alternate site was not technologically, legally or economically feasible; 
c.  How and why the proposed height is essential to meet service demands for the geographic service area; and 
d.  How and why the necessary service cannot be provided with more antennas at a height complying with Section 16.56.080. 
18.  The applicant must provide any other information which may be requested by the department to fully evaluate and review the application and the potential impact of a proposed telecommunications facility. 
C.  Support Structure Co-location Information Submittals. Any person or entity co-locating an antenna or antennas which will add no more than ten (10) feet to the height of the support structure and related equipment or appurtenances on or around a support structure for which a permit has already been issued shall submit the following information only. This information must be submitted at the time the application is submitted. The application will not be considered complete and will not be accepted unless accompanied by all required information at the time of submittal: 
1.  The name of the person or entity co-locating the antenna. 
2.  The name of the owner of the support structure and a copy of any lease agreements with said owner. 
3.  The support structure's permit number. 
4.  The location of the support structure. 
5.  The remaining structural capacity of the support structure. 
6.  Certification that the antenna(s) and related equipment or appurtenances comply with all current regulations of the FCC, with specific reference to FCC regulations governing non-ionizing electromagnetic radiation (NIER), and that the radio frequency levels meet the American National Standards Institute (ANSI) guidelines for public safety. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.56.060 - Administrative approvals. 
A.  General. 
1.  The planning and zoning director may administratively approve the uses set forth in subsection D of this section. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this subsection and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
2.  The planning and zoning director shall respond to each application within forty-five (45) days of its receipt by either approving or denying the application. One forty-five (45) day extension of this review period may be exercised by the planning and zoning director if such additional time is deemed necessary to adequately assess the request. If the planning and zoning director fails to respond to the applicant within a maximum of ninety (90) days, the application shall be deemed to be approved. 
3.  As part of any administrative approval, the planning and zoning director may administratively reduce setback requirements by up to ten (10) percent to compensate for irregularly shaped lots or parcels. 
4.  Any decision by the planning and zoning director that results in the denial of a request to place, construct, or modify wireless telecommunications facilities shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. In addition to the requirements set forth in subsection D for uses allowed by administrative approval, the planning and zoning director shall consider the applicable factors set forth in Section 16.56.070(F) in acting upon an application for administrative approval. 
B.  Application-Contents-Fee. All applications for administrative approval of a permit shall be submitted to the planning and zoning director. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in Section 16.56.050. An application for administrative approval of a permit shall not be accepted for processing without the information required in Section 16.56.050 of this chapter. An application fee shall be charged by the planning and zoning director in an amount stated in Section 16.56.100 of this chapter. 
C.  Co-location of Antennas Required. Applicants for the erection of a support structure or placement of an antenna shall be required to co-locate upon an existing support structure or alternative support structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing support structure suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative support structure is available as set forth in Section 16.56.040(D). 
D.  Uses Allowed by Administrative Approval. The following uses may be approved by the planning and zoning director after conducting an administrative review, provided all other criteria of this chapter are met. 
1.  If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna co-location, as required in subsection C above, is not possible for a given geographic antenna placement area, construction of a new support structure up to a height of one hundred fifty (150) feet, including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said support structure or antenna, may be permitted in the M1 and M2 zoning districts. 
2.  If it is adequately demonstrated that antenna co-location, as required in subsection C above, is not possible for a given geographic antenna placement area, construction of a new support structure up to a height of fifty (50) feet (thirty-five (35) feet if only intended to accommodate one user), including the placement of additional buildings or other supporting equipment used in connection with said support structure or antenna, may be permitted in the CM zoning district. 
3.  Co-location of any antenna, so long as the addition of said antenna adds no more than ten (10) feet to the height of the existing support or alternative support structure. 
4.  Replacing an existing support structure with a new support structure designed to accommodate three or more users so long as the new support structure does not exceed the height limitations of this chapter and setback requirements of this chapter are met. After the replacement support structure is built, only one support structure shall remain on such site. 
E.  Appeal of Administrative Determination. If a permit application for a support structure as an administratively permitted use is determined by the planning and zoning director to not meet all applicable criteria of this chapter, the applicant may appeal the determination to the board of appeals and adjustments pursuant to Section 16.12.180. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.56.065 - Administrative approval of insubstantial changes to existing structures. 
    An applicant may request administrative approval of modifications to an existing support structure or base station that is deemed to not be a substantial change, as defined in this code. 
1.  The applicant shall provide a site plan and information as listed on a city application regarding location of the structure(s); elevations or a rendering of the structure(s) including any proposed changes; any accessory structure(s); and all proposed landscaping. If an application is deemed incomplete, an applicant will be notified by the department within ten (10) days. Any timeframes of review are delayed or tolled until the applicant resubmits the application materials. 
2.  After submission of an application to the department, and a determination of eligibility has been made, the planning and zoning director will review all applications and make their decision based upon the information submitted. 
3.  The addition of antennas to an existing structure are exempted from all setback requirements which pertain to residentially zoned or used properties. 
4.  Once the request has been confirmed to not be a substantial change, as defined in this code, a decision shall be made by the planning and zoning director within sixty (60) days, subject to federal law and FCC rule changes. 
5.  The 60-day period begins to run when the application is filed but may be tolled in cases where the department determines that the application is incomplete. To toll the timeframe for incompleteness, the department must provide written notice to the applicant within thirty (30) days of receipt of the application, clearly and specifically delineating all missing documents or information as required under subsection 1. of this section. The timeframe for review begins running again when the applicant makes a supplemental submission in response to the notice of incompleteness. Following a supplemental submission, the department has ten (10) days to notify the applicant that the supplemental submission did not provide the information identified in the original notice delineating missing information. The timeframe is tolled in the case of second or subsequent notices pursuant to the procedures identified in this subsection 5. Second or subsequent notices of incompleteness shall not specify missing documents or information that were not delineated in the original notice of incompleteness. 
6.  In the event the city fails to approve or deny a request seeking approval under this section within the timeframe for review (accounting for any tolling), the request shall be deemed granted. The deemed grant does not become effective until the applicant notifies the city in writing after the review period has expired (accounting for any tolling) that the application has been deemed granted. 
(Ord. dated 4/1/19, § 2) 
16.56.070 - Special use permit required. 
A.  General. 
1.  If the proposed support structure or antenna is not eligible for administrative approval, then a special use permit shall be required for the construction of a support structure, alternative support structure or the placement of an antenna in any zoning district. All such uses shall comply with requirements set forth in this chapter and all other applicable codes and ordinances. 
2.  In granting a special use permit, the governing authority may impose conditions to the extent that it concludes such conditions are necessary to mitigate from the proposed support structure or antenna upon surrounding properties as set out in Section 16.56.060. 
B.  Application-Contents-Fee. All applications for special use permits shall be submitted to the planning and zoning director. Each application shall contain as a part thereof detailed plans and specifications as set forth in Section 16.56.050. An application for a special use permit shall not be accepted for processing without all the information required in Section 16.56.050. An application fee shall be charged by the planning and zoning director in accordance with Section 16.56.100. 
C.  Co-location of Antennas Required. Applicants for the erection of a support structure or antenna, except amateur radio operators, shall be required to co-locate upon an existing support structure. An exception to co-location shall only be made if the applicant adequately demonstrates that an existing support structure suitable for co-location does not exist in the geographic antenna placement area, and that no suitable alternative support structure is available as set forth in Section 16.56.040(D) contained herein. 
D.  Independent Expert Review. The governing authority shall engage a licensed professional engineer as an independent expert to review any of the materials submitted by an applicant for a special use permit if the application seeks a new support structure over one hundred (100) feet in height. The governing authority may engage such an expert if the application seeks a new support structure under one hundred (100) feet, or seeks a co-location. The expert shall render an opinion regarding any concerns about the proposal, including but not limited to, structural integrity and the feasibility of alternative sites or co-location. Following the review of an independent expert, the governing authority shall convey its concerns to the applicant in writing and shall allow the applicant a reasonable opportunity to address those concerns. 
E.  Public Hearing. Before taking action upon the proposed special use permit, the governing authority shall hold a public hearing on the matter consistent with the requirements of Sections 16.12.070 and 16.12.080. 
F.  Considerations in Approval or Denial of Special Use Permits. Any denial of a request to place, construct or modify a telecommunications facility shall be in writing and supported by substantial evidence contained in a written record. The mayor and council shall submit a written decision to the clerk of the mayor and council, and mail a copy to the applicant, within one week of the date of decision. The following factors shall be taken into consideration in acting upon a special use permit application under the provisions of this chapter: 
1.  The height and setbacks of the proposed support structure or antenna(s); 
2.  The proximity of the support structure or antenna(s) to residential structures and residential district boundaries; 
3.  The surrounding topography; 
4.  The surrounding tree coverage and foliage; 
5.  The design of the support structure or antenna(s), with particular reference to design characteristics that have the effect of reducing or eliminating visual obtrusiveness, such as a monopole or alternative support structure; 
6.  The proposed ingress and egress; 
7.  The availability of suitable existing support structures or other structures for antenna co-location; and whether the applicant has demonstrated adequately, pursuant to Section 16.56.040(D), that no co-location is possible; 
8.  The impact of the proposed support structure or antenna(s) upon scenic views, historic districts or properties, and visual quality of the surrounding area; 
9.  The needs of the applicant as balanced against the detrimental effects on surrounding properties; 
10.  The impact of the proposed support structure or antenna(s) on adjacent and nearby properties; 
11.  Whether the applicant has demonstrated with clear and convincing evidence that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity; 
12.  Whether the applicant has complied with, and satisfactorily demonstrated compliance with, all requirements of this chapter; 
13.  Whether the applicant has satisfied the aesthetic requirements of Section 16.56.040(E); and 
14.  If the applicant has previously filed a five-year plan pursuant to Section 16.56.040(B), whether the proposed facility complies with that plan, and if not, whether the applicant has valid reasons for deviating from its plan. 
G.  Requirements for Issuance of Special Use Permit. The special use permit may be issued by the governing authority only upon satisfaction of the following requirements: 
1.  A proper and complete application filed in accordance with the requirements of Section 16.56.050; 
2.  The application is in compliance with the conditions for the proposed special use required by this section, and is in compliance with all requirements of Section 16.56.040; 
3.  The applicant complies with the conditions proposed by the governing authority for the purpose of reducing the harmful effects of the use on surrounding uses and ensuring compatibility with neighboring uses; 
4.  The governing authority determines, based upon a review of the requirements and factors set forth in this chapter, that the benefits and need for the proposed special use are greater than any possible depreciating effects or damages to neighboring or nearby properties; and 
5.  All fees have been paid in full. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. of 6/1/15(1), § 3) 
16.56.080 - Support structures and antennas in residential areas. 
A.  Placement of Support Structures and Antenna. No permit shall be granted for any site zoned as a historic district, NR1, NR2, NR3 and CR unless the evidence establishes that it is not possible to locate said support structure or antenna in a nonresidential district and close significant gaps or otherwise provide personal wireless communication service mandated by the terms of the applicant's federal telecommunication license. No support structure or antenna shall be permitted within two thousand (2,000) feet of any residentially used property unless the applicant can show that the denial of a permit in such a location will cause a significantly harmful and permanent degradation of service which cannot be overcome by any other means including planned or potential locations which would provide the same or similar coverage or capacity. For the purposes of this subsection, the phrase "residentially used property" shall mean the property on which the residence is located and not more than one acre of land, determined as if the residence was situated in the center of said tract. All other requirements of this chapter shall apply and must be satisfied prior to a permit being granted in these zoning districts. 
B.  Height Standards. If the evidence establishes the necessity for placing a support structure or antenna within the residential districts listed in subsection A above, the height of such support structure or antenna shall be limited as follows: 
1.  NR1, NR2, NR3 and NM: The maximum height for a support structure, including antennas, shall be seventy-five (75) feet. 
2.  CR and TCR: The maximum height for a support structure, including antennas, shall be ninety (90) feet. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.56.090 - Removal of abandoned support structures and antennas. 
A.  Notice of Abandoned Antenna and Structures. The owner or lessee of a support structure or antenna shall promptly notify the department of its intent to abandon or the abandonment of any support structure or antenna. 
B.  Removal of Abandoned Antennas and Support Structures. Any support structure or antenna that is not operated for a continuous period exceeding twelve (12) months shall be considered abandoned, and the owner of such antenna or support structure shall remove the structure within ninety (90) days of such abandonment. If said support structure or antenna is not removed within said ninety (90) days, the governing authority may, take such action as may be deemed necessary to remove, or cause to be removed, such antenna or support structure at the owner's expense. If there are two or more users of a single support structure, then this provision shall not become effective until all users cease utilizing the support structure. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part)) 
16.56.100 - Application and permit fees. 
    Application fees for administrative approvals and for construction of new support structures shall be established by the mayor and council from time to time by resolution and may vary depending upon the height of the proposed new support structure. In addition to such application fees, the applicable construction and utility inspection permit fees in effect at the time of the application shall apply. 
(Ord. dated 6/30/08 (part); Ord. of 6/1/2015(1), § 4) 
STATUTORY REFERENCES FOR GEORGIA CITIES AND TOWNS 
    The statutory references listed below refer the code user to state statutes applicable to Georgia cities and towns. They are up to date through the Regular Session of the 2017 Legislative Session. 
General Provisions 
Incorporation of municipal corporations 
OCGA ch. 36-31 
Powers of municipal corporations generally 
OCGA chs. 36-30 and 36-34 
Home rule 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II; OCGA ch. 36-35 
Limitations on home rule powers 
OCGA § 36-35-6 
Elections 
OCGA title 21 
Ordinances 
OCGA §§ 36-30-3; 36-35-3 
Local government code enforcement boards 
OCGA ch. 36-74 
Penalty limits 
OCGA §§ 36-30-8 and 36-35-6(a)(2) 
Annexation of territory 
OCGA ch. 36-36 
Administration and Personnel 
Administrative powers generally 
OCGA § 36-34-2 
Officers generally 
OCGA §§ 36-30-4 et seq., 36-34-2 
Vacancies in office 
OCGA § 36-30-13 
Ethics in Government Act 
OCGA ch. 21-5 
Public meetings 
OCGA ch. 50-14 
Ordinances not to bind succeeding councils 
OCGA § 36-30-3 
Municipal courts 
OCGA ch. 36-32 
Park or recreation boards 
OCGA § 36-64-5 
Liability for acts or omissions of officers 
OCGA ch. 36-33 
Municipal training 
OCGA ch. 36-45 
Police and fire protection 
Ga. Const. Art IX, § II, para. III 
Peace officer training 
OCGA ch. 35-8 
Compensation of law enforcement officers 
OCGA § 36-30-9 
Mutual aid agreements 
OCGA ch. 36-69 
Revenue and Finance 
Financial provisions generally 
OCGA §§ 36-80-2 et seq., 36-60-7, 36-60-8 
Powers of taxation and expenditure 
Ga. Const. Art IX, § IV 
Limits on taxing power 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. VIII 
Fiscal year 
OCGA § 36-81-3 
Limits on local debt 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § V 
Municipal taxation 
OCGA § 48-5-350 et seq. 
Revenue bonds 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § VI 
Budgets and audits 
OCGA ch. 36-81 
Bonds 
OCGA chs. 36-38 and 36-82 
Local government investment pool 
OCGA ch. 36-83 
Public works bidding 
OCGA ch. 36-91 
Interlocal risk management agencies 
OCGA ch. 36-85 
Acquisition, sale and lease of real and personal property 
OCGA ch. 36-37 
Grants of state funds 
OCGA ch. 36-40 
Urban residential finance authorities 
OCGA ch. 36-41 
Downtown development authorities 
OCGA ch. 36-42 
City business improvement districts 
OCGA ch. 36-43 
Immunity from antitrust liability 
OCGA ch. 36-65 
Business and occupation taxes 
OCGA ch. 48-13 
Fees and taxes on insurance companies 
OCGA ch. 33-8 
Special assessments 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § VI 
Business Licenses and Regulations 
Alcoholic beverages 
OCGA title 3 
Business and occupation taxes 
OCGA ch. 48-13 & §§ 36-60-6 and 36-60-9 
Cable television 
OCGA §§ 36-18-3, 36-34-2(7) 
Adult bookstores and theaters 
OCGA § 36-60-3 
Self-service motor fuel dispensing pumps 
OCGA § 36-60-1 
Animals 
Animals generally 
OCGA title 4 
Dogs 
OCGA ch. 4-8 
Responsible Dog Ownership Law 
OCGA § 4-8-20 et seq. 
Health and Safety 
Food service establishments 
OCGA § 26-2-370 et seq. 
Air quality control 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Public health facilities 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Facilities for treatment of patients 
OCGA § 36-34-4 
Fireworks 
OCGA ch. 25-10 
Garbage collection and disposal 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Police and fire protection 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Alarm systems 
OCGA § 36-60-12 
Unfit buildings 
OCGA §§ 36-61-11 and 41-2-7 et seq. 
War on terrorism local assistance 
OCGA ch. 36-75 
Public Peace, Morals and Welfare 
State criminal code 
OCGA title 16 
Prohibition on regulating conduct which is prohibited by state criminal law 
OCGA § 36-35-6(a)(2) 
Vehicles and Traffic 
Vehicle code 
OCGA title 40 
Powers of local authorities 
OCGA § 40-6-370 et seq. 
Prosecution of traffic offenders 
OCGA ch. 40-13 
Abandoned and junked motor vehicles 
OCGA ch. 40-11; OCGA § 36-60-4 
Public transportation 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III 
Streets, Sidewalks and Public Places 
Street and sidewalk construction and maintenance 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III; OCGA §§ 36-60-5, 36-30-11, 36-30-12 
Street improvements 
OCGA ch. 36-39 
Street obstructions 
OCGA § 36-30-10 
Parks and recreation areas 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. III; OCGA ch. 36-64 
Botanical gardens 
OCGA § 36-34-5.2 
Zoos 
OCGA § 36-34-5.3 Public Services 
Water and sewer systems 
OCGA § 36-34-5 
Industrial waste water treatment services 
OCGA § 36-60-2 
Library services 
OCGA § 36-34-5.1 
Buildings and Construction 
Building codes 
OCGA ch. 8-2 
State building codes 
OCGA § 8-2-20 et seq. 
Planning and Zoning 
Generally 
Ga. Const. Art. IX, § II, para. IV 
Zoning procedures 
OCGA ch. 36-66 
Conflict of interest in zoning actions 
OCGA ch. 36-67A 
Coordinated and comprehensive planning 
OCGA ch. 36-70 
Development impact fees 
OCGA ch. 36-71 
PRIOR CODE TABLE 
    This table provides users with the legislative history and the current disposition of the sections in the code of the city of Covington, Georgia. Thus, prior code Section 1-1 appears in this Code in Chapter 1.01. The legislative history information was derived from the City of Covington, comprising the general ordinances of the City of Covington, Georgia published by Municipal Code Corporation, 1961. 
Prior 
Code § Ordinance 
History Herein 1-1 Not codified 1-2 Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. I, § 1, 2-6-84 1.04.010 1-3 1.04.020 1-4 1.04.030 1-5 1.04.040 1-6 1.04.050 1-7 1.04.060 1-8 Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. I, § 2, 2-6-84 1.12.010 2-1 Code 1932, § 1; Ord. of 1-5-48; Mo. of 12-17-59; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. II, § 1, 2-6-84 2.04.010 2-1.1 Ord. No. 1970-40, 4-20-70 2.08.010 2-2 Code 1932, § 4; Ord. of 2-17-64, § 1 2.12.010 2-3 2.12.020 2-4 Reserved 2-5 2.20.010 2-6 Code 1932, § 6 2.16.010 2-7 Code 1932, § 7; Ord. of 2-17-64, § 1; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. II, § 2, 2-6-84 2.32.010 2-8 Code 1932, §§ 7, 20(7) 2.32.020 2-8.1 Ord. No. 1966-19, 4-4-66; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. II, § 3, 2-6-84 1.08.010 2-9 Code 1932, § 104, Art. 1 1.08.020 2-10 Code 1932, § 15; Ord. No. 1966-17, § 1, 3-21-66; Ord. No. 1988-185, § 1, 8-29-88 2.24.010 2-11 Code 1932, § 20(4) 2.20.020 2-17 Ord. No. 12-21-64, § 1; Ord. No. 1978-89, 1-16-78 3.04.010 2-18 Ord. of 2-3-64, § 1; Ord. No. 1989-189, § 1, 7-17-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/6/08 2-19 Ord. of 2-3-64, § 2; Ord. No. 1989-189, 7-17-89 3.08.020 2-20 Code 1932, § 20 2.08.020 2-23 Ord. No. 1967-29, § 1, 3-20-67; Ord. No. 1984, Art. II, § 5, 2-6-84 2.48.010 3-1 2.56.010 3-2 2.56.020 3-3 2.56.030 3-4 2.56.040 3-5 2.56.050 3-6 2.56.060 3-7 2.56.070 3-8 2.56.080 3-9 2.56.090 3-10 2.56.100 3-11 2.56.110 3-12 2.56.120 3-13 2.56.130 3-14 2.56.140 3-15 2.56.150 3-16 2.56.160 3-17 2.56.170 3-18 2.56.180 3-19 2.56.190 3-20 2.56.200 3-21 2.56.210 3-22 2.56.220 3-23 2.56.230 3-24 2.56.240 3-25 2.56.250 3-26 2.56.260 3-27 2.56.270 3-28 2.56.280 3-29 2.56.290 3-30 2.56.300 3-31 2.56.310 3-32 2.56.320 3-33 2.56.330 3-34 2.56.340 3-35 2.56.350 3-36 2.56.360 3-37 2.56.370 3-38 2.56.380 3-39 2.56.390 3-40 2.56.400 3-41 2.56.410 3-42 2.56.420 3-43 2.56.430 3-44 2.56.440 3-45 2.56.450 3-46 2.56.460 3-47 2.56.470 3-48 2.56.480 3-49 2.56.490 3-50 2.56.500 3-51 2.56.510 3-52 2.56.520 4-1 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-2 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74; Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74; Ord. No. 1975-64, 6-16-75; Ord. No. 1977-84, 6-16-77; Ord. No. 1999-305, § 1, 2-1-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-3 Reserved 4-4 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-5 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74; Ord. No. 1975-67, § 1, 7-21-75; Ord. No. 1982-129, § 1, 8-16-82; Ord. No. 1999-305, § 2, 2-1-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-6 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74 Repealed by Ord. dated 12/19/05 4-7 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74; Ord. No. 1975-60, 2-17-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-8 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-9 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74; Ord. No. 1977-79, § 2, 1-24-77 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-10 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-11 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74; Ord. No. 1975-65, 6-16-75; Ord. No. 1981-120, § 1, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1983-134, § 1, 2-7-83; Ord. No. 1986-171, § 1, 12-1-86 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-12 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74; Ord. No. 1975-63, § 1, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-13 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-14 Ord. No. 1974-57, 11-18-74 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-15 Ord. No. 1984-148, § 1, 3-5-84 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-101 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1979-103, § 1, 9-17-79 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-102 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-103 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1979-103, § 2, 9-17-79 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-104 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1975-67, § 2, 7-21-75; Ord. No. 1979-103, §§ 3, 4, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 1992-223, 12-30-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-105 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-106 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1979-103, § 5, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 1999-305, § 3, 2-1-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-107 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1979-103, § 6, 9-17-79; Ord. No. 1999-305, § 4, 2-1-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-108 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-109 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 12/19/05 4-110 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1984-148, § 2, 3-5-84 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-111 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1979-103, § 7, 9-17-79 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-112 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-113 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1999-305, § 5, 2-1-99 4-114 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-115 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-116 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1979-103, § 8, 9-17-79 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-117 Reserved 4-118 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 4-119 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 4-120 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1977-79, § 3, 1-24-77; Ord. No. 1981-120, § 2, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1986-171, § 2, 12-1-86 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-121 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-122 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 4-123 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-124 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 4-125 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-126 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-127 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-128 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1976-75, 8-16-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-129 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75; Ord. No. 1981-117, 2-2-81; Ord. No. 1982-124, 4-19-82; Ord. No. 1995-248, 12-19-94 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-130 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-131 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-132 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-133 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-134 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-135 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-136 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-137 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-138 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-139 Ord. No. 1975-63, § 2, 4-23-75 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-140 Not codified 4-141 Not codified 4-201 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1997-291, 11-17-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-202 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1984-154, § 1, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 1995-256, 9-19-95; Ord. No. 1997-290, § 1, 10-20-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-203 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-204 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1984-154, § 2, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 1997-280, § 2, 10-20-97; Ord. No. 1999-305, § 6, 2-1-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-205 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1984-154, § 3, 11-19-84; Ord. No. 1999-305, §§ 7, 8, 2-1-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-206 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-207 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1984-148, § 3, 3-5-84; Ord. No. 1997-290, § 3, 10-20-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-208 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-209 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1986-171, § 3, 12-1-86 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-210 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-211 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-212 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-213 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-214 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-215 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-216 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-217 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-218 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 4-219 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-220 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-221 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 4-222 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-223 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-224 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-225 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-226 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 4-227 Ord. No. 1983-143, § 1, 9-20-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08 5-1 Res. of 10-7-57 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-2 Code 1932, § 97, Art. 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 5-3 Code 1932, § 98, Art. 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 5-4 Code 1932, § 71, Art. 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 5-5 Code 1932, § 100, Art. 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-6 Code 1932, § 74, Art. 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-7 Code 1932, § 76, Art. 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-12 Ord. No. 1995-259, § 2, 8-7-95 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-13 Ord. No. 1995-259, § 2, 8-7-95 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-14 Ord. No. 1995-259, § 2, 8-7-95 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-15 Ord. No. 1995-259, § 2, 8-7-95 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-16 Ord. No. 1995-259, § 2, 8-7-95 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-17 Ord. No. 1995-259, § 2, 8-7-95 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-28 Ord. No. 1970-41, Art. 1, 8-17-70 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-29 Ord. No. 1970-41, Art. 6, 8-17-70; Ord No. 1984-147, Art. III, § 4, 2-6-84 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-30 Ord No. 1970-41, Art. 8, 8-17-70 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-31 Ord No. 1970-41, Art. 3, 8-17-70 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-32 Ord. No. 1970-41, Art. 4, 8-17-70 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-33 Ord. No. 1970-41, Art. 5, § 3, 8-17-70 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-34 Ord. No. 1970-41, Art. 5, § 1, 8-17-70 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-35 Ord. No. 1970-41, Art. 5, § 2, 8-17-70 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-36 Ord. No. 1970-41, Art. 7, 8-17-70; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. III, § 5, 2-6-84 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-50 Ord. No. 1989-191, § 1, 10-16-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-51 Ord. No. 1989-191, § 1, 10-16-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-52 Ord. No. 1989-191, § 1, 10-16-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 5-53 Ord. No. 1989-191, § 1, 10-16-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/20/07 6-1 Ord. No. 5-5-58, § 2; Mo. of 5-5-58; Ord. No. 1965-1, § 1, 4-19-65; Ord. No. 1980-107, § 1, 2-4-80; Ord. No. 1983-139, § 1, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1984-151, 8-6-84; Ord. No. 1986-164, § 2, 4-7-86; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 1(1), 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1989-187, §§ 1, 2, 2-20-89; Ord. No. 1991-208, 2-18-91; Ord. No. 1991-214, § 1, 10-7-91; Ord. No. 1998-298, § 1, 3-10-98 15.04.010 6-2 Ord. No. 5-5-58, § 3; Ord. No. 1965-1, § 2, 4-19-65; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. IV, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 1(3), 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1998-298, § 2, 3-16-98 15.04.020 6-3 Ord. of 5-5-58, § 4; Ord. No. 1965-1, § 3, 4-17-65; Ord. No. 1998-299, 4-20-98 15.04.030 6-16 Ord. of 10-3-55, § 1; Ord. No. 1991-214, § 4(b), 10-7-91 15.28.010 6-21 Ord. of 10-3-55, § 6; Ord. No. 1991-214, § 4, 10-7-91 15.28.020 6-24 Ord. of 10-3-55, § 9 15.28.030 6-26 Ord. of 10-3-55, § 12; Ord. No. 1991-214, § 4, 10-7-91 15.28.040 6-29 Res. of 2-6-56; Mo. of 11-5-56; Ord. No. 1991-214, § 4(g), 10-7-91 15.28.050 6-30 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 2, 12-17-79 15.28.060 6-41 Ord. No. 1989-195, 12-18-89 15.36.010 6-42 Ord. No. 1989-195, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1995-251, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1997-285, § 1, 5-19-97 15.36.020 6-43 Ord. No. 1989-195, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1995-251, § 2, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1997-285, § 2, 5-19-97 15.36.030 6-44 Ord. No. 1989-195, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1995-251, § 3, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1997-285, § 3, 5-19-97 15.36.040 6-45 Ord. No. 1989-195, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1995-251, § 4, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1997-285, § 4, 5-19-97; Ord. No. 1998-296, 3-16-98 15.36.050 6-46 Ord. No. 1989-195, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1995-251, § 5, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1997-285, § 5, 5-19-97 15.36.060 6-47 Ord. No. 1989-195, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1995-25 1, § 6, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1997-285, § 6, 5-19-97 15.36.070 6-48 Ord. No. 1989-195, 12-18-89; 1997-285, § 7, 5-19-97 15.36.080 6-49 Ord. No. 1989-195, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1997-285, § 8, 5-19-97 15.36.090 6-50 Ord. No. 1977-82, 6-20-77 15.16.010 6-51 Ord. No. 1977-82, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 1987-177, § 1, 12-7-87 15.16.020 6-52 Ord. No. 1977-82, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 1987-177, § 2, 12-7-87 15.16.030 6-53 Ord. No. 1977-82, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 1987-177, § 3, 12-7-87 15.16.040 6-54 Ord. No. 1977-82, 6-20-77; Ord. No. 1987-177 § 4, 12-7-87 15.16.050 6-60 Ord. No. 1979-105, § 1, 12-17-79 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 6-61 Ord. No. 1979-105, § 1, 12-17-79 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 6-62 Ord. No. 1979-105, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 1(7), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 6-63 Ord. No. 1979-105, § 1, 12-17-79 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 6-64 Ord. No. 1979-105, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 1(8), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 6-65 Ord. No. 1979-105, § 1, 12-17-79 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 6-76 Ord. No. 1991-208, § 6-66, 2-18-91 15.32.010 6-77 Ord. No. 1991-208, § 6-67, 2-18-91 15.32.020 6-78 Ord. No. 1991-208, § 6-68, 2-18-91 15.32.030 6-79 Ord. No. 1991-208, § 6-69, 2-18-91 15.32.040 6-80 Ord. No. 1991-208, § 6-70, 2-18-91 15.32.050 6-81 Ord. No. 1991-208, § 6-71, 2-18-91 15.32.060 6-82 Ord. No. 1991-208, § 6-72, 2-18-91 15.32.070 6-83 Ord. No. 1991-208, § 6-73, 2-18-91 15.32.080 7-1 Code 1932, § 49, Art. 1 2.60.010 7-2 Mo. of 8-6-51 2.60.020 7-3 Ord. No. 1965-2, § 1, 4-19-65 2.60.030 7-4 Mo. of 1-22-59 2.60.040 7-5 Res. of 6-2-53; Ord. No. 1965-2, § 2, 4-19-65 2.60.050 7-6 Ord. No. 1965-2, § 3, 4-19-65 2.60.060 7-7 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 2, 6-20-88 2.60.070 7-8 Ord. No. 1990-206, 8-7-90 2.60.080 7-9 Ord. No. 1990-206, 8-7-90 2.60.090 8-1 Ord. No. 1990-198, 5-7-90 2.52.010 8-2 Ord. No. 1990-198, 5-7-90 2.52.020 8-3 Ord. No. 1990-198, 5-7-90 2.52.030 8-4 Ord. No. 1990-198, 5-7-90 2.52.040 8-5 Ord. No. 1990-198, 5-7-90 2.52.050 8-6 Ord. No. 1990-198, 5-7-90 2.52.060 8-7 Ord. No. 1990-198, 5-7-90 2.52.070 9-1 Ord. of 2-1-54, § 1; Ord. No. 1993-231, § 1, 8-16-93 2.44.010 9-2 Ord. of 2-1-54, § 2; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. V, § 2(A), 2-6-84 2.44.030 9-3 Ord. of 2- 1-54, § 3; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. V, § 2(A), 2-6-84 2.44.030 9-4 Ord. of 2-1-54, § 4; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. V, § 2(B), 2-6-84 2.44.040 9-5 Ord. of 2-1-54, § 5; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. V, § 2(C), 2-6-84 2.44.050 9-6 Ord. of 2-1-54, § 6; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. V2 § 2(D), 2-6-84; Ord. No. 1993-231, § 3, 8-16-93 2.44.060 9-7 Ord. No. 1991-215, 10-7-91; Ord. No 1993-232, 8-16-93; Ord. No. 1993-235, 12-7-93 2.44.070 10-1.1 Ord. No 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1989-196, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-82; Ord. No. 1998-302, § 2, 5-19-98 2.36.010 10-1.2 2.36.020 10-2 Ord. No. 1976-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1981-118, § 1, 8-17-81; Ord. No 1982-126, § 1, 6-7-82; Ord. No 1984-147, Art. VI, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 1984-150, § 1, 6-4-84; Ord. No. 1985-162, § 1, 1-6-88; Ord. No. 1987-175, 5-18-87; Ord. No. 1988-180, § 1, 3-17-88; Ord. No. 1988-186, § 1, 10-17-88; Ord. No. 1989-190, § 1, 8-7-89; Ord. No. 1989-196, § 2, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1990-23, 6-4-90; Ord. No. 1991-210, §§ 1, 2, 5-13-91; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1992-222, §§ 1-3, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 1994-240, §§ 1, 2, 3-28-94; Ord. No. 1997-289, §§ 1, 2, 8-18-97 15.12.010 10-3 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1982-126, § 2, 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VI, § 2, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 1984-150, § 2, 6-4-84; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1992-222, § 4, 10-19-92 15.12.020 10-4 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-97; Ord. No. 1988-186, § 2, 10-17-88; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1992-222, § 5, 10-19-92 15.12.030 10-5 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1987-172, § 2, 1-6-87; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.12.040 10-6 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1987-172, § 3, 1-6-87; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 1, 4-9-92; Ord. No. 1992-222, § 6, 10-19-92 15.12.050 10-9 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VI, § 3, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.24.010 10-10 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 10.12.010 10-11 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 2.36.030 10-12 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.12.060 10-13 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.12.070 10-14 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.12.080 10-15 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.12.090 10-16 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-97; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VI, § 4, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.24.020 10-17 Ord. No. 1979-106, § 1, 12-17-79; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.24.030 10-18 Ord. No. 1984-150, § 3, 6-4-84; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.24.040 10-19 Ord. No. 1984-155, § 1, 12-17-84; Ord. No. 1985-158, §§ 1, 2, 4-15-80; Ord. No. 1988-180, §§ 2, 3, 3-17-88; Ord. No. 1989-196, § 3, 12-18-89; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1992-222 § 8, 10-19-92; Ord. No. 1994-240, § 3, 3-28-94; Ord. No. 1997-289, §§ 3, 4, 8-18-97 15.24.050 10-30 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3 (10-201), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VI, § 5, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.20.010 10-31 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-202), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1992-222, §§ 9, 10, 10-19-92 15.20.020 10-32 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-203), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.20.030 10-33 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-204), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1992-222, § 11, 10-19-92 15.20.040 10-34 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-205), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VI, § 6, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.20.050 10-35 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-206), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.20.060 10-36 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-207), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.20.070 10-37 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-208), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.20.080 10-38 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-209), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.20.090 10-39 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-210), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.20.100 10-40 Ord. No. 1982-126, § 3(10-21-1), 6-7-82; Ord. No. 1992-219, § 2, 4-6-92 15.20.110 10A-1 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 1, § A, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-2 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 1, § B, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-3 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 1, § C, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-4 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 1, § D, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-5 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 3, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 1988-178, §§ 1, 2, 1-11-88; Ord. No. 1990-202, 5-21-90 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-6 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 3, § A, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-7 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 3, § B, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-8 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 3, § D, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-9 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 3, § E, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-10 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 3, § F, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-11 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 3, § G, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-12 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 3, § H, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-13 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 7, § B, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-25 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 4, § A, Art. 7, § A, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 1986-166, § 1, 5-19-86 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-26 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 4, § C, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-27 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 3, § C, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-28 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 4, § B, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 1988-178, § 3, 1-11-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-29 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 4, § B, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-40 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 6, § A, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-41 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 6, § B, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-42 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 6, § C, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-43 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 6, § D, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-44 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 6, § E, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-45 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 6, § F, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-46 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 6, § G, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-47 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 6, § H, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-60 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 5, § A, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 1988-178; § 7, 1-11-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-61 Ord. No. 1983-137, §§ 4, 6, 9, 1-11-88; Ord. No. 1990-202, 5-21-90; Ord. No. 1993-234, 12-6-93 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-62 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 5, § B, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-63 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 5, § C, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-64 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 5, § D, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-65 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 5, § F, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 1988-178, § 5, 1-11-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-66 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 5, § G, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 10A-67 Ord. No. 1983-137, Art. 5, § H, 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/17/07 11-1 Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VII, § 1, 2-6-84; Ord. No. 1996-279, §§ 2-6, 10-21-96 8.04.010 11-2 8.04.020 11-3 8.04.030 11-4 8.04.040 11-5 Code 1932, § 79, Art. 1 8.04.050 11-8 8.04.060 11-9 8.04.070 11-10 8.04.080 11-11 Ord. No. 1968-36, 2-19-68; Ord. No. 1971-43A, 2-15-71; Ord. No. 1974-55, 9-19-74; Ord. No. 1974-56, 10-21-74; Ord. No. 1982-123, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 1986-168, § 1, 6-2-86; Ord. No. 1990-199, 5-7-90; Ord. No. 1995-258, 9-10-95 8.04.090 11-15 Ord. No. 1996-279, § 7, 10-21-96 8.04.100 11-16 Ord. No. 1996-279, § 7, 10-21-96 8.04.110 11-17 Ord. No. 1996-279, § 7, 10-21-96 8.04.120 11-19 Ord. No. 1965-8, § 1, 8-2-65 8.04.130 11-20 Ord. No. 1965-8, § 1, 8-2-65 Repealed by Ord. dated 5/21/07 11-21 Ord. No. 1965-8, § 1, 8-2-65 Repealed by Ord. dated 5/21/07 11-22 Ord. No. 1965-8, § 1, 8-2-65 8.04.160 11-23 Ord. No. 1965-8, § 1, 8-2-65 Repealed by Ord. dated 5/21/07 11-24 Ord. No. 1965-8, § 1, 8-2-65 8.04.180 12-1 Code 1932, § 6, Art. 1; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VIII, § 1, 2-6-84 8.08.010 12-2 Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VIII, §§ 2, 3, 2-6-84 8.08.020 12-3 Code 1932, § 105, Art. 1; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VIII, § 4, 2-6-84 12.16.010 12-4 Ord. of 8-19-63; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VIII, § 6, 2-6-84 13.16.310 12-101 Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VIII, § 7, 2-6-84 Repealed by Ord. dated 5/21/07 12-102 Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. VIII, § 7, 2-6-84 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 12-120 Ord. No. 1996-265, § 1, 4-16-96 8.24 12-121 Ord. No. 1996-265, § 1, 4-16-96 8.24 12-122 Ord. No. 1996-265, § 1, 4-16-96 8.24 12-123 Ord. No. 1996-265, § 1, 4-16-96 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/17/04 12-124 Ord. No. 1996-265, § 1, 4-16-96 8.24 12-125 Ord. No. 1996-265, § 1, 4-16-96 8.24 12-126 Ord. No. 1996-265, § 1, 4-16-96 Repealed by Ord. dated 8/17/04 12-127 Ord. No. 1996-265, § 1, 4-16-96 8.24 12A-1 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 3, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1991-214, § 5, 10-7-91 15.08.010 12A-2 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 3, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1991-214, § 5(b), 10-7-91 15.08.020 12A-3 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 3, 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 4/6/04 12A-4 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 3, 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 4/6/04 12A-5 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 3, 6-20-88 15.08.050 12A-6 15.08.060 13-1 Ord. No. 1994-247, § 2, 12-5-94 5.04.010 13-2 Ord. No. 1994-247, § 2, 12-5-94 5.04.020 13-3 Ord. No. 1994-247, § 2, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 1995-261, §§ 1-3, 11-26-95 5.04.030 13-4 Ord. No. 1994-247, § 2, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 1995-261, §§ 4-6, 11-26-95; Ord. No. 1999-310, §§ 1, 2, 5-17-99 5.04.040 13-5 Ord. No. 1994-247, § 2, 12-5-94; Ord. No. 1995-261, § 7, 11-26-95 5.04.050 13-6 Ord. No. 1994-247, § 2, 12-5-94 5.04.060 13-7 Ord. No. 1994-247, § 2, 12-5-94 5.04.070 13-8 Ord. No. 1994-247, § 2, 12-5-94 5.04.080 13-21 Ord. No. 1983-144, § 1(13-31), 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1984-153, § 1, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 1996-263, § 1, 2-5-96 5.24.010 13-22 Ord. No. 1983-144, § 1(13-32), 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1984-153, § 1, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 1996-263, § 2, 2-5-96 5.24.020 13-23 Ord. No. 1983-144, § 1(13-33), 9-20-83; Ord. No. 1984-153, § 1, 11-5-84; Ord. No. 1996-263, § 3, 2-5-96 5.24.030 13-24 Ord. No. 1983-144, § 1(13-34), 9-20-83 5.24.040 13-25 Ord. No. 1983-144, § 1(13-35), 9-20-83 5.24.050 13-26 Ord. No. 1983-144, § 1(13-36), 9-20-83 5.24.060 13-37 Ord. No. 1983-145, § 1, 11-22-83 5.20.010 13-38 Ord. No. 1983-145, § 2, 11-22-83 5.20.020 13-39 Ord. No. 1983-145, § 3, 11-22-83 5.20.030 13A-1 8.12.010 13A-2 8.12.020 13A-3 8.12.030 13A-4 8.12.040 13A-5 8.12.050 13A-6 8.12.060 13A-7 8.12.070 13A-8 8.12.080 13A-9 8.12.090 14-1 Code 1932, § 72, Art. 1 12.16.020 14-2 Ord. No. 2, § 1, 1955 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 14-3 Ord. No. 1977-85, § 1, 9-19-77 9.08.010 14-4 Ord. No. 1984-157, § 1, 2-4-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 14-5 Ord. No. 1984-157, § 1, 2-4-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 14-9 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 14-12 12.04.010 14-16 5.32.020 14-19 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 14-20 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 14-21.1 Ord. of 2-5-62, §§ 1-3; Ord. No. 1965-10, § 1, 8-2-65 5.32.010 14-27 5.32.030 14-33 12.16.030 14-35 Code 1932, § 68, Art. 1 5.04.090 14-36 12.12.010 14-39 9.12.010 14-40 9.12.020 14-41 9.12.030 14-42 Ord. No. 1982-127 § 1, 7-19-82 9.04.010 14-61 Ord. No. 1987-174, § 1(14-101), 3-16-87 12.20.010 14-62 Ord. No. 1987-174, § 1(14-101), 3-16-87 12.20.020 14-63 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.010 14-64 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.020 14-65 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.030 14-66 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.040 14-67 Ord. No. 1993-233 10-4-93 5.08.050 14-68 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.060 14-69 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.070 14-70 Ord. No. 1993-233 10-4-93 5.08.080 14-71 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.090 14-72 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.100 14-73 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.110 14-74 Ord. No. 1993-233 10-4-93 5.08.120 14-75 Ord. No. 1993-233 10-4-93 5.08.130 14-76 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.140 14-77 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.150 14-78 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.160 14-79 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.170 14-80 Ord. No. 1993-233, 10-4-93 5.08.180 14A-1 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.010 14A-2 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.020 14A-3 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.030 14A-4 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.040 14A-5 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.050 14A-6 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.060 14A-7 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.070 14A-8 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.080 14A-9 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.090 14A-10 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.100 14A-11 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 8.20.110 14A-12 Ord. No. 1982-131, 11-1-82 Not codified 15-1 Ord. No. 2, § 1, 4-6-53 2.48.020 15-2 Ord. No. 2, § 2, 4-6-53 2.48.030 15-3 Ord. No. 2, § 3, 4-6-53 2.48.040 15-4 Ord. No. 2, § 4, 4-6-53 2.48.050 15-5 Ord. No. 2, § 5, 4-6-53 2.48.060 15-6 Ord. No. 2, § 5, 4-6-53 2.48.070 16-1 Code 1932, § 2; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. XII, § 1, 2-6-84 2.40.010 16-2 Code 1932, § 166, Arts. 1, 2 2.40.020 16-3 Code 1932, § 166, Art. 3 2.40.030 16-4 Code 1932, § 173, Arts. 1, 2; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. XII, § 2, 2-6-84 2.40.040 16-5 2.40.050 16A-1 Ord. No. 1971-46, 4-5-71; Ord. No. 1978-98, § 1, 10-16-78; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. XIII, 2-6-84 2.28.010 16A-2 Ord. No. 1971-46, 4-5-71 2.28.020 16A-3 Ord. No. 1971-46, 4-5-71 2.28.030 16A-4 Ord. No. 1971-46, 4-5-71 2.28.040 16A-5 Ord. No. 1971-46, § 1, 4-5-71 2.28.050 16A-6 Ord. No. 1971-46, 4-5-71 2.28.060 17-1 Code 1932, § 52, Art. 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 5/16/05 17-2 Code 1932, § 75, Art. 1; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 4, 6-20-88 12.04.030 17-3 Code 1932, § 77, Art. 1 12.04.040 17-4 Code 1932, § 67, Art. 1 12.16.040 17-5 Code 1932, § 88 12.16.050 17-6 Ord. No. 1990-207, 8-21-90 10.16.010 17-21 Ord. No. 1966-26, § 1, 12-5-66 15.40.010 17-22 Ord. No. 1966-26, § 2, 12-5-66 15.40.020 17-23 Ord. No. 1966-26, § 2, 12-5-66 15.40.030 17-24 Ord. No. 1966-26, § 2, 12-5-66 Repealed by Ord. Dated 10/1/01 19-1 Ord. No. 1978-96, 8-7-78 3.12.010 19-2 Ord. No. 1978-96, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 1988-185, § 2, 8-29-88; Ord. No. 1997-286, § 1, 6-7-97 3.12.020 19-3 Ord. No. 1978-96, 8-7-78 3.12.030 19-4 Ord. No. 1978-96, 8-7-78 3.12.040 19-5 Ord. No. 1978-96, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 1988-185, § 2, 8-29-88; Ord. No. 1997-286, § 2, 6-7-97 3.12.050 19-6 Ord. No. 1978-96, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 1988-185, § 2, 8-29-88; Ord. No. 1997-286, § 3, 4, 6-7-97 3.12.060 19-7 Ord. No. 1992-224, 12-15-92 3.16.010 19-8 Ord. No. 1992-224, 12-15-92 3.16.020 19-9 Ord. No. 1992-224, 12-15-92 3.16.030 19-10 Ord. No. 1992-224, 12-15-92 3.16.040 19-11 Ord. No. 1994-242, 7-18-94 3.16.050 20-1 Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. XIV, § 1, 2-6-84 10.04.010 20-2 Ord. No. 1990-205, 6-4-90 Repealed by Ord. Dated 10/1/01 20-3 Ord. No. 1995-254, 10-2-95 10.08.010 20-101-20-1507 Reserved 20-1601 Ord. No. 1975-66, § 3, 6-16-75; Ord. No. 1994-238, 3-14-94 12.08.010 20-1601.1 Ord. No. 1994-238, 3-14-94 12.04.050 20-1601.2 Ord. No. 1994-238, 3-14-94 12.08.020 20-1701 Ord. No. 1975-66, § 3, 6-16-75 10.12.020 20-1801 Ord. No. 1975-66, § 3, 6-16-75 12.12.020 20-1802 Ord. No. 1975-66, § 3, 6-16-75 12.12.030 20-1803 Ord. No. 1975-66, § 3, 6-16-75 12.12.040 20-1804 Ord. No. 1975-66, § 3, 6-16-75 12.12.050 20-1805 Ord. No. 1975-66, § 3, 6-16-75 12.12.060 20-2001 Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. XIV, § 4, 2-6-84 Repealed by Ord. dated 5/21/07 20-2101 Ord. No. 1975-66, § 3, 6-16-75 10.08.020 21-1 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 1(1.2), (2.1), (2.2), 11-9-70 15.44.010 21-2 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 1(3.1), (3.2), 11-9-70 15.44.020 21-3 Ord. No. 1965-4, 6-7-65; Ord. No. 1970-43, 11-9-70; Ord. No. 1976-76, § 4, 9-20-76 15.44.030 21-4 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 1(4.1)-(4.3), 11-9-70; 1988-183, § 5, 6-20-88 15.44.040 21-5 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 1(5.1)-(5.8), 11-9-70 15.44.050 21-6 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 1(6.1)-(6.7), 11-9-70; Ord. No. 1985-159, § 1, 6-17-85 15.44.060 21-7 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 1(7.1)-(7.7), 11-9-70 15.44.070 21-8 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 1(8.1)-(8.5), 11-9-70 15.44.080 21-11 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 2, 11-9-70 15.44.090 21-12 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 2(1.1)-(1.4), 11-9-70; Ord. No. 1976-76, § 4, 9-20-76 15.44.100 21-13 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 2(2.1)-(2.4), 11-9-70 15.44.110 21-14 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 2(3.1)-(3.4), 11-9-70 15.44.120 21-15 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 2(4.1), 11-9-70 15.44.130 21-21 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 3, 11-9-70 15.44.140 21-22 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 3(2.1)-(2.4), 11-9-70 15.44.150 21-23 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 3(2.5), 11-9-70 15.44.160 21-24 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 3(2.6), 11-9-70 15.44.170 21-25 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 3(2.7), 11-9-70 15.44.180 21-26 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 3(2.8), 11-9-70 15.44.190 21-31 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 4(1.1), (1.2), 11-9-70 15.44.200 21-32 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 4(2.1)-(2.3), 11-9-70 15.44.210 21-33 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 4(3.1), 11-9-70 15.44.220 21-34 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 4(4.1), 11-9-70 15.44.230 21-35 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 4(5.1)-(5.4), 11-9-70 15.44.240 21-36 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 4(6.1), (6.2), 11-9-70; Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. XV, § 1, 2-6-84 15.44.250 21-37 Ord. No. 1970-43, § 4(7.1), 11-9-70 15.44.260 21-48 Ord. No. 1998-297, 4-6-98 15.44.270 21-49 Ord. No. 1998-297, 4-6-98 15.44.280 21-50 Ord. No. 1998-297, 4-6-98 15.44.290 21-51 Ord. No. 1998-297, 4-6-98 15.44.300 21-52 Ord. No. 1998-297, 4-6-98 15.44.310 22-1 13.04.010 22-2 13.04.020 22-3 13.04.030 22-4 13.04.040 22-5 13.04.050 22-6 13.04.060 22-7 13.04.070 22-8 13.04.080 22-9 Ord. No. 1975-70, 11-18-75 13.04.090 22-10 13.04.100 22-11 Ord. No. 1977-86, § 1, 12-19-77; Ord. No. 1978-94, § 1, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 1982-130, 10-18-82 13.04.110 22-12 Mo. of 1-28-59; Ord. No. 1966-22, § 1, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 1977-86, § 2, 12-19-77 13.04.120 22-13 13.04.130 22-14 13.04.140 22-15 13.04.150 22-16 13.04.160 22-17 13.04.170 22-18 Ord. No. 1978-94, § 2, 8-7-78 13.04.180 22-19 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 6, 6-20-88 13.04.190 22-21 13.08.010 22-22 13.08.020 22-23 13.08.030 22-24 13.08.040 22-25 13.08.050 22-26 13.08.060 22-27 13.08.070 22-28 13.08.080 22-29 13.08.090 22-30 13.08.100 22-31 13.08.110 22-32 13.08.120 22-33 13.08.130 22-34 13.08.140 22-37 13.08.150 22-38 13.08.160 22-39 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/2/06 22-40 13.08.180 22-41 13.08.190 22-42 13.08.200 22-43 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/2/06 22-44 13.08.220 22-45 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/2/06 22-46 13.08.240 22-47 Ord. No. 1994-244, § 18-15-94 13.08.250 22-50 Ord. No. 1995-250, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 1995-253, § 1, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1996-274, § 1, 8-5-96 13.08.260 22-51 Ord. No. 1971-44, 2-15-97; Ord. No. 1974-51, 1-30-1974; Ord. No. 1974-54, 9-19-74; Ord. No. 1975-62, 3-31-75; Ord. No. 1976-77, 10-15-76; Ord. No. 1979-99, § 1, 3-19-79; Ord. No. 1982-122, § 1, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 1983-140, § 1, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1986-165, § 1, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 1988-181, § 1, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 1990-197, § 1, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 1991-209, § 1, 4-21-91; Ord. No. 1993-226, 4-5-93; Ord. No. 1993-227, § 1, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 1993-228, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 1995-250, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 1998-300, § 1, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 1998-301, § 1, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 1999-311, § 1, 7-19-99 13.08.270 22-52 Ord. No. 4-1-63, § 1; Ord. No. 65-5, § 1, 6-7-65; Ord. No. 1968-35, §§ 1-3, 2-5-68; Ord. No. 1971-44, 2-15-71; Ord. No. 1974-51, 1-30-74; Ord. No. 1974-54, 9-19-74; Ord. No. 1975-62, 3k-31-75; Ord. No. 1976-77, 10-5-76; Ord. No. 1979-99, § 2, 3-19-79; Ord. No. 1982-122, § 2, 3-1-82: Ord. No. 1983-140, § 2, 3-21-83, Ord. No. 1968-165, § 2, 5-5-86; Ord. No. 1988-181, § 2, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 1991-209, § 2, 4-21-91; Ord. No. 1991-212, 7-15-91; Ord. No. 1993-227, § 2, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 1993-228, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 1995-250, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 1995-253, § 2, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1998-300, § 2, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 1998-301, § 2, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 1999-311, § 2, 7-19-99 13.08.280 22-53 Ord. No. 1971-44, 2-15-71; Ord. No. 1974-51, 1-30-74; Ord. No. 1974-54, 9-19-74; Ord. No. 1975-62, 3-31-75; Ord. No. 1976-77, 10-5-76; Ord. No. 1979-99, § 3, 3-19-79; Ord. No. 1982-122, § 3, 3-31-82; Ord. No. 1983-140, § 3, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1984-149, 6-4-84; Ord. No. 1988-181, § 3, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 1991-209, § 3, 4-21-91; Ord. No. 1991-213, 8-5-91; Ord. No. 1993-227, § 3, 4-19-93; Ord. No. 1993-228, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 1995-250, 3-20-95; Ord. No. 1995-253, § 3, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1998-300, § 3, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 1998-301, § 3, 4-21-98; Ord. No. 1999-311, § 3, 7-19-99 13.08.290 22-53.1 Ord. No. 1992-221, 6-22-92; Ord. No. 1995-253, § 4, 6-19-95; Ord. No. 1998-300, § 4, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 1998-301, § 4, 5-4-98; Ord. No. 1999-311, § 4, 7-19-99 13.08.300 22-54 Ord. No. 1988-181, § 4, 3-21-88; Ord. No. 1988-182, § 3, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 1991-209, § 4, 4-21-91; Ord. No. 1994-245, 10-17-94; Ord. No. 1999-309, 5-17-99 13.08.310 22-55 Ord. No. 1988-182, § 1, 5-16-88 13.08.320 22-56 Ord. No. 1971-44, 2-15-71; Ord. No. 1974-51, 1-30-74; Ord. No. 1974-54, 9-19-74; Ord. No. 1975-62, 3-31-75; Ord. No. 1976-77, 10-5-76; Ord. No. 1979-99, § 4, 3-19-79; Ord. No. 1982-122, § 4, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 1983-140, § 4, 3-21-83 13.08.330 22-57 Ord. No. 1997-284, § 2, 4-21-97; Ord. No. 1999-311, § 5, 7-19-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 3/3/03 22-58 Ord. No. 1988-182, § 2, 5-16-88; Ord. No. 1997-284, § 1, 4-21-97 13.08.350 22-59 Ord. No. 1994-244, § 2, 8-15-94; Ord. No. 1997-284, § 1, 4-21-97 13.08.360 22-61 13.12.010 22-62 13.12.020 22-63 13.12.030 22-64 13.12.040 22-65 13.12.050 22-66 13.12.060 22-67 Ord. No. 1966-16, § 1, 2-7-66 13.12.070 22-68 Mo. of 2-6-50; Ord. No. 1966-16, § 2, 2-7-66 13.12.080 22-69 Ord. No. 4-1-63, § 2; Ord. No. 1966-20, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 1971-44, 2-15-71; Ord. No. 1975-59, 3-3-75; Ord. No. 1979-99 § 5, 3-19-79; Ord. No. 1982-122, § 5, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 1983-140, § 5, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1987-173, § 1, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 1988-184, 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1990-197, § 8, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 1996-271, § 1, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 1998-303, § 1, 7-6-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 1/6/03 22-70 13.12.100 22-71 Ord. No. 1966-16, § 3, 2-7-66; Ord. No. 1971-44, 2-15-71 13.12.110 22-72 13.12.120 22-73 Ord. No. 1990-201, 4-16-90 13.12.130 22-76.1 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 100 13.12.140 22-76.2 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 200 13.12.150 22-76.3 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 201 13.12.160 22-76.4 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 202; Ord. No. 1966-16, § 4, 2-7-66 13.12.170 22-76.5 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 203 13.12.180 22-76.6 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 204; Ord. No. 1994-246, 12-5-94 13.12.190 22-76.7 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 205; Ord. No. 1966, § 5, 2-7-66 13.12.200 22-76.9 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 301; Ord. of 4-1-63, § 3; Ord. No. 1966-16, § 7, 2-7-66 13.12.210 22-76.10 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 302; Ord. No. 1966-16, § 8, 27-66; Ord. No. 1967-32, 11-21-67 13.12.220 22-76.11 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 303; Ord. No. 1966-16, § 9, 2-7-66 13.12.230 22-76.12 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 304; Ord. No. 1966-16, § 10, 2-7-66 13.12.240 22-76.13 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 500; Ord. No. 1966-16, § 11, 2-7-66 13.12.250 22-76.14 Ord. of 5-15-61, § 500.1 13.12.260 22-77 13.16.010 22-78 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 2, 8-19-96 13.16.020 22-79 Ord. No. 1971-44, 2-15-71; Ord. No. 1975-58, 2-3-75; Ord. No. 1979-99, § 6, 3-21-79; Ord. No. 1982-122, § 6, 3-1-82; Ord. No. 1983-140, § 6, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1987-173, § 2, 3-16-87; Ord. No. 1995-252, 6-5-95; Ord. No. 1996-271, § 2, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 1998-303, § 2, 7-6-98 13.16.030 22-80 Ord. of 4-1-63, § 4; Ord. No. 1966-16, § 12, 2-7-66; Ord. No. 1967, 33, 11-21-67; Ord. No. 1971-44, 2-15-71; Ord. No. 1990-197, § 10, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 1996-271, § 3, 7-15-96 13.16.040 22-81 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 3, 8-19-96 13.16.050 22-82 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 4, 8-19-96 13.16.060 22-83 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 5, 8-19-96 13.16.070 22-84 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 6, 8-19-96 13.16.080 22-85 13.16.090 22-86 Ord. No. 1966-16, § 13, 2-7-66 13.16.100 22-87 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 7, 8-19-96 13.16.110 22-88 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 8, 8-19-96 13.16.120 22-88.1 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 9, 8-19-96 13.16.130 22-88.2 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 10, 8-19-96 13.16.140 22-88.3 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 11, 8-19-96 13.16.150 22-88.4 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 12, 8-19-96 13.16.160 22-88.5 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 13, 8-19-96 13.16.170 22-88.6 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 14, 8-19-96 13.16.180 22-88.7 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 15, 8-19-96 13.16.190 22-88.8 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 16, 8-19-96 Reserved 22-88.9 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 17, 8-19-96 13.16.200 22-88.10 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 18, 8-19-96 13.16.210 22-88.11 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 19, 8-19-96 13.16.220 22-88.12 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 20, 8-19-96 13.16.230 22-88.13 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 21, 8-19-96 13.16.240 22-88.14 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 22, 8-19-96 13.16.250 22-88.15 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 23, 8-19-96 13.16.260 22-88.16 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 24, 8-19-96 13.16.270 22-88.17 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 25, 8-19-96 13.16.280 22-88.18 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 26, 8-19-96 13.16.290 22-88.19 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 27, 8-19-96 13.16.300 22-88.20 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 28, 8-19-96 Reserved 22-88.21 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 29, 8-19-96 Reserved 22-88.22 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 30, 8-19-96 Reserved 22-88.23 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 31, 8-19-96 Reserved 22-90 13.20.010 22-91 13.20.020 22-92 13.20.030 22-93 13.20.040 22-94 Ord. No. 1966-16, § 14, 2-7-66; Ord. No. 1966-21, § 1, 5-3-66; Ord. No. 1971-44, 2-15-71; Ord. No. 1974-51, 1-30-74; Ord. No. 1974-54, 9-19-74; Ord. No. 1975-61, 3-21-75; Ord. No. 1976-72, 3-15-76; Ord. No. 1977-80, 2-7-77; Ord. No, 1978-93, §§ 1-6, 8-7-78; Ord. No. 1979-99, § 7(A)-(E), 3-19-79; Ord. No. 1979-100, § 1, 5-21-79; Ord. No. 1980-113, §§ 1--5, 9-15-80; Ord. No. 1983-140, § 7, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1990-197, §§ 2-7, 3-5-90; Ord. No. 1991-211, 5-13-91, Ord. No. 1995-260, 8-7-95; Ord. No. 1996-277, 10-8-96; Ord. No. 1998-293, 2-16-98 13.20.050 22-95 Ord. No. 1980-116, § 1, 11-17-80; Ord. No. 1983-140, § 8, 3-21-83; Ord. No. 1990-200, 4-16-90 13.20.060 22-101 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.010 22-102 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.020 22-103 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.030 22-104 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.040 22-105 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1. 10-6-80 5.16.050 22-106 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.060 22-107 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.070 22-108 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.080 22-109 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.090 22-110 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80; Ord. No. 1981-121, § 1, 2-15-82 5.16.100 22-111 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.110 22-112 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.120 22-113 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.130 22-114 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.140 22-115 Ord. No. 1980-114, § 1, 10-6-80 5.16.150 22-126 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.010 22-127 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.020 22-128 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.030 22-129 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.040 22-130 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.050 22-131 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.060 22-132 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.070 22-133 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.080 22-134 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.090 22-135 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.100 22-136 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.110 22-137 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.120 22-138 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.130 22-139 Ord. No. 1996-275, § 33, 8-19-96 13.24.140 22-201 Ord. No. 1985-160, § 1, 8-5-8513 13.28.010 22-202 Ord. No. 1985-160, § 1, 8-5-85 13.28.020 22-203 Ord. No. 1985-160, § 1, 8-5-8513 13.28.030 22-204 Ord. No. 1985-160, § 1, 8-5-85 13.28.040 22-205 Ord. No. 1985-160, § 1, 8-5-85 13.28.050 22-206 Ord. No. 1985-160, § 1, 8-5-85 13.28.060 22-207 Ord. No. 1985-160, § 1, 8-5-85 13.28.070 22-208 Ord. No. 1985-160, § 1, 8-5-85 13.28.080 22-209 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.010 22-210 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.020 22-211 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.030 22-212 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.040 22-213 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.050 22-214 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.060 22-215 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.070 22-216 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.080 22-217 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.090 22-218 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.100 22-219 Ord. No. 1998-295, 3-16-98 13.36.110 22-220 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.010 22-221 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.020 22-222 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.030 22-223 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.040 22-224 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.050 22-225 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.060 22-226 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.070 22-227 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.080 22-228 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.090 22-229 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.100 22-230 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.110 22-231 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.120 22-232 Ord. No. 1986-169, § 1, 7-21-86 13.32.130 23-1 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.010 23-2 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.020 23-3 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.030 23-4 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.040 23-5 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.050 23-6 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.060 23-7 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.070 23-8 Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. XVI, § 1, 2-6-84 5.28.080 23-9 Reserved 23-10 Ord. of 3-18-63, Ord. No. 1984-147, Art. XVI, § 2, 2-6-84 5.28.090 23-11 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.100 23-12 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.110 23-13 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.120 23-14 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.130 23-15 Ord. of 3-18-63 5.28.140 24-1 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-2 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 3, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1981-119, § 1, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(1), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-3 Ord. No. 1996-262, 2-5-96 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-4 Ord. No. 1985-159, § 2(1)-(3), 6-17-85; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(2), (3), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-5 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 1.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-5.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, Art. II, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-5.2 Ord. No. 1972-50, §§ 3.1, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1992-217, § 1, 1-6-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-5.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, §§ 13.1, 13.2, 13.3, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24.6 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 4.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-6.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 4.2, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-6.2 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 4.3, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-6.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 4.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-6.4 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 4.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-6.5 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 5.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-7 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 6.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-7.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 6.2, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 240-7.2 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 6.3, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1985-59, § 2(4), 6-17-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-7.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 6.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-7.4 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 6.5, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-8 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-8.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 7.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-8.2 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 7.3, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-8.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 7.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-8.4 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 7.5, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-9 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 8.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-9.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 8.2, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-9.2 Ord. No. 1985-159, § 2(5), 6-17-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-9.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 8.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-9.4 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 8.5, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-10 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 9.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-10.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 9.2, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-10.2 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 9.3, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-10.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 9.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.1, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1992-217, § 2, 1-6-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-112 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.2, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(4), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.3, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(5), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11.4 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11.5 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.5, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(6), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11.6 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.6, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(7), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11.7 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.7, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(8), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11.8 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.8, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11.9 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.9, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(9), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-11.10 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 10.1.10, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-12 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 11.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-12.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 11.2, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-12.2 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 11.3, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-12.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 11.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-12.4 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 11.5, 12-18-72;Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(10), 6-20-88; Ord. No. 1988-187, § 1, 12-12-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-12.5 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 11.6, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-13 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 12.1, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-13.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 12.2, 12-18-72; Ord. No. 1992-217, §§ 3-5, 1-6-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-13.2 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 12.3, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-13.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 12.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-14 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 15.1, 12-18-72 Not codified 24-14.1 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 15.2, 12-18-72 Not codified 24-14.2 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 15.3, 12-18-72 Not codified 24-14.3 Ord. No. 1972-50, § 15.4, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-14.4 Ord. No. 1972-50, Art. XIV, 12-18-72 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-16 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-17 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-18 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-19 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-20 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-21 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-23 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-23.1 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(11), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 7/11/05 24-23.2 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(12), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 7/11/05 24-23.3 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-23.4 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-23.5 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(13), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-24 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1981-119, § 3A, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(14), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-25 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-25.1 Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(15), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-25.2 Ord. No. 1993-225, § 1, 3-1-93; Ord. No. 1993-230, 8-2-93 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-26 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1983-136, § 2, 2-21-83; Ord. No. 1988-187, § 2, 12-12-88; Ord. No. 1992-220, 6-8-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-27 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-28 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 1997-287, § 1, 7-21-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-29 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-30 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1988-183, § 7(16), 6-20-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31.1 Ord. No. 1983-136, § 3(24-31A), 2-21-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31.2 Ord. No. 1988-187, § 3, 12-12-88 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31.3 Ord. No. 1999-304, § 1, 10-5-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31.3.1 Ord. No. 1999-304, § 1, 10-5-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31.3.2 Ord. No. 1999-304, § 1, 10-5-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31.3.3 Ord. No. 1999-304, § 1, 10-5-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31.4 Ord. No. 1999-306, § 1, 2-1-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31.5 Ord. No. 1999-308, § 1, 4-5-99; Ord. No. 1999-313, § 1, 7-19-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 3/21/05 24-31.6 Ord. No. 1999-307, § 1, 4-19-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-31.7 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-32 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-33 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-33.1 Ord. No. 1997-280, 1-20-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-33.2 Ord. No. 1997-288, 7-21-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-34 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1990-206, § 1, 8-7-9 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-35 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1981-119, § 2, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1990-206, § 2, 8-7-90 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-36 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1990-206, § 3, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 1997-282, §§ 1-10, 3-17-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-37 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1978-91, §§ 1, 2, 3-20-78; Ord. No. 1981-119, § 3, 10-5-81; Ord. No. 1990-206, § 4, 8-7-90; Ord. No. 1998-297, 4-6-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-38 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1993-229, 8-2-93 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-38.1 Ord. No. 1993-229, 8-2-93; Ord. No. 1998-297, 4-6-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-38.2 Ord. No. 1993-229, 8-2-93 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-39 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-40 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-45 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-46 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-47 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-48 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-49 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-50 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-51 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76 Repealed by Ord. dated 3/3/08 24-52 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 1, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1982-132, § 1, 12-17-82; Ord. No. 1985-161, §§ 1-4, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1992-217, § 6, 1-6-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-52.1 Ord. No. 1985-161, § 5, 12-16-85; Ord. No. 1992-217, § 7, 1-6-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-53 Ord. No. 1976-76, § 2, 9-20-76; Ord. No. 1985-161, § 6, 12-16-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-101 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 1, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-102 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 2, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-103 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-292, § 3, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-104 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1991-216, § 1, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 4, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-110 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1989-193, § 1, 11-20-89; Ord. No. 1991-216, §§ 2, 3, 12-16-91; Ord. No. 1996-272, §§ 1-5, 7-15-96; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 5, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-111 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 6, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-112 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1989-194, § 1, 11-2-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 7, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-113 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 8, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-114 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-115 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-116 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 9, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-119 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 11, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-120 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 12, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-130 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 14, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-131 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-133 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-134 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-135 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 16, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-136 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 17, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-137 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-138 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 18, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-150 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 20, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-151 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 21, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-152 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 22, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-153 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89; Ord. No. 1998-294, § 23, 2-16-98 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/03 24-154 Ord. No. 1989-192, § 1, 11-6-89 Not Codified 24-155 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1997-281, § 1, 2-3-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-156 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1997-281, §§ 2, 3, 2-3-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-157 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1997-281, § 4, 2-3-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-158 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1997-281, § 5, 2-3-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-159 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-160 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1997-281, § 6, 2-3-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-161 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-162 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1997-281, § 7, 2-3-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-163 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-164 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1997-281, § 8, 2-3-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-165 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92; Ord. No. 1997-281, §§ 9, 10, 2-3-97 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-166 Ord. No. 1992-218, 4-6-92 Repealed by Ord. dated 9/16/03 24-167 Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-168 Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 1999-312, § 1, 8-16-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-169 Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 1999-312, § 4, 8-16-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-170 Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-171 Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94; Ord. No. 1999-312, §§ 2, 3, 8-16-99 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-172 Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-172.1 Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-173 Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-174 Ord. No. 1994-236, 2-7-94 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-175 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-176 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-177 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-178 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-179 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-180 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-181 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-182 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-183 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-184 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-185 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-186 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-187 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-188 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-189 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-190 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-191 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-192 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-193 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-194 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-195 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-196 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-197 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-198 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-199 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-200 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-201 Repealed by Ord. dated 5/2/05 24-202 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-203 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-204 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-205 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-206 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-207 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-208 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-209 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-210 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-211 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-212 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-213 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08 24-214 Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08  
APPENDIX A - PERSONNEL SYSTEM 
Prior Code § Ordinance History Herein Art. I Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. II Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. III Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. IV Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. V Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. VI Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. VII Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. VIII Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. IX Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. X Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. XI Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. XII Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. XIII Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01  
PERSONNEL POLICIES FOR CITY OF COVINGTON 
Prior Code § Ordinance History Herein Policy I § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy II § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy III § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 9 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 10 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 11 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 12 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 13 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 14 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 15 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy IV § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy V § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy VI § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy VII § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy VIII § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy IX § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy X § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy XII § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 9 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy XIII § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy XIV § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy XV Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy XVI Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy XVII Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Policy XVIII Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01  
APPENDIX B - RETIREMENT PLAN 
Prior Code § Ordinance History Herein Art. I Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. II § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 9 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 10 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 11 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 12 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 13 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 14 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 15 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 16 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 17 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 18 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 19 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 20 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 21 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 22 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 23 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 24 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 25 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 26 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 27 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 28 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 29 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 30 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 31 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 32 Ord. No. 1985-156, § 1, 1-21-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 33 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 34 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 35 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 36 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 37 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 38 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 39 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 40 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 41 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 42 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 43 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 44 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. III § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art IV § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2(b) Ord. No. 1985-156, § 2, 1-21-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4(b) Ord. No. 1985-156, § 3, 1-21-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. V § 1(b)(7) Ord. No. 1983-133, § 1, 1-3-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2(b) Ord. No. 1985-156, § 4, 1-21-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Ord. No. 1985-156, § 5, 1-21-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4(b) Ord. No. 1983-133, § 2, 1-3-83 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. VI § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. VII § 1(b) Ord. No. 1985-156, § 6, 1-21-85 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. VIII § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. IX § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 9 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. X § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. XI § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. XII § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. XIV § 1 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 2 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 3 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 4 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 5 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 6 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 7 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 8 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 9 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 § 10 Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01 Art. XV Repealed by Ord. dated 10/1/01  
    As of Supplement No. 18, this table will no longer be updated. 
ORDINANCE LIST AND DISPOSITION TABLE 
    Beginning with Supplement No. 18, this table will be replaced with the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
Ordinance 
Dated 12/20/99 Repeals and replaces prior code Ch. 22, Arts. IV and VII, utility systems (13.16, 13.24) 3/6/00 Adds prior code § 12-125(6); amends prior code § 12A-1(b); renumbers prior code § 12-127 to be § 12-128 and adds new § 12-127; renumbers prior code §§ 12A-4 and 12A-5 to be §§ 12A-5 and 12A-6 and adds new § 12A-4; repeals prior code § 12A-2(c), health and sanitation (8.24, 15.08) 4/17/00 Adds Art. IX to prior code Ch. 24, historic preservation (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 5/1/00 Repeals and replaces prior code §§ 22-69, 22-79 and 22-80(a), utility systems (13.16) 5/1/00 Repeals and replaces prior code §§ 22-51, 22-52 and 22-94, utility systems (13.08, 13.20) 6/5/00 Amends prior code § 22-79; repeals and replaces prior code § 22-80(a), utility systems (13.16) 10/16/00 Adds § 16B to Charter (Charter) 2/19/01 Amends § 77 of Charter (Charter) 3/5/01 Amends prior code §§ 22-51, 22-52, 22-53 and 22-53.1, utility systems (13.08) 4/16/01 Repeals and replaces prior code § 22-69, utility systems (Repealed by Ord. dated 1/6/03) 5/8/01 Adds prior code § 24-31.7, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 6/4/01 Amends prior code § 24-31.2, planned unit development district (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 6/18/01 Amends prior code § 24-33.2, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 6/18/01 Amends prior code § 22-79, utility systems (13.16) 8/20/01 Repeals and replaces prior code § 22-54, utility systems (13.08) 10/1/01 Amends prior code §§ 6-42, 6-43, 6-44, 6-47 and 6-49, soil erosion (15.36) 10/1/01 Amends prior code §§ 4-2(a), 4-12(d), 4-13(c), 4-205(b)(I), 9-7, 10-4, 19-9, 21-3(d), 22-77, 24-5.2; repeals and replaces prior code §§ 1-8, 2-1(a), 24-23(a), 24-31.1(A)(1), 24-31.2(G)(1) and (2), 24-31.3(H)(1) and (2), 24-33(E), 24-34(f), 24-35(D), 24-36(D), 24-37(D), 24-45(b); repeals §§ 15-1-15-6, repeals prior code §§ 4-12(g)-(j), 4-13(d), 4-13(e), 4-107(a), 4-118, 4-119, 4-122, 4-124, 4-218, 4-221, 5-2, 5-3, 5-4, 6-60-6-65, 12-102, 14-2, 14-4, 14-5, 14-9, 14-19, 14-20, 17-24, 20-2, Appendix A and Appendix B, various subjects (1.12, 2.04, 2.44, 2.48, 3.16, 13.16, 15.12, 15.44) 10/15/01 Amends Charter §§ 30-D and 34; repeals Charter §§ 9(s) and 48, various subjects (Charter) 1/7/02 Amends prior code §§ 13-21, 13-22, 13-24, and 13-25, insurance companies (5.24) 2/18/02 Amends prior code §§ 24-199 and 24-201, historic preservation (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 2/18/02 Adds Ch. 9.16, offenses against public peace (9.16) 2/18/02 Amends prior code § 24-31.7, protection of groundwater recharge areas (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 4/1/02 Amends prior code §§ 24-24 and 24-25, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 5/6/02 Amends prior code § 22-10, utility service (13.04) 7/15/02 Repeals and replaces prior code §§ 19-7, 19-8, 19-9, 19-10, 19-11, 19-12, 19-13, 19-14, 19-20, 19-21, taxes (3.16) 7/15/02 Adds Ch. 8.28, litter control (8.28) 7/15/02 Amends prior code Ch. 24, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 11/18/02 Adopts Covington Municipal Code (1.01) 11/18/02 Amends § 16.148.040, groundwater protection areas (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 12/2/02 Amends § 13.20.050, natural gas rates (13.20) 1/6/03 Amends § 13.16.040; repeals and replaces § 13.12.090, water and sewer systems (13.12, 13.16) 2/17/03 Amends §§ 15.36.040, 15.36.050 and 15.36.070, soil, erosion and sediment control (15.36) 3/3/03 Repeals and replaces § 13.08.340, economic development schedule (13.08) 3/17/03 Adds § 15.24.060; amends §§ 13.16.010, 15.12.010-15.12.020, 15.12.040, 15.12.070 [15.12.050], 15.12.060 and 15.24.050, various subjects (13.16, 15.12, 15.24) 6/16/03 Amends § 16.92.030; repeals and replaces Ch. 16.132, signs (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 7/9/03 Amends § 13.16.040; repeals and replaces § 13.12.090, water and sewer systems (13.12, 13.16) 9/16/03 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.136, tree preservation (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 2/3/04 Amends § 13.20.050, natural gas system (13.20) 3/16/04 Adds §§ 16.32.180 and 16.32.190, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 4/6/04 Amends §§ 15.04.010-15.04.020 and Ch. 15.08, construction and standard housing code (15.04, 15.08) 4/6/04 Adds § 15.36.080; amends §§ 15.36.020-15.36.070; renumbers §§ 15.36.080 and 15.36.090 to be §§ 15.36.090 and 15.36.100, soil erosion and sediment control (15.36) 4/20/04 Amends §§ 5.12.100 and 5.12.570, alcoholic beverages (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08) 4/20/04 Repeals and replaces § 5.12.620, alcoholic beverages (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08) 5/18/04 Amends §§ 16.40.050, 16.44.050, 16.56.030, 16.60.040, 16.84.050, 16.88.040 [16.88.030], 16.100.040, 16.104.040, 16.108.040, 16.112.040 and 16.116.030, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 8/3/04 Adds § 10.08.011; amends title of Ch. 10.08, parking and through traffic (10.08) 8/17/04 Adds § 8.24.041; amends § 8.24.020; repeals and replaces §§ 8.24.040 and 8.24.070, unfit buildings (8.24) 8/17/04 Adds § 13.08.370, electric system (13.08) 8/17/04 Adds Ch. 16.152, bypass corridor overlay district (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 9/23/04 Amends § 13.12.090, water system (13.12) 10/4/04 Adds Ch. 16.156, administrative variances (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 10/5/04 Adds Ch. 13.40; amends § 16.12.030, various subjects (13.40) 10/5/04 Adds Ch. 16.149, stormwater management (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 11/15/04 Adds § 8.28.040 and renumbers §§ 8.28.040-8.28.060 to be §§ 8.28.050-8.28.070, litter control (8.28) 3/17/05 Adds § 13.28.090; amends § 13.28.080, cross-connection control program (13.28) 3/17/05 Amends § 16.149.030, stormwater management (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 3/21/05 Amends § 5.12.530, alcoholic beverages (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08) 3/21/05 Repeals and replaces Ch. 16.72, WS watershed protection overlay districts (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 5/2/05 Amends §§ 16.32.080, 16.144.020 and 16.144.240; repeals and replaces § 16.144.270, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 5/16/05 Adds § 15.24.070, fire prevention (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08) 5/16/05 Adds § 3.16.110, lodging tax (3.16) 5/16/05 Repeals and replaces § 12.04.020, streets and sidewalks (12.04) 5/20/05 Adds § 13.16.041; amends § 13.16.040, sewer systems (13.16) 7/11/05 Amends §§ 16.40.020, 16.48.020, 16.52.040, 16.104.020, 16.108.020, 16.132.020, 16.132.040 and 16.152.090; renames Ch. 16.48; repeals and replaces §§ 16.32.080 and 16.32.090, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 12/19/05 Amends §§ 5.12.500, 5.12.550 and 5.12.570; repeals and replaces §§ 5.12.050 and 5.12.230, fire and safety codes (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08) 2/6/06 Amends §§ 13.12.090 and 13.16.040, water and sewer systems (13.12, 13.16) 2/6/06 Amends § 13.20.050, natural gas system (13.20) 3/6/06 Amends § 5.12.200, alcoholic beverages (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/16/08) 3/20/06 Adds Ch. 2.22, public works division (2.22) 4/3/06 Adds Ch. 2.06, code of ethics (2.06) 7/10/06 Amends §§ 16.48.040, 16.132.020 and 16.132.030, subdivisions and zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 7/10/06 Amends § 21 of Charter (Charter) 8/7/06 Adds Ch. 5.32 [5.36], pawnbrokers (5.36) 10/2/06 Amends § 13.08.150; repeals and replaces § 13.08.210; repeals §§ 13.08.170 and 13.08.230, electric system (13.08) 12/18/06 Adds § 16.32.200, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 12/18/06 Adds § 16.136.175, zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 3/5/07 Amends §§ 5.08.070 and 16.116.020, various subjects (5.08) 5/21/07 Adds § 8.04.160; amends §§ 8.04.130, 8.12.030-8.12.060, 8.12.080, 8.24.040, 8.24.070, 8.28.030, 9.12.020, 15.08.020 and 16.108.020; renumbers §§ 8.04.160 and 8.04.180 to be §§ 8.04.150 and 8.04.170; repeals and replaces § 8.04.140 and Ch. 8.16; repeals §§ 8.04.150, 8.04.170, various subjects (8.04, 8.12, 8.16, 8.24, 8.28, 9.12, 15.08) 8/6/07 Repeals and replaces § 13.40.100, stormwater system (13.40) 8/20/07 Adds Ch. 13.44, cable franchises and regulations (13.44) 8/20/07 Repeals and replaces T. 6, animal control (6.02, 6.04, 6.06, 6.08, 6.10, 6.12, 6.14) 9/17/07 Repeals and replaces Ch. 15.48, flood damage prevention (15.48) 3/3/08 Repeals and replaces § 16.128.030, subdivisions and zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 3/17/08 Amends § 2.04.010, city government generally (2.04) 4/7/08 Amends title of Ch. 16.12, §§ 13.40.090, 15.04.020, 15.48.180, 16.04.020, 16.08.010, 16.12.010, 16.12.030, 16.12.050, 16.32.030, 16.76.020, 16.76.080, 16.120.040, 16.120.050, 16.132.020, 16.136.060, 16.136.240, 16.144.050, 16.149.170-16.149.190 and 16.156.030, various provisions; repeals Div. 2 of Art. 2 of Ch. 15.48 (13.40, 15.04, 15.48) 5/5/08 Amends §§ 16.152.030 and 16.152.090, subdivisions and zoning (Repealed by Ord. dated 6/30/08) 6/2/08 Amends §§ 13.12.090, 13.16.040, 13.16.041, 13.16.140 and 13.40.080, public services (13.12, 13.16, 13.40) 6/16/08 Repeals and replaces Ch. 5.12, alcoholic beverages (5.12) 6/16/08 Adds §§ 15.24.080 and 15.24.090; amends §§ 15.12.010 and 15.24.050; repeals § 15.24.070, buildings and construction (15.12, 15.24) 6/30/08 Adds Title 14; repeals and replaces Title 16, development regulations, zoning (14.04, 14.08, 14.12, 14.16, 14.20, 14.24, 14.28, 14.32, 16.04, 16.08, 16.12, 16.16, 16.20, 16.24, 16.28, 16.32, 16.36, 16.40, 16.44, 16.48, 16.52, 16.56) 8/4/08 Amends § 2.04.010, city government generally (2.04) 8/5/08 Amends § 15.36.050, soil erosion and sediment control (15.36) 8/18/08 Amends § 5.12.240, alcoholic beverages (5.12) 9/15/08 Adds § 14.28.270, tree preservation (14.28) 10/6/08 Amends § 3.08.020; repeals and replaces § 3.08.010, purchasing procedures (3.08) 11/3/08 Adds Ch. 10.18, motorized carts (10.18)  
    Beginning with Supplement No. 18, this table will be replaced with the Code Comparative Table and Disposition List. 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLE AND DISPOSITION LIST 
This is a chronological listing of the ordinances of Covington, Georgia beginning with Supplement No. 18, included in this Code. 
Ordinance 
Dated Description Section Section 
this Code 11- 3-08 Amends fiscal year for city 1 Charter § 59 12- 8-08 Amends residency requirements 1 5.12.060 D.1. 12- 8-08 Amends administrative duties and powers 1 Charter § 30-B 12- 8-08 Amends water rates 1 13.12.090 C. 12- 8-08 Amends gas rates 1-4 13.20.050 3.E, 3.F, 3.H., 3.I  1-20-09 Business vehicle parking in residential districts 1       Rpld 10.08.010 Penalties 2       Rnbd 10.08.020       as 10.08.030 Parking regulations 3       Added 10.08.020  2- 2-09 Amends fiscal year for the city 1 Charter § 59  2-16-09 Amends pawnbroker reporting requirements 1 5.36.060 C.  2-16-09 Amends stormwater utility fee 1 13.40.050 Stormwater utility fee adjustments 2       Rpld 13.40.070 Low impact parcel credit 3       Added 13.40.080 F. Stormwater credit 4       Added 13.040.080 G. Amends credits 5       Rnbd 13.040.080 F.       as 13.040.080 H.  3- 4-09 Amends provisions relating to alcoholic beverage licenses 1, 2 5.12.070 B.  4-20-09 Amends provisions relating to city clerk 1, 2 2.12.010, 2.12.020  5-18-09 Amends water rates 1 13.12.090 C.  5-18-09 Amends gas rates 1-6 13.20.050 B.3., C.3, D.3., H.3., I.3.d.       Dltd 13.20.050 G., J.  5-18-09(Res.) Amends garbage collection fees 1-3 8.04.090 C.  6- 1-09 Amends motorized carts operations regulations 1, 2 10.18.030 D., E.  7- 6-09 Amends authorized improvements provisions 1, 2 14.08.110 A., D. 10-19-09 Amends acceptable maximum value of any gift, etc. offered to a member of the council 1 Charter § 32 10-19-09 Provisions pertaining to dogs and cats 1       Added 6.06.080 11- 2-09 Amends provisions pertaining to countersigning requirements for payroll checks 1 3.04.010 11- 2-09 Amends provisions pertaining to soil erosion and sediment control 1, 2 15.36.020, 15.36.040 B.5.  2- 1-10 Amends lodging tax rate 1 3.16.020  2- 1-10 Amends water tap fees 1 13.12.090 B.  2- 1-10 Amends sewer tap fees 1 13.16.040 A.8.  3- 1-10 Amends security provisions for required development improvements and land disturbing activities 1, 2 14.08.110, 15.36.050 B.7.  3- 1-10 Amends provisions relating to signs in corridor mixed use zoning districts 1 16.48.030 E.1.a.  3-15-10 Provisions clarifying minor land disturbing activities 1       Added 15.36.030 C.  4- 5-10 Amends provisions relating to late payment of utility taxes 1, 2 13.04.110 A., B.  4- 5-10 Amends rates for security lighting service contracts 1 13.08.360  4- 5-10 Provisions relating to distributed generation energy costs 1       Added 13.08.380  4-19-10 Amends economic development service schedule 1, 2 13.08.340 E., G.  4-19-10 Amends rates, fees and charges for the natural gas system 1 13.20.050 B.3. 2 13.20.050 C.3. 3 13.20.050 D.3. 4 13.20.050 H.3.  4-19-10 Rates, fees and charges for commercial firm natural gas service 1       Added 13.20.050 J.  5- 3-10 Amends permitted use table 1(Exh. A) 16.16.020 F. Amends provisions relating to signs 2-5 16.48.020 Amends provisions relating to regulating signs by zoning district 6(Exh. B) 16.48.030 Amends provisions relating to signs 7 16.48.060 C. 8 16.48.070 A. 9 16.48.090 A.2. 10 16.48.110 A. 11 16.48.110 B.1.  5-17-10 Solid waste disposal 1-3 8.04.010 4       Dltd 8.04.020, 8.04.040 5       Added 8.04.055 6 8.04.070 7       Added 8.04.085 8       Added 8.04.090 C.4. 9       Dltd 8.04.100, 8.04.110, 8.04.120       Added 8.04.100 10 Ch. 8.04, Art. 3(title) 11       Added 8.04.110  6- 7-10 Amends provisions relating to alcoholic beverage licenses 1 5.12.060 A.2.  6- 7-10 Amends provisions relating to imposition of business taxes 1 5.20.010  6- 7-10 Amends water service rates 1 13.12.090 C. 2 13.16.030  7-19-10 Relating to alcoholic beverage license for on-premises consumption 1 5.12.210 E.  7-19-10 Water tap fees and rates 1 13.12.090 A. Sewer tap fees and rates 2 13.16.040 A.  8- 2-10 Relating to lodging tax rate 1 3.16.030  8- 2-10 Provides for limited sale of food and beverages on city sidewalks in portions of downtown business district 1       Added 12.04.030 C.  8- 2-10 Supplemental use provisions; colleges and universities 1       Dltd 16.20.180  8-16-10 Exceptions to provisions limiting sales of real or personal property to the city by a member of the council, the mayor or any officer or employee of the city 1 Charter § 32  8-16-10 Relating to the use of bow and arrows within city limits 1 9.12.030  8-16-10 Relating to signs; penalties 1 16.48.130 G.3. 10- 4-10 Walker's Bend overlay zoning district 1       Added 16.24.030 10-18-10 Relating to planning commission 1 16.12.020 H.1. 11-15-10 Parking of commercial vehicles in residential districts 1       Added 10.08.010 Parking and storage of large vehicles, 
Parking in NR1, NR2 or NR3 zoning districts 2       Rpld 16.20.520, 
16.20.530 11-15-10 Amends provisions regarding outdoor burning 1 15.24.080 12-20-10 Dealers in precious metals and gems       Added Ch. 5.40 12-20-10 Amends various provisions regarding soil erosion, sedimentation and pollution control 1 Ch. 15.36 (Title) 2 15.36.010 3-8 15.36.020 9 15.36.030 10 15.36.040 11-16 15.36.050 A., B.1., 2., 4., C.2. 17 15.36.060 18 15.36.080  1- 3-11 Amends natural gas rates, fees and charges 1, 2 13.20.050 E.2., 3.  1- 3-11 Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape 1       Added 13.32.140  2-21-11 Remediation of unfit dwellings 1       Added 8.24.040 C.3.  3- 7-11 Amends permitted uses table 1 16.16.020 Amends keeping and raising of farm animals 2 16.20.390  4- 4-11 Adds definition of tattoo and body piercing parlor/studio 1 16.08.010 Amends permitted uses table 2 16.16.020  5- 2-11 Amends occupation tax levied provisions 1 5.04.040 B. Amends payment of occupation tax 2 5.04.080 A.  5- 2-11 Amends application procedure for alcoholic beverage license 1 5.12.080 G.  5- 2-11 Amends sewer system rates and charges 1 13.16.030  5-16-11 Amends disposal of yard waste 1 8.04.100 A. Amends definition of "yard waste" 2 8.04.010  5-16-11 Amends water service rates 1 13.12.090 C.  6- 6-11 Amends city manager residency requirements 1 Chtr. § 30  6-20-11 Inoperative vehicles 1 8.16.010       Rpld 16.32.100  7- 7-11 Junk motor vehicles 1 8.16.010 Inoperative vehicles 2       Rpld 16.32.100  7-18-11 Remediation of unfit dwellings 1 8.24.040 C.3.  9- 6-11 Motorized carts 1, 3 10.18.030 D., E. 2       Dltd 10.18.030 G.       Rnbd 10.18.030 H.       as 10.18.030 G.  9- 6-11 Meter reading, billing 1 13.04.110 B. Termination of utility services 2 13.04.180  9- 6-11 Charges for sanitary services 1 13.16.030  9-19-11 Storm drainage 1 14.12.080 I.  9-19-11 Automotive repair 1, 2 16.08.010 3 16.20.100 10-17-11 Qualifications to sell alcohol 1, 2 5.12.060 A.2, D.2  7- 7-11 Junk motor vehicles 1 8.16.010 Inoperative vehicles 2       Rpld 16.32.100 10-17-11 Inoperative vehicles 1 8.16.010 A. 2       Added 8.16.010 D. 10-17-11 Unfit buildings 1 8.24.040 B. 11-21-11 Motor vehicle sales 1 16.20.480 11-21-11 Signs 1 16.48.010-16.48.130       Added 16.48.140-16.48.160 12-13-11 Disbursement of proceeds from lodging tax collection 1 3.16.110 12-13-11 Alcoholic sales hours 1 5.12.040 A.  1- 9-12 Electrical systems 1       Dltd 13.08.340  2- 6-12 Amends various provisions regarding noise control 1 8.20.020 2       Rpld 8.20.030       Rnbd 8.20.040-8.20.110       as 8.20.030-8.20.100 3 8.20.050 D. 4 8.20.050 F. 5 8.20.060 6 8.20.070 B. 7 8.20.090 8 8.20.100  4- 2-12 Amends various provisions regarding compatibility with current International Building and Fire Codes 1, 2 15.16.020 3 15.16.030 4 15.16.040 A. 5-17 15.24.050  4- 2-12 Amends various provisions regarding cemeteries 1       Rpld 2.60.020-2.60.060       Added 2.60.020 2       Rnbd 2.60.070-2.60.090       as 2.60.030-2.60.050  5- 7-12 Amends City Charter Chtr. §§ 1-75  5-21-12 Revises water service rates 1 13.12.090 C.  7- 2-12 Amends electrical system (Large industrial service, Schedule HP-2) 1       Added 13.08.340  7- 2-12 Use of firearms for elimination of rodents 1       Added 9.12.025  8- 6-12 Amends garbage collection fees 1, 2 8.04.090 C.1., 2.  8- 6-12 Amends various zoning provisions regarding permitted uses and recycling 1, 2 16.08.010 C. 3 16.16.020 4       Added 16.20.590 5       Added 16.20.600       Rnbd 16.20.590-16.20.740       as 16.20.610-16.20.760  9-17-12 Amends the International Property and Maintenance Code 1 15.08.010 B. 10- 1-12(1) Revises taxicab regulations 1       Rpld 5.28.010-5.28.140       Added 5.28.010-5.28.370 10- 1-12(2) Added panhandling regulations 1       Added 9.16.040 10- 1-12(3) Amends provisions pertaining to trees and shrubbery 1 12.12.020 2 12.12.030 10- 1-12(4) Amends zoning map provisions 1       Added 16.04.040.D.1. 2       Rnbd 16.04.040.D.2. 1.-6.       as 16.04.040D.2. A.-F. 10-15-12(1) Amends provisions pertaining to buildings and structures required to have approved automatic sprinkler systems 1 15.24.020.C.6. 10-15-12(2) Amends provisions pertaining to zoning definitions and standard zoning districts 1 16.08.010.C. 2 16.16.020 11-19-12(1) Adds provisions pertaining to security deposit rates 1       Added 13.04.105 11-19-12(2) Amends provisions pertaining to sidewalks 1 14.12.050 11-19-12(3) Amends supplemental use provisions 1 16.16.020 11-19-12(4) Amends cemetery regulations 1 16.20.150 11-19-12(5) Amends flood damage prevention 15.48.010-15.48.260 12- 3-12 Amends Charter, § 33 pertaining to contract, interest prohibited 1 Char., § 33  1- 7-13 Amends water and sewer tap fees 1 13.12.090A. 2 13.16.040A.  2- 4-13(1) Amends insurance requirements for operation of taxicabs in the city 1 5.28.070 2 5.28.150(B)  2- 4-13(2) Amends provisions pertaining to building design and parking lot layout and design 1 16.28.020B.5. 2 16.44.030A.1.  2-18-13 Amends definitions and adds tobacco-free parks and recreation facilities 1 12.20.010 2       Added 12.20.030  4-15-13 Amends fiscal provisions generally 1, 2 3.04.010  4-15-13(1) Amends provisions relating to signs allowed without permit 1       Rpld 16.48.060 2, 3       Added 16.48.050C., D.  6- 3-13 Amends provisions relating to airports 1       Added 2.56.225  6- 3-13(1) Amends provisions relating to residential sewer tap fees - extensions and abandonment of private systems when public sewer available 1 13.16.040.A. 2       Added 13.16.040.C. 3 13.16.170  6-17-13 Amends provisions relating to credit regulations - applications for service to provide for refunds of security deposits 1 13.04.100  7- 1-13 Alters certain provisions for the purpose of adding § 16.20.680 1 16.16.020 2       Added 16.20.680       Rnbd 16.20.680-16.20.760       as 16.20.690-16.20.770  9- 3-13 Amends provisions pertaining to display of merchandise on street-prohibited-exceptions 1       Added 12.04.030D.  9-16-13 Amends certain provisions of Title 5, Ch. 5.12, Alcoholic Beverages 1 5.12.030 2 5.12.050D., E. 3 5.12.060D.4.  9-16-13(1) Amends certain provisions of Title 5, Ch. 5.12, Alcoholic Beverages 1 5.12.010 2 5.12.030 3 5.12.050D., E. 4 5.12.060D.4., E., F. 10-21-13 Amends provisions to revise water tap fees 1       Rpld 13.12.110 11- 4-13 Amends certain provisions pertaining to application procedure for licenses to sell alcoholic beverages 1 5.12.080C.  1- 6-14 Amended provisions of Title 2 of Ch. 5.56, Airport 1 2.56.010  2- 3-14 Amends certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.08, Electric System, Art. 3, Schedules 1       Rpld 13.08.260 2 13.08.270 3 13.08.280 4       Added 13.08.285 5 13.08.290 6       Rpld 13.08.310 13.08.330 13.08.340 7 13.08.360 8       Added 13.08.380 9 13.08.320B.  2-17-14 Amends certain provisions relating to hours of operation of premises licenses to sell alcoholic beverages for on-premises consumption 1 5.12.040  4- 7-14 Amends certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.08 Electric System, Article 3, Schedules 1       Rpld 13.08.300  4-21-14 Amends certain provisions of Title 5, Ch. 5.12, Alcoholic Beverages 1 5.12.100  5-19-14 Amends provisions pertaining to signs 1 16.48.030 2A 16.48.040A.1. 2B 16.48-040B.5. 3 16.48.080C., I., L. 4 16.48.100D. 5A 16.48.110B. 5B 16.48.110B.2. 6A 16.48.150A. 6B 16.48.150B.  7- 7-14 Amends provisions pertaining to school K-12 1       Rpld 16.20.630A.  7-15-14 Amends provisions pertaining to building design, civic design and parking lot layout and design 1 16.28.020 2 16.44.030  8-18-14(1) Amends provisions relating to retail sale and delivery of packaged alcoholic beverages to pedestrian and vehicular traffic through windows in licenses premises 1 5.12.180  8-18-14(2) Amends certain provisions of Title 15, Ch. 15.12 Fire and Safety Codes updating for compatibility with current International Building and Fire Codes 1-3 15.12.010 4 15.12.040 5 15.12.050  9-15-14(1) Amends certain provisions of Title 16 pertaining to certain uses 1 16.16.020  9-15-14(2) Amends certain provisions of Title 16 pertaining to certain uses 1 16.16.020  9-15-14(3) Amends certain provisions of Title 16 pertaining to off-street automobile parking spaces 1 16.44.010  9-15-14(4) Amends certain provisions of Title 14 pertaining to parking lot landscaping 1 14.28.260 10-06-14(1) Adds provisions pertaining to cemeteries 1       Added 12.24.010, 12.24.020 10-20-14 Amends certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 3.08 Electric System pertaining to industrial service 1       Added 13.08.290I. 12-15-14(1) Amends certain provisions of Title 9, Ch. 9.08 Offenses By or Against Minors pertaining to curfew 1       Added 9.08.020 12-15-14(2) Amends certain provisions of Title 3, Ch. 3.08 Purchasing Procedures pertaining to purchasing policy - when approval required 1 3.08.010  1- 5-15 Amends Title 16, Ch. 16.20 Supplemental Use Provisions pertaining to accessory uses 1       Added 16.20.020.O.  3- 2-15 Amends certain provisions of Title 5, Ch. 5.04 Business Licenses and Occupation Taxes Generally pertaining to occupation tax levied and payment of occupation tax - effect of delinquency 1 5.04.040.B. 2 5.04.080  3-16-15(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.12, Water System 1, 2 13.12.090C., D.  3-16-15(2) Amends provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.08, Electric System, Art. 3, Schedules 1, 2       Added 13.08.300  3-16-15(3) Amends certain provisions pertaining to prohibited activities for on-premises consumption licensees 1 5.12.240B. 2       Added 5.12.240J.  4- 6-15(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.20, Natural Gas System 1 13.20.050 2 13.20.060  4- 6-15(2) Amends certain provisions pertaining to abandoned cemeteries and burial grounds 1       Added 2.60.060  4-20-15(1) Amends provisions of Titles 2, 5, 6, 8, 10, 13, 14 and 15 1 2.56.225C.1. 2 5.08.080B. 3 5.12.080A. 4 6.06.030A-C. 5 6.06.070 6 6.10.020 7 8.20.070A. 8 10.18.020A. 9 13.12.090A. 10 13.16.040A. 11 13.40.050 12 14.08.070 13 14.28.070 14 14.28.090 15 15.04.020H.8-12. 16 15.12.030 17 15.20.020 18 15.32.070  5- 4-15(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts, and Ch. 16.20, Supplemental Use Provisions 1, 3 16.16.020 2 16.20.450  5-18-15(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts 1, 2 16.16.030  5-18-15(2) Amends Charter 1 Charter § 22  6- 1-15(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 14, Ch. 14.32, Development Regulations; Title 16, Ch. 16.48, Signs; Ch. 16.56, Telecommunications Structures 1 14.32.020D.4. 2 16.48.090E. 3 16.56.070B. 4 16.56.100  9-21-15(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts 1 16.16.020  9-21-15(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 14, Ch. 14.08, Platting Procedures 1       Rpld 14.08.010-14.08.240       Added 14.08.010-14.08.260  9-21-15(3) Alters certain provisions of Title 14, Ch. 14.12, Monuments and Iron Pipes 1 14.12.090 10- 5-15(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.16, Sewer Systems 1 13.16.010 2 13.16.030  1-20-16(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 13, Art. 3, Ch. 13.08, Electric System 1       Added 13.08.260  2- 2-16(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 14, Ch. 14.08, Platting Procedures 1 14.08.250T. 2 14.08.260  2- 2-16(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 5, Ch. 5.12, Alcoholic Beverages 1 5.12.080F.  3- 7-16(1) Changes certain provisions of Title 2, Ch. 2.04, City Government Generally 1 2.04.010E.  5- 2-16(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 10, Ch. 10.08, Parking and Through Traffic 1       Added 10.08.012  5- 2-16(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.44, Parking and Loading 1       Rpld 16.44.010-16.44.040       Added 16.44.010-16-44-040  5- 2-16(3) Alters certain provisions of Title 14, Ch. 14.16, Design Standards 1       Added 14.16.050C.  5- 2-16(4) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts 1 16.16.020  6- 6-16(1) Updates official zoning map Not codified  6- 6-16(2) Amends Charter 1 § 53  6-20-16(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 5, Ch. 5.04, Business Licenses and Occupation Taxes Generally 1 5.04.080  7- 6-16(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts 1.A., B. 16.16.020  7- 6-16(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.12, Procedures 1 16.12.090  8-15-16(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.04, Utility Systems Generally 1 13.04.110B. 10- 3-16(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 15, Ch. 15.36, Soil Erosion and Sediment Control 1, 2 15.36.020 12-12-16(1) Amends certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.08, Electric System 1       Added 13.08.380C., D. 12-12-16(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.08, Electric System 1-3 13.08.290I.1., 4., 6.  1- 4-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 15, Ch. 15.24, Outdoor Burning I 15.24.080  1-18-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.24, Overlay Zoning Districts 1       Added 16.24.040  1-18-17(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.20, Supplemental Use Provisions 1 16.20.370B.  1-18-17(3) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Ch. 16.08, Interpretations and definitions and Ch. 16.20, Supplemental Use Provisions 1 16.08.010 2       Added 16.20.290A.9.  2- 6-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 14, Ch. 14.08, Platting Procedure 1 14.08.120 14.08.200  2-20-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 2, Ch. 2.04, City Government Generally 1 2.04.010E.  3-20-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 15, Ch. 15.04, Construction Codes 1       Rpld 15.04.030  3-20-17(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 15, Ch. 15.24, Fire Prevention Generally 1 15.24.060  4- 3-17(1) Amends Charter 1 § 33  6- 5-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 15, Ch. 15.04, Construction Codes 1       Rpld 15.04.020D. 2 15.04.020H.  7- 3-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 15, Ch. 15.24, Fire Prevention Generally 1       Added 15.24.070 10-16-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 14, Ch. 14.28, Tree Preservation 1 14.28.270 12- 4-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 15, Ch. 15.24, Fire Prevention Generally 1       Added 15.24.060F. 12-18-17(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 13, Ch. 13.12, Water System 1 13.12.090C.  2-19-18(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 5, Ch. 5.12, Alcoholic Beverages 1       Added 5.12.060G.  2-20-18(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 5, Ch. 5.12, Alcoholic Beverages 1 5.12.030 2       Added 5.12.060H. 3       Added 5.12.255  3- 5-18(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.08, Interpretations and Definitions, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts, and Ch. 16.20, Supplemental Use Provisions 1 16.08.010 2 16.16.020 3       Added 16.20.500  3- 5-18(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 6, Animals, Ch. 6.02, General Provisions and Definitions, and Ch. 6.10, Livestock and Fowl 1 6.02.010 2       Added 6.02.040 3       Dltd 6.10.040  4- 2-18(1) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.08, Interpretations and Definitions, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts, and Ch. 16.20, Supplemental Use Provisions 1 16.08.010 2, 3 16.16.020 4       Added 16.20.255  4- 2-18(2) Alters certain provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.08, Interpretations and Definitions, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts, and Ch. 16.20, Supplemental Use Provisions 1 16.08.010 2 16.16.020 3       Added 16.20.495  4- 2-18(3) Alters certain provisions of Title 13, Public Services, Ch. 13.08, Electric System 1       Dltd 13.08.250 2 13.08.360B. 3 13.08.360C.  7- 2-18(1) Alters provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts, and Ch. 16.20, Supplemental Use Provisions 1-7 16.16.020 8-14 16.16.030 15 16.20.250  7-23-18(1) Adds provisions of Title 3, Revenue and Finance, Ch. 3.12, Property Tax, pertaining to the community redevelopment tax incentive program 1       Added 3.12.070  8- 6-18(1) Alters provisions of Title 15, Buildings and Construction, Ch. 15.04, Construction Codes 1 15.04.020H.2.a., b.  8- 6-18(2) Alters provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.24, Overlay Zoning District 1 16.24.020  8- 6-18(3) Alters provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.24, Overlay Zoning District 1 16.24.040  8-20-18(1) Amends Charter 1 Charter § 27  9- 4-18(1) Alters provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.24, Overlay Zoning Districts 10- 1-18(1) Alters provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.12, Procedures 1 16.12.040A. 11-13-18(1) Alters provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.20, Supplemental Use Provisions 1 16.20.370D. 11-13-18(2) Alters provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts 1       Added 16.16.030C. 11-13-18(3) Alters provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.16, Standard Zoning Districts 1, 2 16.16.020 12-17-18(1) Alters provisions of Title 3, Revenue and Finance, Ch. 3.16, Lodging Tax 1 3.16.030B.  1-22-19(1) Deletes provisions of Title 2, Administration and Personnel, Ch. 2.48, Retirement 1       Dltd 2.48.010  1-22-19(2) Alters provisions of Title 13, Public Services, Ch. 13.08, Electric System 1 13.08.290I. 2 13.08.300I.  4- 1-19(1) Alters provisions of Title 16, Zoning, Ch. 16.56, Telecommunication Structures 1 16.56.020 2       Added 16.56.065  4-15-19(1) Alters provisions of Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations, Ch. 5.04, Business Licenses and Occupation Taxes Generally 1 5.04.040B.  5- 9-19(1) Alters provisions of Title 5, Business Licenses and Regulations, Ch. 5.12, Alcoholic Beverages 1, 2 5.12.030  
