THE CODE OF ORDINANCES OF THE CITY OF DONALSONVILLE, GEORGIA 
____________ 
Published in 2019 by Order of the Mayor and Council 
____________ 
  
DONALSONVILLE OFFICIALS 
____________ 
Dan E. Ponder Jr. 
Mayor 
____________ 
Ed Bond, Mayor Pro Tem 
Mitchell Blanks 
Mitzy Moye 
Flossie Smith 
Lindsay Register 
Travis Brooks 
City Council 
____________ 
Steven W. Hicks 
City Manager 
____________ 
Billy M. Grantham 
City Attorney 
____________ 
Christina Corvers 
City Clerk 
PREFACE 
This Code constitutes a recodification of the general and permanent ordinances of the City of Donalsonville, Georgia. 
Source materials used in the preparation of the Code were the 1996 Code and ordinances subsequently adopted by the mayor and council. The source of each section is included in the history note appearing in parentheses at the end thereof. The absence of such a note indicates that the section is new and was adopted for the first time with the adoption of the Code. By use of the comparative tables appearing in the back of this Code, the reader can locate any section of the 1996 Code, as supplemented, and any subsequent ordinance included herein. 
The chapters of the Code have been conveniently arranged in alphabetical order, and the various sections within each chapter have been catchlined to facilitate usage. Notes which tie related sections of the Code together and which refer to relevant state law have been included. A table listing the state law citations and setting forth their location within the Code is included at the back of this Code. 
Chapter and Section Numbering System 
The chapter and section numbering system used in this Code is the same system used in many state and local government codes. Each section number consists of two parts separated by a dash. The figure before the dash refers to the chapter number, and the figure after the dash refers to the position of the section within the chapter. Thus, the second section of chapter 1 is numbered 1-2, and the first section of chapter 6 is numbered 6-1. Under this system, each section is identified with its chapter, and at the same time new sections can be inserted in their proper place by using the decimal system for amendments. For example, if new material consisting of one section that would logically come between sections 6-1 and 6-2 is desired to be added, such new section would be numbered 6-1.5. New articles and new divisions may be included in the same way or, in the case of articles, may be placed at the end of the chapter embracing the subject, and, in the case of divisions, may be placed at the end of the article embracing the subject. The next successive number shall be assigned to the new article or division. New chapters may be included by using one of the reserved chapter numbers. Care should be taken that the alphabetical arrangement of chapters is maintained when including new chapters. 
Page Numbering System 
The page numbering system used in this Code is a prefix system. The letters to the left of the colon are an abbreviation which represents a certain portion of the volume. The number to the right of the colon represents the number of the page in that portion. In the case of a chapter of the Code, the number to the left of the colon indicates the number of the chapter. In the case of an appendix to the Code, the letter immediately to the left of the colon indicates the letter of the appendix. The following are typical parts of codes of ordinances, which may or may not appear in this Code at this time, and their corresponding prefixes: 
CHARTER 	CHT:1 
RELATED LAWS 	RL:1 
SPECIAL ACTS 	SA:1 
CHARTER COMPARATIVE TABLE 	CHTCT:1 
RELATED LAWS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	RLCT:1 
SPECIAL ACTS COMPARATIVE TABLE 	SACT:1 
CODE 	CD1:1 
CODE APPENDIX 	CDA:1 
CODE COMPARATIVE TABLES 	CCT:1 
STATE LAW REFERENCE TABLE 	SLT:1 
CHARTER INDEX 	CHTi:1 
CODE INDEX 	CDi:1 
 
Indexes 
The indexes have been prepared with the greatest of care. Each particular item has been placed under several headings, some of which are couched in lay phraseology, others in legal terminology, and still others in language generally used by local government officials and employees. There are numerous cross references within the indexes themselves which stand as guideposts to direct the user to the particular item in which the user is interested. 
Looseleaf Supplements 
A special feature of this publication is the looseleaf system of binding and supplemental servicing of the publication. With this system, the publication will be kept up to date. Subsequent amendatory legislation will be properly edited, and the affected page or pages will be reprinted. These new pages will be distributed to holders of copies of the publication, with instructions for the manner of inserting the new pages and deleting the obsolete pages. 
Keeping this publication up to date at all times will depend largely upon the holder of the publication. As revised pages are received, it will then become the responsibility of the holder to have the amendments inserted according to the attached instructions. It is strongly recommended by the publisher that all such amendments be inserted immediately upon receipt to avoid misplacing them and, in addition, that all deleted pages be saved and filed for historical reference purposes. 
Acknowledgments 
This publication was under the direct supervision of Mollie M. Garrett, Code Attorney, and Joanna J. Douglas, Editor, of the Municipal Code Corporation, Tallahassee, Florida. Credit is gratefully given to the other members of the publisher's staff for their sincere interest and able assistance throughout the project. 
The publisher is most grateful to Christina Corvers, City Clerk, for her cooperation and assistance during the progress of the work on this publication. It is hoped that her efforts and those of the publisher have resulted in a Code of Ordinances which will make the active law of the city readily accessible to all citizens and which will be a valuable tool in the day-to-day administration of the city's affairs. 
Copyright 
All editorial enhancements of this Code are copyrighted by Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Donalsonville, Georgia. Editorial enhancements include, but are not limited to: organization; table of contents; section catchlines; pre-chapter section analyses; editor's notes; cross references; state law references; numbering system; code comparative table; state law reference table; and index. Such material may not be used or reproduced for commercial purposes without the express written consent of Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Donalsonville, Georgia. 
© Copyrighted material. 
Municipal Code Corporation and the City of Donalsonville, Georgia. 2019.  
PART I - CHARTER[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
Editor's note— Printed herein is 1997 Ga. Laws (Act No. 449), page 4524. Amendments are indicated by parenthetical history notes following amended provisions. The absence of a history note indicates that the provision remains unchanged from the original. Obvious misspellings have been corrected without notation. For stylistic purposes, headings and catchlines have been made uniform, and expression of numbers in text as appears in the Code of Ordinances has been used. A consistent scheme of capitalization has also been used. Additions for clarity are indicated by brackets. Catchlines have been editorially supplied. 
 
ARTICLE I. - INCORPORATION AND POWERS 
 
Sec. 1.10. - Name. 
This city and the inhabitants thereof are hereby constituted and declared a body politic and corporate under the name and style City of Donalsonville, Georgia, and by that name shall have perpetual succession.  
Sec. 1.11. - Corporate boundaries. 
(a)  The boundaries of this city shall be those existing on the effective date of the adoption of this Charter with such alterations as may be made from time to time in the manner provided by law. The boundaries of this city at all times shall be shown on a map, a written description or any combination thereof, to be retained permanently in the office of the city clerk and to be designated, as the case may be: "Official Map of the Corporate Limits of the City of Donalsonville, Georgia." Photographic, typed, or other copies of such map or description certified by the city clerk shall be admitted as evidence in all courts and shall have the same force and effect as the original map or description. 
(b)  The mayor and council may provide for the redrawing of any such map by ordinance to reflect lawful changes in the corporate boundaries. A redrawn map shall supersede, for all purposes, the entire map or maps which it is designated to replace.  
Sec. 1.12. - Powers and construction. 
(a)  This city shall have all powers possible for a city to have under the present or future constitution and laws of this state as fully and completely as though they were specifically enumerated in this Charter. This city shall have all the powers of self-government not otherwise prohibited by this Charter or by general law. 
(b)  The powers of this city shall be construed liberally in favor of the city. The specific mention or failure to mention particular powers shall not be construed as limiting in any way the powers of this city. 
(c)  The powers of the government of the City of Donalsonville to be exercised by the mayor and council shall include, but not be limited to, the following: 
(1)  Air and water pollution. To regulate the emission of smoke or other exhaust which pollutes the air, and to prevent the pollution of natural streams which flow within the corporate limits of the city; 
(2)  Animal regulations. To regulate and license or to prohibit the keeping or running at large of animals and fowl, and to provide for the impoundment of same if such are in violation of any ordinance or lawful order; to provide for the disposition by sale, gift, or humane destruction of animals and fowl when not redeemed as provided by ordinance; and to provide punishment for violation of ordinances enacted under this Charter; 
(3)  Appropriations and expenditures. To make appropriations for the support of the government of the city; to authorize the expenditure of money for any purposes authorized by this Charter and for any purpose for which a municipality is authorized by the laws of the State of Georgia; and to provide for the payment of expenses of the city; 
(4)  Building regulation. To regulate and to license the erection and construction of buildings and all other structures; to adopt building, housing, plumbing, electrical, gas, and heating and air conditioning codes; and to regulate all housing and building trades; 
(5)  Business regulation and taxation. To levy and to provide for collection of licenses, fees, and taxes on privileges, occupations, trades and professions; to license and regulate the same; to provide for the manner and method of payment of such licenses, fees, and taxes; and to revoke such licenses after due process for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; 
(6)  Condemnation. To condemn property, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city, for present or future use and for any corporate purpose deemed necessary by the governing authority, utilizing procedures enumerated in title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.], or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(7)  Contracts. To enter into contracts and agreements with other governmental entities and with private persons, firms, and corporations; 
(8)  Emergencies. To establish procedures for determining and proclaiming that an emergency situation exists inside or outside the city, and to make and carry out all reasonable provisions deemed necessary to deal with or meet such an emergency for the protection, safety, health or well-being of the citizens of the city; 
(9)  Fire regulations. To fix and establish fire limits and, from time to time, to extend, enlarge, or restrict the same; to prescribe fire safety regulations not inconsistent with general law, relating to fire prevention, detection, and firefighting; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations of such limits and regulations; 
(10)  Garbage fees. To levy, fix, assess, and collect a garbage, refuse, and trash collection and disposal, and other sanitary service charge, tax, or fee for such services as may be necessary in the operation of the city from all individuals, firms, and corporations residing in or doing business in the city benefiting from such services; to enforce the payment of such charges, taxes, or fees; and to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges; 
(11)  General health, safety, and welfare. To define, regulate, and prohibit any act, practice, conduct, or use of property which is detrimental to the health, sanitation, cleanliness, welfare, and safety of the inhabitants of the city, and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(12)  Gifts. To accept or refuse gifts, donations, bequests, or grants from any source for any purpose related to the powers and duties of the city and the general welfare of its citizens, on such terms and conditions as the donor or grantor may impose; 
(13)  Health and sanitation. To prescribe standards of health and sanitation and to provide for the enforcement of such standards; 
(14)  Jail sentences. To provide that persons given jail sentences in the city's court may work out such sentences in any public works or on the streets, roads, drains, and squares in the city; to provide for commitment of such persons to any jail; or to provide for commitment of such persons to any county work camp or county jail by agreement with the appropriate county officials; 
(15)  Motor vehicles. To regulate the operation of motor vehicles and exercise control over all traffic, including parking upon or across the streets, roads, alleys and walkways of the city; 
(16)  Municipal agencies and delegation of power. To create, alter, or abolish departments, boards, offices, commissions, and agencies of the city and to confer upon such agencies the necessary and appropriate authority for carrying out all the powers conferred upon or delegated to the same; 
(17)  Municipal debts. To appropriate and borrow money for the payment of debts of the city and to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized by this Charter or the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(18)  Municipal property ownership. To acquire, dispose of, and hold in trust or otherwise any real, personal, or mixed property, in fee simple or lesser interest, inside or outside the property limits of the city; 
(19)  Municipal property protection. To provide for the preservation and protection of property and equipment of the city and for the administration and use of same by the public; and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violations thereof; 
(20)  Municipal utilities. To acquire, lease, construct, operate, maintain, sell, and dispose of public utilities, including, but not limited to, a system of waterworks, sewers and drains, sewage disposal, gas works, electric light plants, transportation facilities, public airports, and any other public utility; to fix the taxes, charges, rates, fares, fees, assessments, regulations, and penalties; to provide for the withdrawal of service for refusal or failure to pay the same; and to authorize the extension of water, sewerage, and electrical distribution systems, and all necessary appurtenances by which said utilities are distributed, inside and outside the corporate limits of the city, as provided by ordinance; 
(21)  Nuisance. To define a nuisance and provide for its abatement, whether on public or private property; 
(22)  Ordinances, rules, and regulations. To make, establish, and adopt such bylaws, ordinances, policies, and rules and regulations as shall appear necessary for the security, welfare, convenience, and interest of the city and the inhabitants of the city, and for preserving the health, peace, order, and good government of the city; 
(23)  Penalties. To provide penalties for violation of any ordinances adopted pursuant to the authority of this Charter and the laws of the State of Georgia; 
(24)  Planning and zoning. To provide comprehensive city planning for development by zoning and to provide subdivision regulation and the like as the city council deems necessary and reasonable to ensure a safe, healthy, and aesthetically pleasing community; 
(25)  Police and fire protection. To exercise the power of arrest through duly appointed police officers and to establish, operate, or contract for a police and a firefighting agency; 
(26)  Public hazards: removal. To provide for the destruction and removal of any building or other structure which is or may become dangerous or detrimental to the public; 
(27)  Public improvements. To provide for the acquisition, construction, building, operation, and maintenance of public ways, parks and playgrounds, recreational facilities, cemeteries, markets and market houses, public buildings, libraries, public housing, airports, hospitals, terminals, docks, parking facilities, or charitable, cultural, educational, recreational, conservation, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal, and medical institutions, agencies, and facilities; to provide any other public improvements, inside or outside the corporate limits of the city; to regulate the use of public improvements; and, for such purposes, property may be acquired by condemnation under title 22 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated [O.C.G.A. § 22-1-1 et seq.] or such other applicable laws as are or may hereafter be enacted; 
(28)  Public peace. To provide for the prevention and punishment of [public] drunkenness, riots, and public disturbances; 
(29)  Public transportation. To organize and operate such public transportation systems as are deemed beneficial; 
(30)  Public utilities and services. To grant franchises or make contracts for public utilities and public services; and to prescribe the rates, fares, regulations, and standards, and conditions of service applicable to the service to be provided by the franchise grantee or contractor, insofar as such are not in conflict with valid regulations of the Public Service Commission; 
(31)  Regulation of roadside areas. To prohibit or regulate and control the erection, removal, and maintenance of signs, billboards, trees, shrubs, fences, buildings, and any and all other structures or obstructions upon or adjacent to the rights-of-way of streets and roads or within view of streets or roads, within or abutting the corporate limits of the city, and to prescribe penalties and punishment for violation of such ordinances; 
(32)  Retirement. To provide and maintain a retirement plan for officers and employees of the city; 
(33)  Roadways. To lay out, open, extend, widen, narrow, establish or change the grade of, abandon or close, construct, pave, curb, gutter, adorn with shade trees, or otherwise improve, maintain, repair, clean, prevent erosion of, and light the roads, alleys, and walkways within the corporate limits of the city; and to negotiate and execute leases over, through, under or across any city property or the right-of-way of any street, road, alley, and walkway or portion thereof within the corporate limits of the city, for bridges, passageways, or any other purpose or use between buildings on opposite sides of the street and for other bridges, overpasses, and underpasses for private use at such location, and to charge a rental therefor in such manner as may be provided by ordinance; and to authorize and control the construction of bridges, overpasses, and underpasses within the corporate limits of the city; and to grant franchises and rights-of-way throughout the streets and roads and over the bridges and viaducts for the use of public utilities and for private use; and to require real estate owners to repair and maintain in a safe condition the sidewalks adjoining their lots or lands, and to impose penalties for failure to do so; 
(34)  Sewer fees. To levy a fee, charge, or sewer tax as necessary to assure the acquiring, constructing, equipping, operating, maintaining, and extending of a sewage disposal plant and sewerage system, and to levy on those to whom sewers and sewerage systems are made available a sewer service fee, charge, or sewer tax for the availability or use of the sewers; to provide for the manner and method of collecting such service charges and for enforcing payment of the same; and to charge, impose, and collect a sewer connection fee or fees to those connected with the system; 
(35)  Solid waste disposal. To provide for the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish and refuse, and to regulate the collection and disposal of garbage, rubbish, and refuse by others; and to provide for the separate collection of glass, tin, aluminum, cardboard, paper, and other recyclable materials; and to provide for the sale of such items; 
(36)  Special areas of public regulation. To regulate or prohibit junk dealers, pawn shops, the manufacture, sale, or transportation of intoxicating liquors and the use and sale of firearms; to regulate the transportation, storage, and use of combustible, explosive, and inflammable materials, the use of lighting and heating equipment, and any other business or situation which may be dangerous to persons or property; to regulate and control the conduct of peddlers and itinerant traders, theatrical performances, exhibitions, and shows of any kind, by taxation or otherwise; and to license, tax, regulate, or prohibit professional fortunetelling, palmistry, adult bookstores, and massage parlors; 
(37)  Special assessments. To levy and provide for the collection of special assessments to cover the costs for any public improvements; 
(38)  Taxes: ad valorem. To levy and provide for assessment, valuation, revaluation, and collection of taxes on all property subject to taxation; 
(39)  Taxes: other. To levy and collect such other taxes as may be allowed now or in the future by law; 
(40)  Taxicabs. To regulate and license vehicles operated for hire in the city; to limit the number of such vehicles; to require the operators of such vehicles to be licensed; to require public liability insurance on such vehicles in the amounts to be prescribed by ordinance; and to regulate the parking of such vehicles; 
(41)  Urban redevelopment. To organize and operate an urban redevelopment program; and 
(42)  Other powers. To exercise and enjoy all other powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities necessary or desirable to promote or protect the safety, health, peace, security, good order, comfort, convenience, or general welfare of the city and its inhabitants; and to exercise all implied powers necessary to carry into execution all powers granted in this Charter as fully and completely as if such powers were fully stated in this Charter; and to exercise all powers now or in the future authorized to be exercised by other municipal governments under other laws of the State of Georgia; and no listing of particular powers in this Charter shall be held to be exclusive of others, nor restrictive of general words and phrases granting powers, but shall be held to be in addition to such powers unless expressly prohibited to municipalities under the constitution or applicable laws of the State of Georgia.  
Sec. 1.13. - Exercise of powers. 
All powers, functions, rights, privileges, and immunities of the city, and its officers, agencies, or employees shall be carried into execution as provided by this Charter. If this Charter makes no provision, such shall be carried into execution as provided by ordinance or as provided by pertinent laws of the State of Georgia.  
ARTICLE II. - GOVERNMENT STRUCTURE LEGISLATIVE BRANCH 
 
Sec. 2.10. - Mayor and council—Creation; number; election. 
The legislative authority of the government of this city, except as otherwise specifically provided in this Charter, shall be vested in a mayor and council to be composed of a mayor and six members of the council. The mayor and councilmembers shall be elected in the manner provided by this Charter.  
Sec. 2.11. - Mayor and council—Terms and qualifications for office. 
The mayor and each member of the council shall serve for terms of four years and until their respective successors are elected and qualified. No person shall be eligible to serve as mayor or councilmember unless he or she shall have been a resident of the city for a period of at least 12 months immediately prior to the date of the election of the mayor or members of the council; each shall continue to reside therein during his or her period of service and to be registered and qualified to vote in municipal elections of this city.  
Sec. 2.12. - Vacancy; filling of vacancies; suspensions. 
(a)  Vacancies. The office of mayor or councilmember shall become vacant upon the incumbent's death, resignation, forfeiture of office, or removal from office in any manner authorized by this Charter or the general laws of the State of Georgia. A vacancy in the office of mayor or councilmember shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter. 
(b)  Suspension. Upon the suspension from office of mayor or councilmember in any manner authorized by the general laws of the State of Georgia, the mayor and council or those remaining shall appoint a successor for the duration of the suspension. If the suspension becomes permanent, then the office shall become vacant and shall be filled for the remainder of the unexpired term, if any, as provided for in this Charter.  
Sec. 2.13. - Mayor and council—Compensation and expenses. 
The mayor and each councilmember shall receive compensation and expenses for their services as provided by ordinance and in accordance with chapter 35 of title 36 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 36-35-1 et seq.].  
Sec. 2.14. - Conflicts of interest; holding other offices. 
(a)  Conflict of interest. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies shall knowingly: 
(1)  Engage in any business or transaction, nor have a financial or other personal interest, direct or indirect, which is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or which would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(2)  Engage in or accept private employment or render services for private interests when such employment or service is incompatible with the proper discharge of his or her official duties or would tend to impair the independence of his or her judgment or action in the performance of his or her official duties; 
(3)  Disclose confidential information concerning the property, government, or affairs of the governmental body by which he or she is engaged without proper legal authorization; or use such information to advance the financial or other private interest of himself, herself, or others; 
(4)  Accept any valuable gift, whether in the form of service, loan, thing, or promise, from any person, firm, or corporation which to his or her knowledge is interested, directly or indirectly, in any manner whatsoever, in business dealings with the governmental body by which he or she is engaged; provided, however, that an elected official who is a candidate for public office may accept campaign contributions and services in connection with any such campaign; or 
(5)  Represent other private interests in any action or proceeding against this city or any portion of its government. 
(b)  Disclosure. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within any department of the city shall disclose such private interest to the mayor and council. The mayor or any councilmember who has a private interest in any matter pending before the mayor and council shall disclose such private interest and such disclosure shall be entered on the records of the mayor and council, and such mayor or councilmember having a private interest shall disqualify himself or herself from participating in any decision or vote relating thereto. Any elected official, appointed officer, or employee of any agency or political entity to which this Charter applies who shall have any private financial interest, directly or indirectly, in any contract or matter pending before or within such entity shall disclose such private interest to the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(c)  Use of public property. No elected official, appointed officer, or employee of the city or any agency or entity to which this Charter applies shall use property owned by such governmental entity for personal benefit, convenience, or profit except in accordance with policies promulgated by the mayor and council or the governing body of such agency or entity. 
(d)  Contracts voidable and rescindable. Any violation of this section which occurs with the knowledge, express or implied, of a party to a contract or sale shall render said contract or sale voidable at the option of the mayor and council. 
(e)  Ineligibility of elected official. Except where otherwise authorized by law, neither the mayor nor any councilmember shall hold any other elective or compensated appointive office in the city or otherwise be employed by said government or any agency of the city during the term for which he or she was elected. 
(f)  Political activities of certain officers and employees. No appointive officer and no employee of the city shall continue in such employment upon qualifying as a candidate for nomination or election to any public office within the city government. 
(g)  Penalties for violation. 
(1)  Any city officer or employee who knowingly conceals such financial interest or knowingly violates any of the requirements of this section shall be guilty of malfeasance in office or position and shall be deemed to have forfeited his or her office or position; and 
(2)  Any officer or employee of the city who shall forfeit his or her office or position as described in [subsection (g)(1) of this section] shall be ineligible for appointment to, election to, or employment in a position in the city government for a period of three years thereafter.  
Sec. 2.15. - Inquiries and investigations. 
The mayor and council may make inquiries and investigations into the affairs of the city and conduct of any department, office, or agency of the city and for this purpose may subpoena witnesses, administer oaths, take testimony, and require the production of evidence. Any person who fails or refuses to obey a lawful order issued in the exercise of these powers by the mayor and council shall be punished as provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 2.16. - General power and authority of the mayor and council. 
Except as otherwise provided by other provisions of this Charter, the mayor and council shall exercise that authority and those powers as provided by article I of this Charter.  
Sec. 2.17. - Eminent domain. 
The mayor and council is empowered to acquire, construct, operate and maintain public ways, parks, public grounds, cemeteries, markets, market houses, public buildings, libraries, sewers, drains, sewage treatment [plants], waterworks, electrical systems, gas systems, airports, hospitals, and charitable, educational, recreational, sport, curative, corrective, detention, penal and medical institutions, agencies and facilities; [and] any other public improvements inside or outside the city; and to regulate the use thereof, and for such purposes, property may be condemned under procedures established under general law applicable now or as provided in the future.  
ORGANIZATION AND PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 2.18. - Organizational meetings. 
The mayor and council shall hold an organizational meeting on the first Tuesday in January next following the election of the mayor and council. The meeting shall be called to order by the city clerk, and the oath of office shall be administered to the newly elected members as follows: 
"I do solemnly (swear)(affirm) that I will faithfully perform the duties of (mayor or councilmember) of this city and that I will support and defend the Charter thereof as well as the constitution and laws of the State of Georgia and of the United States of America."  
Sec. 2.19. - Regular and special meetings. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall hold regular meetings at such times and places as prescribed by ordinance. 
(b)  Special meetings of the mayor and council may be held on call of the mayor or of any three members of the city council. Notice of such special meetings shall be served on all other members personally, or by telephone personally, at least 24 hours in advance of the meeting. Such notice to the mayor and councilmembers shall not be required if five of the six members of the council are present when the special meeting is called. Such notice of any special meeting may be waived by a councilmember in writing before or after such a meeting, and attendance at the meeting shall also constitute a waiver of notice on any business transacted in such councilmember's presence. Only the business stated in the call may be transacted at the special meeting. 
(c)  All meetings of the mayor and council shall be public to the extent required by law, and notice to the public of special meetings shall be made as fully as is reasonably possible prior to such meetings as provided by state law.  
Sec. 2.20. - Rules of procedure. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall adopt rules of procedure and order of business consistent with the provisions of this Charter and shall provide for keeping a journal of proceedings, which shall be a public record. 
(b)  All committees and committee chairpersons and officers of the mayor and council shall be appointed by the mayor and shall serve at the mayor's pleasure. The mayor shall have the power to appoint new members to any committee at any time.  
Sec. 2.21. - Quorum; voting. 
(a)  Four of the councilmembers shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the mayor and council. Voting on the adoption of ordinances shall be by voice vote and the vote shall be recorded in the journal, but any member of the council shall have the right to request a roll call vote, and such vote shall be recorded in the journal. Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the affirmative vote of a majority of the councilmembers present at an official meeting shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution, or motion. 
(b)  In the event vacancies in office result in less than a quorum of the councilmembers holding office, then the remaining councilmembers in office shall constitute a quorum and shall be authorized to transact business of the mayor and council. In this event, a vote of a majority of the remaining councilmembers present at an official meeting shall be required for the adoption of any ordinance, resolution or motion.  
Sec. 2.22. - Ordinance form; procedures. 
(a)  Every proposed ordinance should be introduced in writing and in the form required for final adoption. No ordinance shall contain a subject which is not expressed in its title. The enacting clause shall be "The mayor and council of the City of Donalsonville hereby ordains…" and every ordinance shall so begin. 
(b)  An ordinance may be introduced by any councilmember and may be read at a regular or special meeting of the mayor and council. Ordinances shall be considered and adopted or rejected by the mayor and council in accordance with the rules which it shall establish; provided, however, an ordinance shall not be adopted the same day it is introduced, unless a written copy of the ordinance shall have been provided to each councilmember not less than 24 hours prior to the meeting at which it shall be considered for adoption, or for emergency ordinances as provided in section 2.24. Upon introduction of any ordinance, the clerk shall as soon as possible distribute a copy to the mayor and each councilmember and shall file a reasonable number of copies in the office of the clerk and at such other public places as the mayor and council may designate.  
Sec. 2.23. - Action requiring an ordinance. 
Acts of the mayor and council which have the force and effect of law shall be enacted by ordinance.  
Sec. 2.24. - Emergencies. 
To meet a public emergency affecting life, health, property, or public peace, the mayor and council may convene on call of the mayor or three councilmembers and promptly adopt an emergency ordinance, but such ordinance may not levy taxes; grant, renew, or extend a franchise; regulate the rate charged by any public utility for its services; or authorize the borrowing of money, except for loans to be repaid within 30 days. An emergency ordinance shall be introduced in the form prescribed for ordinances generally, except that it shall be plainly designated as an emergency ordinance and shall contain, after the enacting clause, a declaration stating that an emergency exists and describing the emergency in clear and specific terms. An emergency ordinance may be adopted, with or without amendment, or rejected at the meeting at which it is introduced, but the affirmative vote of at least three councilmembers shall be required for adoption. It shall become effective upon adoption or at such later time as it may specify. Every emergency ordinance shall automatically stand repealed 90 days following the date upon which it was adopted, but this shall not prevent reenactment of the ordinance in the manner specified in this section if the emergency still exists. An emergency ordinance may also be repealed by adoption of a repealing ordinance in the same manner specified in this section for adoption of emergency ordinances.  
Sec. 2.25. - Codes of technical regulations. 
(a)  The mayor and council may adopt any standard code of technical regulations by reference thereto in an adopting ordinance. The procedure and requirements governing such adopting ordinance shall be as prescribed for ordinances generally, except that: 
(1)  The requirements of section 2.22(b) for distribution and filing of copies of the ordinance shall be construed to include copies of any code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance; and 
(2)  A copy of each adopted code of technical regulations, as well as the adopting ordinance, shall be authenticated and recorded by the clerk pursuant to section 2.26. 
(b)  Copies of any adopted code of technical regulations shall be made available by the clerk for distribution or for purchase at a reasonable price.  
Sec. 2.26. - Signing; authenticating; recording; codification; printing. 
(a)  The mayor shall sign and the clerk shall authenticate the mayor's signature and record in full in a properly indexed book kept for that purpose all ordinances adopted by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall provide for the preparation of a general codification of all the ordinances of the city having the force and effect of law. The general codification shall be adopted by the mayor and council by ordinance and shall be published promptly, together with all amendments thereto and such codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations as the mayor and council may specify. This compilation shall be known and cited officially as "The Code [of Ordinances] of the City of Donalsonville, Georgia." Copies of the Code shall be furnished to all officers, departments, and agencies of the city and made available for purchase by the public at a reasonable price as fixed by the city council. 
(c)  The mayor and council shall cause each ordinance and each amendment to this Charter to be printed promptly following its adoption, and the printed ordinances and Charter amendments shall be made available for purchase by the public at reasonable prices to be fixed by the city council. Following publication of the first Code under this Charter and at all times thereafter, the ordinances and Charter amendments shall be printed in substantially the same style as the Code currently in effect and shall be suitable in form for incorporation therein. The mayor and council shall make such further arrangements as deemed desirable with reproduction and distribution of any current changes in or additions to codes of technical regulations and other rules and regulations included in the Code.  
Sec. 2.27. - City manager; appointment; qualifications; compensation. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city manager for an indefinite term and shall fix the compensation of the city manager. The manager shall be appointed solely on the basis of his or her executive, administrative, and technical qualifications.  
Sec. 2.2[8]. - Removal of city manager. 
(a)  The mayor and council may remove the manager from office in accordance with the following procedures: 
(1)  The mayor and council shall adopt, by affirmative vote of a majority of all its members, a preliminary resolution which must state the reasons for removal and may suspend the manager from duty for a period not to exceed 45 days. A copy of the resolution shall be delivered promptly to the manager; 
(2)  Within five days after a copy of the resolution is delivered to the manager, the manager may file with the mayor and council a written request for a public hearing. This hearing shall be held within 30 days after the request is filed. The manager may file with the mayor and council a written reply not later than five days before the hearing; or 
(3)  If the manager has not requested a public hearing within the time specified in [subsection (a)(2) of this section], the mayor and council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members. If the manager has requested a public hearing, the mayor and council may adopt a final resolution for removal, which may be made effective immediately, by an affirmative vote of a majority of all its members at any time after the public hearing. 
(b)  The manager shall continue to receive his or her salary until the effective date of a final resolution of removal.  
Sec. 2.29. - Acting city manager. 
By letter filed with the city clerk, the manager shall designate, subject to approval of the mayor and council, a qualified city administrative officer to exercise the powers and perform the duties of manager during the manager's temporary absence or disability. During such absence or disability, the mayor and council may revoke such designation at any time and appoint another officer of the city to serve until the manager shall return or the manager's disability shall cease.  
Sec. 2.30. - Powers and duties of the city manager. 
The city manager shall be the chief administrative officer of the city. The manager shall be responsible to the mayor and council for the administration of all city affairs placed in his or her charge by or under this Charter. The manager shall have the following powers and duties: 
(1)  To appoint and, when he or she deems it necessary for the good of the city, suspend or remove all city employees and administrative officers he or she appoints, except as otherwise provided by law or personnel ordinances adopted pursuant to this Charter. The manager may authorize any administrative officer who is subject to his or her direction and supervision to exercise these powers with respect to subordinates in that officer's department, office, or agency. 
(2)  To direct and supervise the administration of all departments, offices, and agencies of the city, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(3)  To attend all meetings of the mayor and council and to have the right to take part in discussion but not to vote. 
(4)  To see that all laws, provisions of this Charter, and acts of the mayor and council, subject to enforcement by the manager or by officers subject to his or her direction and supervision, are faithfully executed. 
(5)  To prepare and submit the annual operating budget and capital budget to the mayor and council. 
(6)  To submit to the mayor and council and make available to the public a complete report on the finances and administrative activities of the city as of the end of each fiscal year. 
(7)  To make such other reports as the mayor and council may require concerning the operations of city departments, offices, and agencies subject to his or her direction and supervision. 
(8)  To keep the mayor and council fully advised as to the financial condition and future needs of the city and to make such recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the affairs of the city as he or she deems desirable. 
(9)  To perform other such duties as are specified in this Charter or as may be required by the mayor and council.  
Sec. 2.31. - Council interference with administration. 
Except for the purpose of inquiries and investigations under section 2.15, the mayor and council or its members shall deal with city officers and employees who are subject to the direction and supervision of the manager solely through the manager, and neither the mayor and council nor its members shall give orders to any such officer or employee, either publicly or privately.  
Sec. 2.32. - Selection of mayor pro tempore. 
By a majority vote of all its members, the mayor and council shall elect a councilmember to serve as mayor pro tempore, and such councilmember shall serve at the pleasure of the mayor and council. The mayor pro tempore shall continue to vote and otherwise participate as a councilmember.  
Sec. 2.33. - Powers and duties of mayor. 
The mayor shall: 
(1)  Preside at all meetings of the mayor and council; 
(2)  Be the head of the city for the purpose of service of process and for ceremonial purposes and shall be the official spokesperson for the city and the chief advocate of policy; 
(3)  Have power to administer oaths and to take affidavits; 
(4)  Sign as a matter of course on behalf of the city all written and approved contracts, ordinances, and other instruments executed by the city which by law are required to be in writing; and 
(5)  Serve as a tie breaker and cast a vote only in the event of a tie vote of the council.  
Sec. 2.34. - Mayor pro tempore; duties. 
The mayor pro tempore shall preside at all meetings of the mayor and council in the absence of the mayor and shall assume the duties and powers of the mayor upon the mayor's disability or absence. The mayor and council, by a majority vote, shall elect a new presiding officer from among its members for any period in which the mayor pro tempore is disabled, absent, or acting as mayor. Any such absence or disability shall be declared by majority vote of all mayor and council.  
ARTICLE III. - ADMINISTRATIVE AFFAIRS 
 
Sec. 3.10. - Administrative and service departments. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this Charter, the mayor and council, by ordinance, shall prescribe the functions or duties, and establish, abolish or alter all non-elective offices, positions of employment, departments, and agencies of the city, as necessary for the proper administration of the affairs and government of this city. 
(b)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, the directors of departments and other appointed officers of the city shall be appointed solely on the basis of their respective administrative and professional qualifications. 
(c)  All appointive officers and directors of departments shall receive such compensation as prescribed by the mayor and council. 
(d)  There shall be a director of each department or agency who shall be its principal officer. Each director shall, subject to the direction and supervision of the city manager, be responsible for the administration and direction of the affairs and operations of the department or agency. 
(e)  All directors under the supervision of the city manager shall be nominated by the city manager with confirmation of appointment by the mayor and council. The manager may suspend, with or without pay, or remove directors under his or her supervision, but such a removal shall not be effective for ten calendar days following the city manager giving written notice of such action and the reasons for such action to the director involved and to the mayor and council. The director involved may appeal to the mayor and council which, after a hearing, may override the action of the city manager by a vote of four of the councilmembers.  
Sec. 3.11. - Boards, commissions, and authorities. 
(a)  The mayor and council shall create, by ordinance, such boards, commissions, and authorities to fulfill any investigative, quasi-judicial or quasi-legislative function the mayor and council deem necessary, and shall, by ordinance, establish the composition, period of existence, duties and powers thereof. 
(b)  All members of boards, commissions, and authorities of the city shall be appointed by the mayor and council for such terms of office and in such manner as shall be provided by ordinance, except where other appointing authority, terms, office, or manner of appointment is prescribed by this Charter or by law. 
(c)  The mayor and council by ordinance may provide for the compensation and reimbursement for actual and necessary expenses of the members of any board, commission, or authority. 
(d)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, no member of any board, commission, or authority shall hold any elective office in the city. 
(e)  Any vacancy on a board, commission, or authority of the city shall be filled for the unexpired term in the manner prescribed for original appointment, except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law. 
(f)  No member of a board, commission, or authority shall assume office until he or she has executed and filed with the clerk of the city an oath obligating himself or herself to faithfully and impartially perform the duties of office, such oath to be prescribed by ordinance and administered by the mayor. 
(g)  Any member of a board, commission, or authority may be removed from office for cause by a vote of four members of the council. 
(h)  Except as otherwise provided by this Charter or by law, each board, commission, or authority of the city shall elect one of its members as chairperson and one member as vice-chairperson and may elect as its secretary one of its own members or may appoint as secretary an employee of the city or such other individual as its bylaws permit. Each board, commission, or authority of the city government may establish such bylaws, rules, and regulations not inconsistent with this Charter, ordinances of the city, or law, as it deems appropriate and necessary for the fulfillment of its duties or the conduct of its affairs. Copies of such bylaws, rules, and regulations shall be filed with the clerk of the city.  
ADMINISTRATIVE OFFICERS 
 
Sec. 3.12. - City attorney. 
The mayor and council shall appoint a city attorney, together with such assistant city attorneys as may be authorized, and shall provide for the payment of such attorney or attorneys for services rendered to the city. The city attorney shall be responsible for representing and defending the city in all litigation in which the city is a party, may be the prosecuting officer in the municipal court, shall attend the meetings of the mayor and council as directed, shall advise the mayor and council and other officers and employees of the city concerning legal aspects of the city's affairs, and shall perform such other duties as may be required by virtue of his or her position as city attorney.  
Sec. 3.13. - City clerk. 
The city manager may nominate, and the mayor and council shall appoint, a city clerk who shall not be a councilmember. The city clerk shall be custodian of the official city seal, maintain such records as are required by this Charter, and perform such other duties as may be required by the city manager.  
Sec. 3.14. - City treasurer. 
The city manager may nominate, and the mayor and council shall appoint, a city treasurer to collect all taxes, licenses, fees, and other monies belonging to the city subject to the provisions of this Charter and the ordinances of the city, and to enforce all laws of Georgia relating to the collection of delinquent taxes and sale or foreclosure for nonpayment of taxes by the city. The city treasurer shall also be responsible for the general duties of a treasurer and fiscal officer.  
Sec. 3.15. - City accountant. 
The city manager may nominate, and the mayor and council shall appoint, a city accountant to perform the duties of an accountant.  
PERSONNEL ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 3.16. - Pay plan. 
The city manager shall annually be responsible for the preparation of a pay plan which shall be submitted to the mayor and council for approval. Such plan may apply to all employees of the city and any of its agencies, departments, boards, commissions, or authorities. For purposes of this section, all elected and appointed city officials are not city employees.  
Sec. 3.17. - Personnel policies. 
The mayor and council shall adopt rules and regulations consistent with this Charter concerning: 
(1)  The method of employee selection and probationary periods of employment; 
(2)  The administration of the position classification and pay plan, methods of promotion and application of service ratings thereto, and transfer of employees within the classification plan; 
(3)  Hours of work, vacation, sick leave, and other leaves of absence, overtime pay, and the order and manner in which layoffs shall be effected; 
(4)  Such dismissal hearings as due process may require; and 
(5)  Such other personnel notices as may be necessary to provide for adequate and systematic handling of personnel affairs.  
ARTICLE IV. - JUDICIAL BRANCH 
 
Sec. 4.10. - Creation; name. 
There shall be a court to be known as the Municipal Court of the City of Donalsonville.  
Sec. 4.11. - Municipal judge; associate judge. 
(a)  The municipal court shall be presided over by a chief judge and such part-time, full-time, or stand-by judges as shall be provided by ordinance. The method of selection and terms of such judges shall be provided by ordinance. 
(b)  No person shall be qualified or eligible to serve as a judge on the municipal court unless he or she shall have attained the age of 21 years, and such person shall be a member of the State Bar of Georgia. All judges shall be nominated by the city manager and appointed by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Compensation of the judges shall be fixed by ordinance. 
(d)  Judges may be removed for cause by a vote of four members of the council. 
(e)  Before assuming office, each judge shall take an oath, given by the mayor, that he or she will honestly and faithfully discharge the duties of office to the best of his or her ability and without fear, favor, or partiality. The oath shall be entered upon the minutes of the journal of the mayor and council required in section 2.20.  
Sec. 4.12. - Convening. 
The municipal court shall be convened at regular intervals as provided by ordinance.  
Sec. 4.13. - Jurisdiction; powers. 
(a)  The municipal court shall try and punish violations of this Charter, all city ordinances, and such other violations as provided by law. 
(b)  The municipal court shall have authority to punish those in its presence for contempt, provided that such punishment shall not exceed $200.00 or ten days in jail. 
(c)  The municipal court may fix punishment for offenses within its jurisdiction not exceeding a fine of $1,000.00 or imprisonment for six months, or both such fine and imprisonment, or may fix punishment by fine, imprisonment, or alternative sentencing as is now or hereafter provided by law. 
(d)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish a schedule of fees to defray the cost of operations and shall be entitled to reimbursement of the cost of meals, transportation, and caretaking of prisoners bound over to superior courts for violations of state law. 
(e)  The municipal court shall have authority to establish bail and recognizances to ensure the presence of those charged with violations before said court and shall have discretionary authority to accept cash or personal or real property as surety for the appearance of persons charged with violations. Whenever any person shall give bail for his or her appearance and shall fail to appear at the time fixed for trial, such person's bond shall be forfeited by the judge presiding at such time, and an execution issued thereon by serving the defendant and his or her sureties with a rule nisi, at least two days before a hearing on the rule nisi. In the event that cash or property is accepted in lieu of bond for security for the appearance of a defendant at trial, and if such defendant fails to appear at the time and place fixed for trial, the cash so deposited shall be, on order of the judge, declared forfeited to the city, or the property so deposited shall have a lien against it for the value forfeited, which lien shall be enforceable in the same manner and to the same extent as a lien for city property taxes. 
(f)  The municipal court shall have the same authority as superior courts to compel the production of evidence in the possession of any party; to enforce obedience to its orders, judgments and sentences; and to administer such oaths as are necessary. 
(g)  The municipal court may compel the presence of all parties necessary to a proper disposal of each case by the issuance of summonses, subpoenas, and warrants which may be served as executed by any officer as authorized by this Charter or by law. 
(h)  Each judge of the municipal court shall be authorized to issue warrants for the arrest of persons charged with offenses against any ordinance of the city, and each judge of the municipal court shall have the same authority as a magistrate of the state to issue warrants for offenses against state laws committed within the city. 
(i)  The municipal court is specifically vested with all the jurisdiction and powers throughout the geographic area of this city granted by law to mayors, recorders and police courts, and particularly by such laws as authorize the abatement of nuisances and prosecution of traffic violations.  
Sec. 4.14. - Appeal and certiorari. 
(a)  A review on a decision of the municipal court, in the case of traffic violations, may be by direct appeal to the superior court, and any bond as may be required to secure the costs of appeal to the Superior Court of Seminole County, Georgia, from the municipal court shall lie as prescribed by law. An appeal to the superior court shall not be a de novo proceeding. 
(b)  The right of certiorari from the decision and judgment of the municipal court shall exist in all criminal cases and ordinance violation cases, and such certiorari shall be obtained under the sanction of a judge of the Superior Court of Seminole County under the laws of the State of Georgia regulating the granting and issuance of writs of certiorari.  
Sec. 4.15. - Rules for court. 
With the approval of the mayor and council, the judge shall have full power and authority to make reasonable rules and regulations necessary and proper to secure the efficient and successful administration of the municipal court; provided, however, that the mayor and council may adopt in part or in toto the rules and regulations applicable to superior courts. The rules and regulations made or adopted shall be filed with the city clerk, shall be available for public inspection, and, upon request, a copy shall be furnished to all defendants in municipal court proceedings at least 48 hours prior to said proceedings.  
ARTICLE V. - ELECTIONS AND REMOVAL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
Editor's note— The Georgia Municipal Election Code in title 21, chapter 3, of the O.C.G.A. was repealed and replaced by the Georgia Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1(b), references in general and local law to the "Georgia Municipal Election Code" or Chapter 3 of Title 21" shall be deemed to refer to O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 5.10. - Applicability of general law. 
All primaries and elections shall be held and conducted in accordance with the title 21, chapter 3 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended.  
Sec. 5.11. - Voting districts. 
(a)  The city shall be divided into two voting districts, District I and District II, with three councilmembers being elected from District I and three councilmembers being elected from District II. District I shall contain Council Posts 1, 2, and 3; and District II shall contain Council Districts 4, 5, and 6. The mayor shall run at large, representing both districts. 
(b)  (1)  The boundaries of District I shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point where Georgia Highway 91 intersects with the northern boundary of [the] City of Donalsonville; proceed thence southerly along the center of Georgia Highway 91, until it intersects with East Third Street; proceed thence easterly along the center of East Third Street until it intersects with Stern Avenue; proceed thence southerly along the center of Stern Avenue until Stern Avenue intersects with East Fifth Street; proceed thence westerly along the center of East Fifth Street until it intersects with Tallman Avenue; proceed thence southerly along the center of Tallman Avenue until it intersects with East Sixth Street; proceed thence easterly along the center of East Sixth Street until it intersects with Highway 91; proceed thence along the center of Highway 91 until it intersects with the southern boundary of the City of Donalsonville; proceed thence westerly along the southern boundary of [the City of] Donalsonville until it corners north; proceed thence northerly along the western boundary of the City of Donalsonville until it corners east; proceed thence along the northern boundary of the City of Donalsonville until it intersects with Georgia Highway 91, at a point of beginning of District No. 1. 
(2)  The boundaries of District II shall be as follows: 
Beginning at a point where Georgia Highway 91 intersects with the northern boundary of [the] City of Donalsonville; proceed thence southerly along the center of Georgia Highway 91, until it intersects with East Third Street; proceed thence easterly along the center of East Third Street until it intersects with Stern Avenue; proceed thence southerly along the center of Stern Avenue until Stern Avenue intersects with East Fifth Street; proceed thence westerly along the center of East Fifth Street until it intersects with Tallman Avenue; proceed thence southerly along the center of Tallman Avenue until it intersects with East Sixth Street; proceed thence easterly along the center of East Sixth Street until it intersects with Highway 91; proceed thence along the center of Highway 91 until it intersects with the southern boundary of the City of Donalsonville; proceed thence easterly along the southern boundary of the City of Donalsonville until it corners north; proceed thence northerly along the eastern boundary of the City of Donalsonville until it corners west; proceed thence westerly along the northern boundary of the City of Donalsonville until it intersects with Georgia Highway 91, at the point of beginning of District No. 2. 
(c)  The mayor and those councilmembers in office on the effective date of this Act shall continue to serve until the expiration of their terms and until their successors are elected and qualified. 
(1998 Ga. Laws (Act No. 850), page 4395)  
Sec. 5.12. - Regular elections; time for holding. 
The board of commissioners shall cause an election to be held at the city hall or such other place in the city as the mayor and council shall direct and designate. All general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November, 1993, and on such day biennially thereafter. Each elected officer shall serve for a term of four years, the term beginning on January 1 of the year following the officer's election. Notwithstanding any provision of this Charter, no term of office to which a person has been elected prior to the effective date of this Charter shall be shortened or lengthened, except pursuant to the procedures established by state law.  
Sec. 5.13. - Qualifying; absentee ballots; other provisions. 
Except as otherwise provided by this Charter, the mayor and council, by ordinance, may prescribe rules and regulations governing qualifying fees, absentee ballots, write-in votes, challenge of votes, and such other rules and regulations as it deems necessary to fulfill any options and duties under chapter 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended.  
Sec. 5.14. - Election by majority vote. 
The candidate for office shall be elected by a majority vote of the votes cast for each position. The procedures and requirements for election of all elected officers of the city shall be in conformity with the provisions of chapter 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended.  
Sec. 5.15. - Special election; vacancies. 
In the event that the office of mayor shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the council shall order a special election to fill the balance of the unexpired term of the office. In the event that the office of councilmember shall become vacant for any post, the mayor and council shall appoint a successor for the unexpired term of that office. However, no more than two so appointed councilmembers shall hold office at any one time. If one-third or more council posts shall become vacant for any cause whatsoever, the mayor and council shall call a special election to fill the third and succeeding council posts for the unexpired term or terms of that office or succeeding offices. In all other respects, the special election shall be held and conducted in accordance with chapter 3 of title 21 of the O.C.G.A., the "Georgia Municipal Election Code," as now or hereafter amended.  
Sec. 5.16. - Removal of officers. 
(a)  The mayor, councilmembers, or other appointed officers provided for in this Charter shall be removed from office for any one or more of the following causes: 
(1)  Incompetence, misfeasance, or malfeasance in office; 
(2)  Conviction of a crime involving moral turpitude; 
(3)  Failure at any time to possess any of the qualifications of office as provided by this Charter or by law; 
(4)  Knowingly violating any express prohibition of this Charter; 
(5)  Abandonment of office or neglecting to perform the duties of office; or 
(6)  Failure for any other cause to perform the duties of office as required by this Charter or by state law. 
(b)  Removal of an officer pursuant to subsection (a) of this section shall be accomplished by one of the following methods: 
(1)  By the vote of four of the councilmembers after an investigative hearing. In the event an elected officer is sought to be removed by the action of the mayor and council, such officer shall be entitled to a written notice specifying the ground or grounds for removal and to a public hearing which shall be held not less than ten days after the service of such written notice. Any elected officer sought to be removed from office as provided in this [subsection] shall have the right of appeal from the decision of the mayor and council to the Superior Court of Seminole County. Such appeal shall be governed by the same rules as govern appeals to the superior court from the probate court; or 
(2)  By an order of the Superior Court of Seminole County following a hearing on a complaint seeking such removal brought by any resident of the City of Donalsonville.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCE 
 
Sec. 6.10. - Property tax. 
The mayor and council may assess, levy, and collect an ad valorem tax on all real and personal property within the corporate limits of the city that is subject to such taxation by the state and county. This tax is for the purpose of raising revenues to defray the costs of operating the city government, of providing governmental services, for the repayment of principal and interest on general obligations, and for any other public purpose as determined by the mayor and council in their discretion.  
Sec. 6.11. - Millage rate; due dates; payment methods. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall establish a millage rate for the city property tax, a due date, and the time period within which these taxes must be paid. The mayor and council, by ordinance, may provide for the payment of these taxes by installments or in one lump sum, as well as authorize voluntary payment of taxes prior to the time when due.  
Sec. 6.12. - Occupation and business taxes. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the power to levy such occupation or business taxes as are not denied by law. Such taxes may be levied on individuals, corporations, and other entities in accordance with the provisions of article 1 of chapter 13 of title 48 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq.] and other general law. The mayor and council may classify businesses, occupations, professions, or callings for the purpose of such taxation in any way which may be lawful and may compel the payment of such taxes as provided in section 6.18.  
Sec. 6.13. - Licenses; permits; fees. 
In accordance with article 1, chapter 13, title 48 of the O.C.G.A. [O.C.G.A. § 48-13-2 et seq.] and other general law, the mayor and council shall have the power, by ordinance, to require any individuals or corporations who transact business in this city or who practice or offer to practice any profession or calling in this city to obtain a license or permit for such activity from the city and pay a reasonable fee for such license or permit where such activities are actually regulated by the city and are not now regulated by general law in such a way as to preclude city regulations. Such fees may reflect the total cost to the city of regulating the activity and, if unpaid, shall be collected as provided in section 6.18. The mayor and council by ordinance may establish reasonable requirements for obtaining or keeping such licenses as the public health, safety, and welfare necessitate.  
Sec. 6.14. - Franchises. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to grant franchises for the use of this city's streets and alleys for the purposes of railroads, street railways, telephone companies, electric companies, cable telecommunications, gas companies, transportation companies, and other similar organizations. The mayor and council shall determine the duration, terms, whether the same shall be exclusive or nonexclusive, and the consideration for such franchises; provided, however, that no franchise shall be granted for a period in excess of 35 years, and no franchise shall be granted unless the city receives just and adequate compensation therefor. The mayor and council shall provide for the registration of all franchises with the city clerk in a registration book kept by the city clerk. The mayor and council may provide, by ordinance, for the registration within a reasonable time of all franchises previously granted.  
Sec. 6.15. - Service charges. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect fees, charges, and tolls for sewers, sanitary and health services, or any other services provided or made available within and without the corporate limits of the city for the total cost to the city of providing or making available such services. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18.  
Sec. 6.16. - Special assessments. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall have the power to assess and collect the cost of constructing, reconstructing, widening, or improving any public way, street, sidewalk, curbing, gutters, sewers, or other utility mains and appurtenances from the abutting property owners under such terms and conditions as are reasonable. If unpaid, such charges shall be collected as provided in section 6.18.  
Sec. 6.17. - Construction; other taxes. 
This city shall be empowered to levy any other tax allowed now or hereafter by law, and the specific mention of any right, power, or authority in this article shall not be construed as limiting in any way the general powers of this city to govern its local affairs.  
Sec. 6.18. - Collection of delinquent taxes and fees. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, may provide generally for the collection of delinquent taxes, fees, or other revenue due the city under sections 6.10 through 6.17 by whatever reasonable means as are not precluded by law. This shall include providing for the dates when the taxes or fees are due; late penalties or interest; issuance and execution of fi. fa.; creation and priority of liens; making delinquent taxes and fees personal debts of the persons required to pay the taxes or fees imposed; revoking city licenses for failure to pay any city taxes or fees; and providing for the assignment or transfer of tax executions.  
Sec. 6.19. - General obligation bonds. 
The mayor and council shall have the power to issue bonds for the purpose of raising revenue to carry out any project, program, or venture authorized under this Charter or the laws of the state. Such bonding authority shall be exercised in accordance with the laws governing bond issuance by municipalities in effect at the time said issue is undertaken.  
Sec. 6.20. - Revenue bonds. 
Revenue bonds may be issued by the mayor and council as state law now or hereafter provides. Such bonds are to be paid out of any revenue produced by the project, program, or venture for which they were issued.  
Sec. 6.21. - Short-term loans. 
The city may obtain short-term loans and must repay such loans not later than December 31 of each year, unless otherwise provided or allowed by law.  
Sec. 6.22. - Fiscal year. 
The mayor and council shall set the fiscal year by ordinance. This fiscal year shall constitute the budget year and the year for financial accounting and reporting of each and every office, department, agency, and activity of the city government.  
Sec. 6.23. - Preparation of budgets. 
The mayor and council shall provide an ordinance on the procedures and requirements for the preparation and execution of an annual operating budget, a capital improvement program, and a capital budget, including requirements as to the scope, content, and form of such budgets and programs.  
Sec. 6.24. - Submission of operating budget to mayor and council. 
On or before a date fixed by the mayor and council, but not later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the mayor and council a proposed operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year. The budget shall be accompanied by a message from the city manager containing a statement of the general fiscal policies of the city, the important features of the budget, explanations of major changes recommended for the next fiscal year, a general summary of the budget, and such other comments and information as the city manager may deem pertinent. The operating budget, the capital improvements budget, the budget message, and all supporting documents shall be filed in the office of the city clerk and shall be open to public inspection.  
Sec. 6.25. - Action by mayor and council on budget. 
(a)  The mayor and council may amend the operating budget proposed by the city manager, except that the budget as finally amended and adopted must provide for all expenditures required by state law or by other provisions of this Charter and for all debt service requirements for the ensuing fiscal year, and the total appropriations from any fund shall not exceed the estimated fund balance, reserves, and revenues. 
(b)  The mayor and council, by ordinance, shall adopt the final operating budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than the May 20 of each year. If the mayor and council fail to adopt the budget by this date, the amounts appropriated for operation for the current fiscal year shall be deemed adopted for the ensuing fiscal year on a month-to-month basis, with items prorated accordingly until such time as the mayor and council adopt a budget for the ensuing fiscal year. Adoption of the budget shall take the form of an appropriations ordinance setting out the estimated revenues in detail by sources and making appropriations according to fund and by organizational unit, purpose, or activity as set out in the budget preparation ordinance adopted pursuant to section 6.23. 
(c)  The amount set out in the adopted operating budget for each organizational unit shall constitute the annual appropriation for such organizational unit, and no expenditure shall be made or encumbrance created in excess of the otherwise unencumbered balance of the appropriations or allotment thereof to which it is chargeable.  
Sec. 6.26. - Tax levies. 
Following adoption of the operating budget, the mayor and council shall levy, by ordinance, such taxes as are necessary. The taxes and tax rates set by such ordinance shall be such that reasonable estimates of revenues from such levy shall at least be sufficient, together with other anticipated revenues, fund balances, and applicable reserves, to equal the total amount appropriated for each of the several funds set forth in the annual operating budget for defraying the expenses of the general government of the city.  
Sec. 6.27. - Changes in appropriations. 
The mayor and council, by ordinance, may make changes in the appropriations contained in the current operating budget at any regular, special, or emergency meeting called for such purpose, but any additional appropriations may be made only from an existing unexpended surplus.  
Sec. 6.28. - Capital improvements budget. 
(a)  On or before the date fixed by the mayor and council, but no later than 30 days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the city manager shall submit to the mayor and council a proposed capital improvements budget with recommendations as to the means of financing the improvements proposed for the ensuing fiscal year. The mayor and council shall have power to accept, with or without amendments, or reject the proposed program and proposed means of financing. The mayor and council shall not authorize an expenditure for the construction of any building, structure, work, or improvement unless the appropriations for such project are included in the capital improvements budget, except to meet a public emergency as provided in section 2.24. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall adopt, by ordinance, the final capital improvements budget for the ensuing fiscal year not later than May 20 of each year. No appropriation provided for in a prior capital improvements budget shall lapse until the purpose for which the appropriation was made shall have been accomplished or abandoned; provided, however, that the city manager may submit amendments to the capital improvements budget at any time during the fiscal year, accompanied by recommendations. Any such amendments to the capital improvements budget shall become effective only upon adoption by ordinance.  
Sec. 6.29. - Independent audit. 
There shall be an annual independent audit of all city accounts, funds, and financial transactions by a certified public accountant selected by the mayor and council. The audit shall be conducted according to generally accepted accounting principles. Any audit of any funds by the state or federal government may be accepted as satisfying the requirements of this Charter. Copies of all audit reports shall be available to the public at printing costs.  
Sec. 6.30. - Contracting procedures. 
No contract with the city shall be binding on the city unless it is: 
(1)  In writing; 
(2)  Drawn by or submitted and reviewed by the city attorney and, as a matter of course, is signed by the city attorney to indicate such drafting or review; and 
(3)  Made or authorized by the mayor and council, and such approval is entered in the journal of the mayor and council of proceedings pursuant to section [2.20].  
Sec. 6.31. - Centralized purchasing. 
The mayor and council shall by ordinance prescribe procedures for a system of centralized purchasing for the city.  
Sec. 6.32. - Sale of city property. 
(a)  The mayor and council may sell and convey any real or personal property owned or held by the city for governmental or other purposes as now or hereafter provided by law. 
(b)  The mayor and council may quitclaim any rights it may have in property not needed for public purposes upon report by the city manager and adoption of a resolution, both finding that the property is not needed for public or other purposes and that the interest of the city has no readily ascertainable monetary value. 
(c)  Whenever, in opening, extending, or widening any street, avenue, alley, or public place of the city, a small parcel or tract of land is cut off or separated by such work from a larger tract or boundary of land owned by the city, the mayor and council may authorize the city manager to execute and deliver, in the name of the city, a deed conveying said cut-off or separated parcel or tract of land to an abutting or adjoining property owner or owners in exchange for rights-of-way of said street, avenue, alley, or public place when such swap is deemed to be in the best interest of the city. All deeds and conveyances heretofore and hereafter so executed and delivered shall convey all title and interest the city has in such property, notwithstanding the fact that no public sale after advertisement was or is hereafter made.  
ARTICLE VII. - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 7.10. - Bonds for officials. 
The officers and employees of this city, both elective and appointive, shall execute such surety or fidelity bonds in such amounts and upon such terms and conditions as the mayor and council shall from time to time require by ordinance or as may be provided by law.  
Sec. 7.11. - Prior ordinances. 
All ordinances, resolutions, rules, and regulations now in force in the city not inconsistent with this Charter are hereby declared valid and of full effect and force until amended or repealed by the mayor and council.  
Sec. 7.12. - Existing personnel and officers. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all personnel and officers of the city and their rights, privileges, and powers shall continue as is beyond the time this Charter takes effect, unless the existing city council shall pass a transition ordinance detailing the changes in personnel and appointive officers required or desired and arrange such titles, rights, privileges, and powers as may be required or desired to allow a reasonable transition.  
Sec. 7.13. - Pending matters. 
Except as specifically provided otherwise by this Charter, all rights, claims, actions, orders, contracts, and legal or administrative proceedings shall continue, and any such ongoing work or cases shall be completed by such city agencies, personnel, or offices as may be provided by the mayor and council.  
Sec. 7.14. - Construction. 
(a)  Section captions in this Charter are informative only and are not to be considered as a part of the Charter. 
(b)  The word "shall" is mandatory and the word "may" is permissive. 
(c)  The singular shall include the plural, the masculine shall include the feminine, and vice versa.  
Sec. 7.15. - Severability. 
If any article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof of this Charter shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional, such invalidity or unconstitutionality shall not affect or impair other parts of this Charter unless it clearly appears that such other parts are wholly and necessarily dependent upon the part held to be invalid or unconstitutional, it being the legislative intent in enacting this Charter that each article, section, subsection, paragraph, sentence, or part thereof be enacted separately and independent of each other.  
Sec. 7.16. - Effective date. 
This Charter shall become effective on January 1, 1998.  
Sec. 7.17. - Repealer. 
An Act incorporating the City of Donalsonville in the County of Seminole, approved April 10, 1971 (1971 Ga. [Laws] [(Act. No. 734)], p. 3844), is hereby repealed in its entirety and all amendatory acts thereto are likewise repealed in their entirety. All other laws and parts of laws in conflict with this Charter are repealed.  
Chapter 1 - GENERAL PROVISIONS 
 
Sec. 1-1. - Designation and citation of Code. 
The provisions embraced in the following chapters and sections shall constitute and be designated "The Code of Ordinances of the City of Donalsonville, Georgia," and may be so cited. Such Code may also be cited as "Donalsonville Code." 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-1; Code 1996, § 1-1)  
Sec. 1-2. - Definitions and rules of construction. 
In the construction of this Code and of all ordinances, the following definitions and rules of construction shall be observed, unless inconsistent with the manifest intent of council or the context clearly requires otherwise: 
Bond. When a bond is required, an undertaking in writing shall be sufficient. 
City. The term "city" or "the city" means the City of Donalsonville in the County of Seminole and the State of Georgia, except as otherwise provided. 
City council. The term "city council" or "the council" means the mayor and council of Donalsonville. 
City manager. The term "city manager" means the city manager of Donalsonville, Georgia. 
Code. The term "Code" means The Code of Ordinances of the City of Donalsonville, Georgia, as designated in section 1-1. 
Computation of time. Except as otherwise provided by time period computations specifically applying to other laws, when a period of time measured in days, weeks, months, years or other measurements of time except hours is prescribed for the exercise of any privilege or the discharge of any duty, the first day shall not be counted but the last day shall be counted; and, if the last day falls on a Saturday or Sunday, the party having such privilege or duty shall have through the following Monday to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the last day prescribed for such action falls on a public and legal holiday, as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 1-4-1, the party having the privilege or duty shall have through the next business day to exercise the privilege or to discharge the duty. When the period of time prescribed is less than seven days, intermediate Saturdays, Sundays and legal holidays shall be excluded in the computation. 
County. The term "county" or "the county" means the County of Seminole, State of Georgia. 
Day. The term "day" means a calendar day of 24 hours. 
Delegation of authority. Whenever a provision appears requiring the head of a department or an officer of the city to do some act or make certain inspections, it is to be construed to authorize the head of the department or an officer to designate, delegate and authorize subordinates to perform the required act or make the required inspection, unless the terms of the provision or section designate otherwise. 
Gender. Words importing the masculine gender shall include the feminine and neuter. 
Joint authority. All terms giving a joint authority to three or more persons or officers shall be construed as giving such authority to a majority of such persons or officers, except when such terms are used to grant authority to the mayor and council. 
Keeper and proprietor. The terms "keeper" and "proprietor" mean and include persons, firms, associations, corporations, receivers, trustees, personal representatives, clubs and partnerships, whether acting by themselves or through a servant, agent or employee. 
Month. The term "month" means a calendar month. 
Names of officers, employees, departments, boards, commissions, or agencies. The name or title of any officer, employee, department, board, commission, or agency shall be read as though the words "of the City of Donalsonville" were added thereto. 
Nontechnical and technical terms. Words and phrases shall be construed according to the common and approved usage of the language; but technical terms and phrases and such others as may have acquired a peculiar and appropriate meaning in law shall be construed and understood according to such meaning. 
Number. Words used in the singular include the plural and the plural includes the singular number. 
O.C.G.A. The abbreviation "O.C.G.A." means the Official Code of Georgia Annotated. 
Oath. The term "oath" shall be construed to include an affirmation in all cases in which, by law, an affirmation may be substituted for an oath, and in such cases, the terms "swear" and "sworn" shall be equivalent to the terms "affirm" and "affirmed." 
Or, and. The term "or" may be read "and," and the term "and" may be read "or," if the sense requires it. 
Owner. The term "owner," applied to a building or land, includes any part owner, joint owner, tenant in common, joint tenant or tenant by the entirety, of the whole or a part of such building or land. 
Penal ordinances. The rules of construction and definitions of terms as contained in the penal code of the state, insofar as they can be made applicable, are hereby adopted as governing the penal ordinances of the city. 
Person. The term "person" includes a corporation, firm, partnership, association, organization and any other group acting as a unit, as well as an individual. 
Personal property. The term "personal property" includes every species of property except real property. 
Preceding and following. The terms "preceding" and "following" mean next before and next after, respectively. 
Premises. Whenever the term "premises" is used, it means place or places. 
Property. The term "property" means and includes real and personal property. 
Public place. The term "public place" means any park, cemetery, schoolyard or open space adjacent thereto, or any area available and/or accessible to the public, regardless of whether privately or publicly owned. 
Real property. The term "real property" includes lands, tenements and hereditaments. 
Residence. The term "residence" means the place adopted by a person as his place of habitation, and to which, whenever he is absent, he has the intention of returning. When a person eats at one place and sleeps at another, the place where such person sleeps shall be deemed his residence. 
Schedule of fees and charges. The term "schedule of fees and charges" means the official consolidated list maintained in the city clerk's office which lists any fees and charges determined by the mayor and council, or their designee, including rates for utility or other public enterprises, fees of any nature, deposit amounts and various charges as determined from time to time by the city council. 
Seal. The term "seal" means the city seal. 
Shall and may. The term "shall" is mandatory; the term "may" is permissive. 
Sheriff. The term "sheriff" means the sheriff of Seminole County, Georgia. 
Sidewalk. The term "sidewalk" means any portion of a street between the curbline and the adjacent property line, intended for the use of pedestrians, but shall not include any unimproved areas between the curbline and improved walkways. 
Signature or subscription. The term "signature" or "subscription" includes a mark when the person cannot write. 
State. The terms "state" and "the state" mean the State of Georgia. 
Street. The term "street" means and includes any public way, road, highway, street, avenue, boulevard, parkway, alley, lane, viaduct, bridge and the approaches thereto within the city. 
Tenant or occupant. The term "tenant" or "occupant," applied to a building or land, includes any person who occupies the whole or a part of such building or land, whether alone or with others. 
Tense. Words used in the past or present tense include the future as well as the past and present. 
Week. The term "week" means a calendar week of seven days. 
Written and in writing. The terms "written" and in writing mean and include printing and any other mode of representing words and letters. 
Year. The term "year" means a calendar year. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-2; Code 1996, § 1-2) 
State Law reference— Computation of time, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1; statutory definitions and rules of construction, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-1 et seq.; construction of definitions, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-2; meaning of certain words, O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; time, O.C.G.A. § 9-11-6.  
Sec. 1-3. - Catchlines of sections; history notes and references. 
(a)  The catchlines of sections in this Code printed in boldface type, italics or otherwise are intended as mere catchwords to indicate the contents of the section, and shall not be deemed or taken to be titles of such sections, nor as any part of the section, nor, unless expressly so provided, shall they be so deemed when any of such sections, including the catchlines, are amended or reenacted. 
(b)  The history notes appearing in parentheses after each section and the references and editor's notes scattered throughout the Code are for the benefit of the user of the Code and shall have no legal effect. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-3; Code 1996, § 1-3) 
State Law reference— Notes and catchlines of code sections not part of law, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-7.  
Sec. 1-4. - Severability of parts of Code. 
It is hereby declared to be the intention of the city council that the sections, paragraphs, sentences, clauses and phrases of this Code are severable, and if any phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section of this Code shall be declared unconstitutional by the valid judgment or decree of any court of competent jurisdiction, such unconstitutionality shall not affect any of the remaining phrases, clauses, sentences, paragraphs and sections of this Code, since the same would have been enacted by the council without the incorporation in the Code of any such unconstitutional phrase, clause, sentence, paragraph or section. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-5; Code 1996, § 1-4) 
State Law reference— Severability, O.C.G.A. § 1-1-3.  
Sec. 1-5. - Effect of repeal or expiration of ordinance. 
(a)  The repeal of an ordinance, or its expiration by virtue of any provision contained therein, shall not affect any right accrued or any offense committed, any penalty or punishment incurred or any proceeding commenced before the repeal took effect or the ordinance expired. 
(b)  When an ordinance which repealed another shall itself be repealed, the previous ordinance shall not be revived without express words to that effect. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-4; Code 1996, § 1-5)  
Sec. 1-6. - Supplementation of Code. 
(a)  By contract or by city personnel, supplements to this Code shall be prepared at least on an annual basis. A supplement to the Code shall include all substantive, permanent and general parts of ordinances passed by the city council during the period covered by the supplement and all changes made thereby in the Code. The pages of a supplement shall be so numbered that they will fit properly into the Code and will, where necessary, replace pages which have become obsolete or partially obsolete, and the new pages shall be so prepared that, when they have been inserted, the Code will be current through the date of the adoption of the latest ordinance included in the supplement. 
(b)  In preparing a supplement to this Code, all portions of the Code which have been repealed shall be excluded from the Code by the omission thereof from reprinted pages. 
(c)  When preparing a supplement to this Code, the codifier (meaning the person authorized to prepare the supplement) may make formal, non-substantive changes in ordinances and parts of ordinances included in the supplement, insofar as it is necessary to do so to embody them into a unified Code. For example, the codifier may: 
(1)  Organize the ordinance material into appropriate subdivisions. 
(2)  Provide appropriate catchlines, headings and titles for sections and other subdivisions of the Code printed in the supplement, and make changes in such catchlines, headings and titles. 
(3)  Assign appropriate numbers to sections and other subdivisions to be inserted in the Code and, where necessary to accommodate new material, change an existing section or change other subdivision numbers. 
(4)  Change the words "this ordinance" or words of the same meaning to "this chapter," "this article," "this division," etc., as the case may be, or to "sections _____ to _____" (inserting section numbers to indicate the sections of the Code which embody the substantive sections of the ordinance incorporated into the Code). 
(5)  Make other non-substantive changes necessary to preserve the original meanings of ordinance sections inserted into the Code; but in no case shall the codifier make any change in the meaning or effect of ordinance material included in the supplement or already embodied in the Code. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-6; Code 1996, § 1-6)  
Sec. 1-7. - Ordinances not affected by Code. 
(a)  Nothing in this Code or the ordinance adopting this Code shall be construed to repeal or otherwise affect the validity of any of the following: 
(1)  Any offense or act committed or done or any penalty or forfeiture incurred or any contract or right established or accruing before the effective date of this Code. 
(2)  Any ordinance or resolution promising or guaranteeing the payment of money for the city or authorizing the issuance of any bonds of the city or any evidence of the city's indebtedness. 
(3)  Any contract or obligation assumed by the city. 
(4)  Any ordinance fixing the salary of any city officer or employee. 
(5)  Any right or franchise granted by the city. 
(6)  Any ordinance dedicating, naming, establishing, locating, relocating, opening, widening, paving, etc., any street or public way in the city. 
(7)  Any appropriation ordinance. 
(8)  Any ordinance which, by its own terms, is effective for a stated or limited term. 
(9)  Any ordinance providing for compensation, pension or retirement benefits, including, but not limited to: 
a.  Sections 2-5-11 through 2-5-17 of the 1984 Code of Ordinances, City of Donalsonville, extending Social Security benefits to the employees and officials of the city. 
b.  An ordinance adopted September 6, 1973, establishing a retirement plan for the employees of the city, and all amendments thereof. 
c.  An ordinance adopted February 26, 1991, to subscribe to a plan of employee benefits through the Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System for employees of the city. 
(10)  Any ordinance providing for local improvements and assessing taxes therefor. 
(11)  Any zoning ordinance. 
(12)  Any ordinance dedicating or accepting any subdivision plat. 
(13)  Any ordinance describing or altering the boundaries of the city. 
(14)  The administrative ordinances or resolutions of the city not in conflict or inconsistent with the provisions of this Code. 
(15)  Any ordinance levying or imposing taxes not included herein. 
(16)  Any ordinance establishing or prescribing street grades in the city. 
(b)  No such ordinance shall be construed to revive any ordinance or part thereof that has been repealed by a subsequent ordinance which is repealed by this chapter; and all such ordinances are hereby recognized as continuing in full force and effect to the same extent as if set out at length herein. 
(Code 1996, § 1-7)  
Sec. 1-8. - Provisions considered continuations of existing ordinances. 
The provisions appearing in this Code, so far as they are the same as ordinances adopted prior to this Code and included in such Code, shall be considered as continuations thereof and not as new enactments. 
(Code 1996, § 1-8)  
Sec. 1-9. - Amendments to Code. 
(a)  All ordinances passed subsequent to this Code which amend, repeal or in any way affect this Code may be numbered in accordance with the numbering system of this Code and printed for inclusion herein. In the case of repealed chapters, sections and subsections or any part thereof, by subsequent ordinances, such repealed portions may be excluded from the Code by omission from reprinted pages affected thereby. The subsequent ordinances as numbered and printed or omitted, in the case of repeal, shall be prima facie evidence of such subsequent ordinances until such time that this Code and subsequent ordinances numbered or omitted are readopted as a new Code by the city council. 
(b)  Amendments to any of the provisions of this Code may be made by amending such provisions by specific reference to the section number of this Code. 
(c)  If a new section (or article or chapter) not heretofore existing in the Code is to be added, the following language may be used: "That The Code of Ordinances of the City of Donalsonville, Georgia, is hereby amended by adding a section (or article or chapter) to be numbered _____, which section reads as follows:…." The new section may then be set out in full as desired. 
(d)  All sections, articles, chapters or provisions desired to be repealed should be specifically repealed by section, article or chapter number, as the case may be. 
(Code 1996, § 1-9)  
Sec. 1-10. - Altering Code. 
It shall be unlawful for any person in the city to change or amend by additions or deletions any part or portion of this Code, or to insert or delete pages, or portions thereof, or to alter or tamper with such Code in any manner whatsoever which will cause the law of the city to be misrepresented thereby, unless so authorized by ordinance or resolution or other official act of the city council. Any person violating this section shall be punished as provided in section 1-11. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-7; Code 1996, § 1-10) 
State Law reference— Altering, falsifying or stealing public records unlawful, O.C.G.A. § 45-11-1.  
Sec. 1-11. - General penalty; continuing violations. 
(a)  Whenever in this Code or in any ordinance of the city any act is prohibited or is made or declared to be unlawful or an offense, or whenever in this Code or any ordinance the doing of any act is required and the failure to do such act is declared to be unlawful, and no specific penalty is provided therefor, and unless otherwise provided by state law, the violation of any such provision of this Code or any such ordinance shall be punished by a fine not to exceed $1,000.00 and imprisonment in the city prison or in the county jail and work and labor on the streets or public works of the city, whether within or without the corporate limits, not exceeding six months, or both a fine and sentence of imprisonment and labor, and all sentences may be in the alternative and fines may be imposed with the alternative of sentence to imprisonment and labor, in the event the fines are not paid. Each day any violation of this Code or of any ordinance shall continue shall constitute a separate offense. 
(b)  The judge of the municipal court shall have the power and authority to: 
(1)  Impose upon persons convicted in the municipal court the fines provided for in this Code or the ordinances of the city, or as otherwise provided by law, with the alternative of other punishment allowed by law, in the event that such fines are not paid; 
(2)  Sentence such person to community service work; or 
(3)  Impose a sentence consisting of any combination of the penalties provided for in this section. 
(c)  The judge of the municipal court shall have full power and authority to declare the forfeiture of bonds given by offenders for their appearance before the municipal court upon the offender's failure to appear as provided for in such bond; the procedure for the forfeiture of such bonds shall be as is provided for the forfeiture of bonds and recognizances set forth in O.C.G.A. § 17-6-70 et seq. 
(Code 1984, § 1-1-8; Code 1996, § 1-11) 
State Law reference— Additional penalty to be imposed in criminal and traffic cases to provide training to law enforcement officers and prosecuting officials, O.C.G.A. § 15-21-73; punishment for misdemeanors generally, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3; deposit of driver's license for violations of laws pertaining to traffic and motor vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 17-6-11; alternative punishments for violations involving a traffic offense, O.C.G.A. § 17-10-3(e).  
Sec. 1-12. - Liability for violations by corporations and other associations. 
(a)  Any violation of this Code by any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization, while acting within the scope of his office or employment, shall in every case also be deemed to be a violation by such corporation, association or organization. 
(b)  Any officer, agent or other person acting for or employed by any corporation or unincorporated association or organization shall be subject and liable to punishment as well as such corporation or unincorporated association or organization for the violation by it of any provisions of this Code, where such violation was the act or omission, or the result of the act, omission or order, of any such person. 
(Code 1996, § 1-12)  
Chapter 2 - ADMINISTRATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-3-1 et seq.; powers of municipal corporations generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-1 et seq.; powers relating to administration of municipal government generally, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2; provisions applicable to counties and municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-1 et seq.; provisions applicable to counties and municipal corporations, O.C.G.A. § 36-80-1 et seq.; home rule for municipalities, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IX, ¶ II; supplemental powers of municipalities and counties enumerated, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 2-1—2-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - MAYOR AND COUNCIL  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Secs. 2-19—2-39. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - MEETINGS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Meetings to be open to public, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1; due notice requirements for other than regular meetings, requirement to prescribe the time, place and dates of regular meetings of governing authority, O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(d). 
 
Sec. 2-40. - Regular meetings. 
Regular meetings of the mayor and council are held at the city hall, or at such other place as may be designated, on the first Tuesday of each month at a time as established by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-1; Code 1996, § 2-46)  
Sec. 2-41. - Adjourned meetings. 
If a quorum shall fail to attend any regular or special meeting of the mayor and council or if, for any reason, any meeting shall fail to complete transaction of the business before the end of the meeting, the meeting may be adjourned to any date prior to the next regular meeting, agreed upon by a majority of the members present, so long as any meeting is scheduled and noticed consistent with the requirements of the Charter. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-2; Code 1996, § 2-47)  
Sec. 2-42. - Order of business. 
(a)  The order of business at all regular meetings of the mayor and council shall be as follows: 
(1)  Approval or correction and approval of minutes of last meeting; 
(2)  Appearances; 
(3)  Permit and license applications; 
(4)  Internal matters and reports; 
(5)  Old business; 
(6)  New business; 
(7)  Other business; and 
(8)  Adjournment. 
(b)  If the mayor and council directs any matter to be the special business of a future meeting, that matter shall have precedence over all other business at that future meeting. 
(c)  No proposition shall be entertained by the mayor and council until it has been seconded, and every proposition shall, when required by the mayor or any member, be reduced to writing. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-3; Code 1996, § 2-48)  
Sec. 2-43. - Rules of procedure. 
Except as otherwise provided by ordinance, the procedures of the mayor and council shall be governed by Robert's Rules of Order, Newly Revised. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-4; Code 1996, § 2-49)  
Sec. 2-44. - Previous questions. 
The previous questions may be called at any time by a majority of the members present. The ayes and nays may be called for by any member. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-5; Code 1996, § 2-50)  
Sec. 2-45. - Motions having precedence. 
(a)  When a question is under consideration, no motion shall be received except as follows: 
(1)  Lay on the table; 
(2)  Postpone to a time certain; 
(3)  Postpone indefinitely; 
(4)  Refer to a committee; 
(5)  Amend; 
(6)  Strike out or insert; or 
(7)  Divide. 
(b)  Motions for any of these purposes shall have precedence in the order named. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-6; Code 1996, § 2-51)  
Sec. 2-46. - Motion to adjourn. 
A motion to adjourn shall always be in order and shall be decided without debate. 
(Code 1984, § 2-1-7; Code 1996, § 2-52)  
Sec. 2-47. - Executive session minutes. 
(a)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e)(2)(C), when the city holds an executive session, they shall ensure that: 
(1)  Minutes of executive sessions shall be recorded but shall not be open to the public; 
(2)  Such minutes shall specify each issue discussed in executive session and that if matters subject to the attorney-client privilege are discussed, then the fact that an attorney-client privilege discussion occurred and its subject matter shall be identified, but the substance of the discussion need not be recorded and shall not be identified in the minutes; 
(3)  Such minutes shall be kept and preserved for in camera and in chambers for inspection by an appropriate court, should a dispute arise as to the propriety of any executive session; and 
(4)  Minutes may be made and records kept by the city clerk or a person temporarily appointed to take such minutes so long as the minutes accurately reflect the record of the meeting, subject to the limitations provided herein. 
(b)  The mayor or the mayor's designee, which may include the clerk, shall record minutes of executive sessions of the mayor and city council. 
(c)  Prior to the conclusion of the executive session, all members of the mayor and city council attending the executive session shall review the minutes recorded. 
(d)  Following the conclusion of the executive session, and upon approval of such confidential minutes by a majority of the members in an open meeting, the minutes of the executive session recorded and approved, in accord with the terms hereof and as noted on the minutes, shall be transmitted to the city clerk to be placed in proper form and kept in a confidential file and preserved for in camera and in chambers for inspection in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 50-14-1(e)(2)(C). 
(Res. of 9-1-2015(1))  
Secs. 2-48—2-67. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFICERS AND EMPLOYEES[3] 
Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Personal liability of councilmembers and other municipal officers, O.C.G.A. § 36-33-4; power to define, regulate and alter the powers, duties, qualifications, compensation and tenure of municipal officers, agents and employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(2); Fair Employment Practices Act of 1978, O.C.G.A. § 45-19-20 et seq.; municipal or county governments not to require residence as condition of employment, O.C.G.A. § 45-2-5. 
 
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 2-68. - City clerk; duties. 
In addition to the duties of the city clerk under the Charter, the city clerk shall perform the following duties: 
(1)  Preserve the codes, records and documents belonging to the city and maintain a proper index to all records and documents; 
(2)  Receive all money due the city, including taxes, licenses and fees, and pay out the money only upon orders of the mayor and council; and 
(3)  Perform any other duties as may be required by the city manager. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-1; Code 1996, § 2-71)  
Sec. 2-69. - City attorney; duties. 
The city attorney shall be the legal advisor and representative of the city and in that capacity shall: 
(1)  Prepare ordinances when so requested by the mayor and council; 
(2)  Prepare for execution all contracts and instruments to which the city is a party when so requested and approve, as to form, all ordinances, bonds and city contracts; and 
(3)  Render any other legal services as may be required by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-2; Code 1996, § 2-72)  
Secs. 2-70—2-96. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - CITY MANAGER 
 
Sec. 2-97. - General responsibilities. 
The city manager is responsible for the overall administration of city government, including personnel, budgets, purchasing, grants, insurance and pensions and maintenance. 
(Code 1996, § 2-91)  
Sec. 2-98. - Purpose of position; scope and affect. 
(a)  The purpose of the position of city manager is to administer all phases of city government. The work is made complex by the multitude and variety of tasks to be completed and by the necessity for dealing with public input, which can be conflicting or critical. 
(b)  The purpose of the position of city manager is to assist the city council in seeing that the city's government operates according to state law and city ordinances. Successful performance in this position facilitates work of all city departments, ensures that grant monies are obtained and used properly, ensures that city services are delivered, and ensures that city records are properly retained and enhances the image of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 2-92)  
Sec. 2-99. - Use of guidelines. 
Guidelines to be used by the city manager consist of all city ordinances, applicable state and federal laws, grant application instructions, city policies and procedures, and directives from the city council. These guidelines require selection, judgment and interpretation in application. 
(Code 1996, § 2-93)  
Sec. 2-100. - Qualifications. 
Minimum qualifications for the position of city manager are as follows: 
(1)  Knowledge and level of competency commonly associated with the completion of a baccalaureate degree in a course of study related to this occupational field, or a combination of college education, training and experience sufficient to adequately prepare an individual to serve in this position. 
(2)  Experience sufficient to thoroughly understand the diverse objectives and functions of the subunits in the division/department in order to direct and coordinate work within the division/department, usually interpreted to require three to five years of related experience. 
(3)  Knowledge of the principles and practices of public administration. 
(4)  Knowledge of the techniques used in the grant application process. 
(5)  Knowledge of the city codes and ordinances and other regulations, policies and procedures. 
(6)  Knowledge of budget preparation and finance. 
(7)  Knowledge of the functions, organization and operations of all city departments. 
(8)  Knowledge of the city's demographic and economic profile, including the industrial base. 
(9)  Knowledge of the principles and practices of effective public relations. 
(10)  Knowledge of state and federal laws in all areas applicable to city government, including unemployment, wage and hour, EEOC, taxes, worker's compensation, pensions and others. 
(11)  Skill in written and oral communications. 
(Code 1996, § 2-94)  
Sec. 2-101. - Major duties. 
The city manager shall have the following duties: 
(1)  Administer all operations of city government. 
(2)  Serve as personnel officer by appointing, supervising and evaluating employees, with the exception of the city attorney, in conformity to the city personnel rules and regulations. 
(3)  See that all laws and ordinances of the city are enforced. 
(4)  Supervise and direct daily operations of all city departments. 
(5)  Develop materials and reports for meetings of the city council and implement decisions and directives of the council. 
(6)  Prepare the city budget by consulting with department heads, elected officials and the city council, make and implement recommendations and control income and expenditures. 
(7)  Keep the city council fully advised as to the financial condition of the city by monthly financial and administrative reports. Special reports from the city manager may be required. 
(8)  Supervise the performance of all street and other contracts made for the city and assist the city council in acquiring rights-of-way for street projects. 
(9)  Develop applications for and administer grants such as, but not limited to, community development block grants, department of community affairs grants, Environment Protection Agency grants and state department of transportation grants. 
(10)  Act as liaison between the city council and the public and media by responding to inquiries and resolving conflicts. 
(11)  Provide reports and information and any other related duties for the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 2-95)  
Sec. 2-102. - Supervisory control. 
The mayor and council assigns work on the basis of standing goals, objectives and priorities. The city manager must use much judgment in deciding how to accomplish goals. The supervisor provides guidance for problematic situations and spot checks work for the nature and propriety of final results. 
(Code 1996, § 2-96)  
Sec. 2-103. - Personal contacts. 
(a)  Contacts are typically with employees in all city departments, members of the city council, employees of the state, representatives of organizations and the public at large. 
(b)  Contacts are typically for exchange of information relevant to city administrative activities, provision of guidance to city employees, response to inquiries from the public, and provision of information about the county to the state and others. 
(Code 1996, § 2-97)  
Secs. 2-104—2-134. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DEPARTMENTS 
 
Sec. 2-135. - Established. 
The following departments of the city are hereby established: 
(1)  Administration; 
(2)  Police; 
(3)  Fire; 
(4)  Utilities; 
(5)  Public works. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-3; Code 1996, § 2-116)  
Sec. 2-136. - Records management. 
(a)  The general government department is responsible for records management activities, and this department shall designate a person or officer to act for and on behalf of the mayor and council in directing and coordinating all records management matters, including maintenance and security of records. 
(b)  No record shall be destroyed except in accordance with approved retention schedules. 
(c)  Whenever any records are destroyed, a certificate of destruction shall be prepared and forwarded to the mayor and council which shall show the type of records destroyed, the approved retention schedule number, the dates covered, and the volume destroyed. 
(Code 1984, § 2-4-4; Code 1996, § 2-117) 
State Law reference— Records management plans for local governments, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-90; records management plan required, O.C.G.A. § 50-18-99(e).  
Secs. 2-137—2-155. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - EMPLOYEE BENEFITS[4] 

Footnotes: 
--- (4) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to maintain and modify retirement or pension systems, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(14); Social Security coverage for employees of the state and political subdivisions of the state, O.C.G.A. § 47-18-1 et seq.; Public Retirement Systems Standards Law, O.C.G.A. § 47-20-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 2-156. - Personnel rules and regulations. 
The mayor and council shall have the authority to establish such rules, regulations, procedures and standards governing the employment of personnel and relating to sick leave, emergency leave and vacation leave as may be deemed necessary to ensure equitable and effective personnel administration. Copies of any such rules and regulations shall be maintained on file in the office of the city clerk where they shall be available for inspection by any city officer or employee or any member of the public. 
(Code 1984, § 2-5-1; Code 1996, § 2-146) 
State Law reference— Authority to establish retirement systems for municipal employees, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-2(4); authority of municipality to provide insurance, retirement and pension benefits, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-4; Georgia Municipal Employees Benefit System, O.C.G.A. § 47-5-1 et seq.  
Secs. 2-157—2-180. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - FINANCES[5] 

Footnotes: 
--- (5) --- 
State Law reference— Grants of state funds to municipalities, O.C.G.A. § 36-40-1 et seq.; local government budgets and audits, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-1 et seq.; preparation of proposed budget, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-5; adoption of budget ordinance, O.C.G.A. § 36-81-6. 
 
Sec. 2-181. - Purchases. 
(a)  Emergency or routine. All departments of the city are authorized to make emergency or routine purchases not in excess of $250.00, provided a purchase order in triplicate has been issued and signed by the head of the department making the purchase. 
(b)  Purchase order between $250.00 and $5,000.00. Whenever a purchase order is issued by a department head in excess of $250.00, but not exceeding $5,000.00, the department head shall obtain the signature of the city manager as a second signature on the purchase order. The city manager is authorized to issue purchase orders, either individually or as second signature, on purchases up to $5,000.00. 
(c)  Purchase order over $5,000.00. When a purchase order is issued for a purchase in excess of $5,000.00, approval to do so shall be obtained from the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-1; Code 1996, § 2-176; Ord. of 5-7-1991) 
State Law reference— Multiyear lease, purchase or lease-purchase contracts, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-13.  
Sec. 2-182. - Duty of clerk to present financial statement. 
It shall be the duty of the city clerk to present a financial statement at each regular monthly meeting of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 3-1-2; Code 1996, § 2-177)  
Chapter 4 - ALCOHOLIC BEVERAGES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 4-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meaning ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alcohol means ethyl alcohol, hydrated oxide of ethyl or spirits of wine, from whatever source or by whatever process produced. 
Alcoholic beverages means all alcohol, distilled spirits, beer, malt beverage, wine or fortified wine. 
Distilled spirits means any alcoholic beverage obtained by distillation or containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume, including, but not limited to, all fortified wines. 
Fortified wine means any alcoholic beverage containing more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "fortified wine" includes, but is not limited to, brandy. 
Gallon or wine gallon means a United States gallon of liquid measure equivalent to the volume of 231 cubic inches or the nearest equivalent metric measurement. 
Importer means any person who imports an alcoholic beverage into this state from a foreign country and sells the alcoholic beverage to another importer, broker, or wholesaler and who maintains a stock of alcoholic beverages. 
Malt beverage means any alcoholic beverage obtained by the fermentation of any infusion or decoction of barley, malt, hops, or any similar product, or any combination of such products in water, containing not more than six percent alcohol by volume and including ale, porter, brown, stout, lager beer, small beer and strong beer. The term "malt beverage" does not include sake, known as Japanese rice wine. 
Manufacturer means any maker, producer or bottler of an alcoholic beverage. The term "manufacturer" also means: 
(1)  In the case of distilled spirits, any person engaged in distilling, rectifying, or blending any distilled spirits; 
(2)  In the case of malt beverages, any brewer; and 
(3)  In the case of wine, any vintner. 
Package means a bottle, can, keg, barrel or other original consumer container. 
Retail consumption dealer means any person who sells distilled spirits for consumption on the premises at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Retailer or retail dealer means, except as to distilled spirits, any person who sells alcoholic beverages, either in unbroken packages or for consumption on the premises, at retail only to consumers and not for resale. With respect to distilled spirits, the term "retailer" or "retail dealer" means any person who sells distilled spirits in unbroken packages at retail only to consumers and not for resale. 
Shipper means any person who ships an alcoholic beverage from outside this state. 
Standard case means six containers of 1.75 liters, 12 containers of 750 milliliters, 12 containers of one liter, 24 containers of 500 milliliters, 24 containers of 375 milliliters, 48 containers of 200 milliliters, or 120 containers of 50 milliliters. 
Tax stamp means the official mark, stamp or indicium of the department used to indicate the payment of taxes imposed by this chapter. 
Taxpayer means any person made liable by law to file a return or to pay tax. 
Wholesaler or wholesale dealer means any person who sells alcoholic beverages to other wholesale dealers, to retail dealers, or to retail consumption dealers. 
Wine means any alcoholic beverage containing not more than 21 percent alcohol by volume made from fruits, berries or grapes, either by natural fermentation or by natural fermentation with brandy added. The term "wine" includes, but is not limited to, all sparkling wines, champagnes, combinations of such beverages, vermouths, special natural wines, rectified wines, and like products. The term "wine" does not include cooking wine mixed with salt or other ingredients so as to render it unfit for human consumption as a beverage. A liquid shall first be deemed to be a wine at that point in the manufacturing process when it conforms to the definition of wine contained in this section. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-1)  
Sec. 4-2. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal under this chapter before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the permittee, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(b)  Powers of hearing officer. The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this chapter, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(c)  Rules of evidence inapplicable. The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(d)  Hearing officer's report. The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendation. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the permittee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk. 
(e)  Meeting. The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the permittee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting, unless the permittee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(f)  Action by council. The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specified points. In either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence.  
Sec. 4-3. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  The licensee or applicant, as applicable, under this chapter shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision or receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(d)  When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 10-87)  
Secs. 4-4—4-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - LICENSES  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 4-25. - Compliance required. 
(a)  The sale of alcoholic beverages shall be legal in the city, subject to the following terms, conditions, restrictions set forth herein and upon full compliance by all persons engaged in business under the auspices of any license granted under this article. 
(b)  The license granted under this article shall be a mere grant or privilege to carry on the licensed business during the term of the license, subject to all the terms and conditions imposed by local, state, and federal law. 
(c)  The following licenses may be issued by the mayor and city council as provided herein: 
(1)  Off-premises retail package malt beverage license. 
(2)  Off-premises retail package wine license. 
(3)  Off-premises retail package malt beverage and wine license. 
(4)  Off-premises retail package liquor/distilled spirits license. 
(5)  On-premises consumption of liquor/distilled spirits license. 
(6)  On-premises consumption malt beverages and wine license. 
(7)  On-premises consumption malt beverages, wine, and liquor/distilled spirits license. 
(d)  On-premises consumption licenses shall derive at least 50 percent of the establishment's total annual gross sales from the sale of prepared meals and food in all of the combined retail outlets. Sales of food products other than prepared meals will be considered in determining the 50 percent ratio so long as bona fide artistic or cultural activities are conducted on the premises simultaneous with the consumption of alcohol. The applicant shall submit such business records as may be requested by the city to verify that the foregoing percentages are being met. 
(Code 1996, § 6-75(a); Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-31)  
Sec. 4-26. - Renewal, fee. 
Each such license and license fee shall be for the calendar year. The fee shall be due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year. Any person desiring to begin an alcoholic beverage business in the city shall pay the prescribed fee and obtain a license before commencing business. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-33)  
Sec. 4-27. - Applications for licenses. 
(a)  The application for a permit shall be submitted in writing to the mayor and council, or their designee, and shall set forth therein the following information: 
(1)  The type of license for which application is made and whether the applicable requirements stated in this article are met; 
(2)  The location of the place of business wherein beer and/or wine and/or liquor is to be sold, and whether the specific requirements related to the location and premises, including, but not limited to, occupancy of structure, land use, distance restriction and all other requirements of this Code are met; 
(3)  Whether the premises are owned or leased with proof of ownership or lawful possession by a current lease shown by the applicant; 
(4)  Names and address of all persons, firms or corporations having a financial interest in profits or losses; 
(5)  A copy of the birth certificate of the applicant showing the applicant to be a U.S. citizen or proof of legal permanent residency in the United States or proof that the applicant is a naturalized citizen of the United States; 
(6)  If the applicant is a corporation, proof by a certificate from the state secretary of state showing that the corporation is in good standing to conduct business in the state, either as a state corporation or a corporation organized in another state lawfully registered to do business in the state; 
(7)  Proof of liquor liability insurance, as required by this article; 
(8)  A signed consent to conduct an NCIC and GCIC background check and fingerprint check to be conducted by the city police department or the county sheriff's office, as authorized in this article; 
(9)  Payment of all applicable application fees, including all cost of background checks and/or fingerprinting and cost of publishing notice of the application, as applicable, in addition to the applicable license fee; 
(10)  And such other information that the mayor and council may from time to time require. 
(b)  The application shall be signed by the applicant and must be verified by oath of the applicant; and if the applicant is a corporation, by the oath of one of its corporate officers or managers. Such application and oath must be on a form provided by the city. 
(c)  All applicants shall furnish all data, information, and records pertinent to the application requested of them in writing by the city, and failure to furnish such data, information, and records within 30 day from the date of such request shall automatically serve to dismiss, with prejudice, the application. The applicants, by filling an application, agree to produce for oral interrogation any person requested by the police department or the mayor and council as considered as being important in the ascertainment of the facts relative to such application and/or license under the terms of this article. The failure to produce such person within 30 days after being requested to do so shall result in the automatic dismissal of any application pending under this article. 
(d)  Any establishment making applications for a license to sell malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits for on-premises consumption shall secure and maintain proof necessary, to the city, of general liability insurance for said establishment for liquor liability, injury to persons, and damage to property related to the consumption of alcohol from said establishment in limits of liability with a minimum coverage of $300,000.00 per occurrence. 
(e)  Upon filing an application, all applicants must pay an application fee and license fee in the required amounts, as established by the mayor and council, the city manager shall issue a receipt and attach a copy of said receipt to the application. 
(f)  The city manager shall first review the application for completeness and compliance with this article, then the application, along with the city manager's recommendation will be considered by the mayor and council not less than 30 nor more than 60 days from the submission of a completed application for processing any application for a license under the terms of this article. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-34)  
Sec. 4-28. - Notice. 
(a)  Unless otherwise provided, notice of all applications for any license under this article shall, within ten days after the completion of the required investigation, be published in the official newspaper of the city wherein all legal advertisements are published to the effect that such application has been made, listing the name of the applicant, the complete address of the place of business where such application for the sale of alcoholic beverages is proposed, and the date of the hearing thereon. The advertisement shall be published once per week for two weeks preceding the next regular meeting of the mayor and council. Such advertisement shall be filed with the proper officer or agent of such newspaper within ten days following the date of application. 
(b)  The applicant shall pay in advance to the city clerk an application fee, as established by the mayor and council, which covers the cost of advertisement of the notice. The city clerk will then place the required notice in the legal organ of the city. 
(c)  No application for a license under this article shall be acted upon on issued by the mayor and council until after advertisement and public hearing thereof, as required herein. 
(d)  A public hearing upon all applications for a license under this article shall be held before the mayor and council at its regular meeting not less than 30 nor more than 60 days after the filing of the application. 
(e)  Advertisement is required for all license applications, except for renewal of licenses. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-36)  
Sec. 4-29. - Investigation of applicant by police. 
All applicants shall be investigated by the police department or by such other person as may be designated by the mayor and council. The report of such investigation shall be presented to the mayor and council for consideration with the application. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-37)  
Sec. 4-30. - Tax investigation of applicant. 
The mayor and council shall cause an inquiry to be made into the tax records to determine if any applicant or other parties interested in an application have outstanding taxes or special assessments that are delinquent or any other monies owing to the city. No license shall be issued, nor shall a license be renewed, until all such debts are paid in full. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-38)  
Sec. 4-31. - Issuance prohibited to certain persons. 
It shall be unlawful to issue a license to: 
(1)  A person who has been convicted of a felony under the state statutes or the statutes of any other state or of the United States within five years of the date of application. 
(2)  A person whose place of business in conducted by an employee, manager or agent, unless the manger or agent or employee possesses the same qualifications as the licensee. 
(3)  A person who is not of good moral character. 
(4)  A person who is deemed to have insufficient mental capacity. 
(5)  A person who has been dishonorably discharged from the armed services of the United States. 
(6)  Any person who, as a previous holder of a license to sell alcoholic beverages, has violated any law, regulation or ordinance relating to such business within a three-year period preceding the date of the application under this article. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-39)  
Sec. 4-32. - Qualifications of applicant and employees. 
(a)  No person shall be granted an alcoholic beverage license unless it shall appear to the satisfaction of the mayor and council that such person, partners in the firm, and officers and directors of the corporation shall be of good moral character, and in no event shall any license be granted to any person or office or director of any such corporation who has been convicted or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, lottery, or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or liquors within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such applications; or who has been convicted or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to the crime of DUI or public drunkenness within a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application; nor shall any such person sell or dispense alcoholic beverages. At the time an application is submitted for a retail or wholesale alcoholic beverage license, the applicant shall, by a duly sworn affidavit, certify that neither he, nor any of the other owners of the retail or wholesale establishment, nor the manager of such establishment, has been convicted or has pled quality or entered a plea of nolo contendere to any crime involving moral turpitude, lottery or illegal possession or sale of narcotics or liquors within a period of ten years immediately prior to the filing of such application, or has been convicted or has pled guilty or entered a plea of nolo contendere to the crime of DUI or public drunkenness within a period of two years immediately prior to the filing of such application. Should any applicant, partner or officer, after a license has been granted, be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or the violation of any laws regulating the sale of narcotics, alcoholic beverages or the lottery laws of this state, such license shall be immediately revoked and cancelled. 
(b)  Should any employee involved in the sale or dispensing of alcoholic beverages after a license has been granted be convicted or plead guilty or nolo contendere to a crime involving moral turpitude or the violation of any law regarding the sale of narcotics, alcoholic beverages or the lottery laws of this state, and the crime was committed in the course of the employee's employment, on or off the premises of the licensee, and the licensee knew or should have known that the crime had been committed and did not immediately report the crime to the proper police authorities, such license shall be subject to be revoked and cancelled. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-41)  
Sec. 4-33. - Distance requirements. 
(a)  Regulations regarding sales within certain distances from churches, schools, etc. As provided in O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21, no person knowingly and intentionally may sell or offer to sell: 
(1)  Any distilled spirits in or within 100 yards of any church building or within 200 yards of any school building, educational building, school grounds, or college campus; 
(2)  Any wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 1981, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of wine and beer was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. Nothing in this subsection shall prohibit a grocery store licensed for the retail sale of only wine and malt beverages for consumption off the premises from selling wine or malt beverages within 100 yards of any school building, school grounds, or college campus, where, as used in this subsection, the term "grocery store" means a retail establishment which has a total retail floor space of at least 10,000 square feet, of which at least 85 percent is reserved for the sale of food and other non-alcoholic items, conducts all of its sales inside the building containing its retail floor space; 
(3)  Any distilled spirits, wine, or malt beverages within 100 yards of an alcoholic treatment center owned and operated by this state or any county or municipal government therein. This subsection shall not apply to any business having a license in effect on July 1, 1981; 
(4)  As used in this subsection, the term "school building" or "educational building" shall apply only to state, county, city, or church school buildings and to such buildings at such other schools in which are taught subjects commonly taught in the common schools and colleges of this state and which are public schools or private schools as defined in O.C.G.A. § 20-2-690(b). 
(b)  Nothing contained in this section shall prohibit the licensing of the sale or distribution of alcoholic beverages by: 
(1)  Hotels of 50 rooms or more which have been in continuous operation for a period of at least five years preceding July 1, 1981; 
(2)  Bona fide private clubs, owning their own homes, subject to licensing under O.C.G.A. § 3-7-1 et seq.; and 
(3)  Licensees for the retail sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises only who shall be subject to regulation as to distances from churches, schools, and colleges. 
(c)  For purposes of this section, distances shall be measured by the most direct route of travel on the ground. 
(d)  Housing authority property. 
(1)  As used in this subsection, the term "housing authority property" shall have the same meaning as provided by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-21(e). 
(2)  No person knowingly and intentionally may sell any alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises within 100 yards of any housing authority property. This subsection shall not apply at any location for which a license has been issued prior to July 1, 2000, nor to the renewal of such license. Nor shall this subsection apply at any location for which a new license is applied for if the sale of alcoholic beverages for consumption on the premises was lawful at such location at any time during the 12 months immediately preceding such application. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-42; Res. No. 06-19-2017, 6-19-2017)  
Sec. 4-34. - Effect of revocation or denial. 
If the mayor and council revokes or denies any license for the sale of alcoholic beverages at any location within the city, no new license shall be granted by the city for the sale of any alcoholic beverages for the period of six months after the date of revocation or denial at the same location. After notice to the mayor and council that a person holding a license, or his employee or agent, is under investigation of prohibited acts, no new license shall be issued for such location until after the disposition of the complaint. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-42(h); Res. No. 06-19-2017, 6-19-2017)  
Sec. 4-35. - Transferability. 
Licenses issued under the authority of this article shall not be transferable from one person to another, nor from one location to another, except with the express written approval of the mayor and council after completion of a new application by the transferee of said license. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-43)  
Sec. 4-36. - Display of licenses. 
The license certificate shall be posted conspicuously in the licensee's place of business. Before operating under such city license, the licensee must secure the state license and comply with all provisions of applicable state law. It shall be the duty of the city clerk to furnish to the licensee such certificate, copy of the city license, or other evidence as may be required by the state revenue commission in order to show payment of the city license fee and approval of the license application by the mayor and council, all as provided herein. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-44)  
Sec. 4-37. - Duration; renewals. 
(a)  All licenses granted pursuant to this article shall expire on December 31 of the year in which the license shall be issued. 
(b)  Licensees who desire to renew their license shall file applications with the requisite fee as established by the mayor and council, with the city manager on the form provided for renewal of the license for the ensuing year. Renewal applications for any establishment currently in compliance with applicable local, state and federal regulations are not required to submit to criminal background investigations, provide public notice, or to obtain mayor and council approval, as required for initial licenses. 
(c)  Applications for the renewal must be filed before December 1 of each year, otherwise no renewal license shall be granted. An application for renewal shall be treated as an initial application when filed after the December 1 deadline and the application shall be required to comply with all licensing requirements outlined in this article as if no previous license has been held. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-45)  
Sec. 4-38. - Suspension; revocation. 
(a)  Any license which has been issued or which may hereafter be issued by the city to any licensee may be suspended or revoked for due cause as defined in this section, and after a hearing held by the mayor and council for the purpose of considering any such suspension or revocation. At least five days' prior written notice of a time, place and purpose of such hearing, and a statement of the charges upon which such hearing shall be held, shall be given to the holder of such license which is sought to be suspended or revoked. 
(b)  The term "due cause" for the suspension or revocation of any license shall consist of a violation of any laws or ordinances regulating such business, or violation of regulations made pursuant to the authority granted for the purpose of regulating such businesses, or for the violation of any state, federal, municipal or city ordinance that would prevent one from obtaining a license, or for the violation of any provision of this article. 
(c)  The mayor is hereby authorized to suspend any license issued under this article in any emergency situation, such as civil disorders or natural disasters, or in any situation that the mayor deems such immediate suspension necessary for the protection of the health and welfare of the citizens of the city, and the suspension may be made effective immediately and shall remain in force until the mayor determines the emergency is over or until the next regular meeting of the mayor and council. 
(d)  When a license is suspended or revoked, the city shall not be required to refund any portion of the license fee to the holder of such suspended or revoked license. When a license is revoked, the licensee may not reapply for a license under this article for a period of three years from such revocation. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-46)  
Sec. 4-39. - Sales under suspended license and hearings. 
No person whose license has been suspended or revoked pursuant to any provision of this article shall sell any beverages covered by the suspended or revoked license during the period of such suspension or after such revocation. No license shall be suspended or revoked without the mayor and council first giving the licensee written notice of the reason therefor, and, within five days thereafter, the licensee shall have the right to a hearing before the mayor and council and may present any evidence or give any reason why the license should not be suspended or revoked. Any person or corporation denied issuance of a license may request in writing a hearing before the mayor and council within five days of written notice of the denial of the application. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-47)  
Sec. 4-40. - Rehearing. 
Any person aggrieved by any act or omission of the mayor and council with respect to its proceedings under this article, including the suspension or revocation of a license, shall have the right to move for a rehearing. Such motion for omission complained of shall be in writing, and shall outline the manner in which such aggrieved party believes that the mayor and council erred. If the motion relates to a matter as to which evidence has already been heard, no additional evidence or argument shall be permitted on the motion for rehearing except after a grant of rehearing by the mayor and council. If the matter of which the complaint is made was not the subject of a prior hearing at which the aggrieved party was permitted to be present and heard, the mayor and council shall afford a hearing within ten days after the filing of the motion, of which reasonable notice shall be given to all parties known to the mayor and council to be interested, at which hearing persons interested in protesting or supporting the act or omission of the mayor and council shall be allowed to appear, be represented, introduce oral and documentary evidence, and examine and cross-examine witnesses. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-48)  
Secs. 4-41—4-68. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROHIBITED ACTS 
 
Sec. 4-69. - Sales to minors and intoxicated persons. 
No licensee shall by himself or another sell, furnish or cause to be sold or furnished, or permit any person in his employ to furnish alcoholic beverages to any person under the legal age for consumption of alcoholic beverages in the state, to any person who is noticeably intoxicated or to any habitual drunk who intemperate habits are known to such persons. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-66)  
Sec. 4-70. - Effect of payment of tax. 
The payment of any tax for the privilege of engaging in the business of vending alcoholic beverages shall not prevent the city from increasing at any time, before or after the grant of a license, the amount of tax, nor prevent the city from providing for and collecting any other form of taxation of such business. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-67)  
Sec. 4-71. - Responsibility for acts of employees. 
The licensee is responsible for the conduct and actions of his employees while in his employment. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-68)  
Sec. 4-72. - Minors as employees. 
(a)  Persons under 18 years of age are not to be allowed or required to serve, sell or take orders for alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  The provisions of this section shall not prohibit persons under 18 years of age who are employed in supermarkets, convenience stores, or drugstores from selling or handling alcoholic beverages which are sold for consumption off the premises. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-69)  
Sec. 4-73. - Offenses involving minors. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person under the legal age for consumption of alcoholic beverages in the state to purchase, drink or possess any alcoholic beverages. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to keep or maintain a place wherein those under the legal age for consumption of alcoholic beverages in the state are permitted to come and bring or purchase any alcoholic beverages. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to buy alcoholic beverages or furnish alcoholic beverages to anyone under the legal age for consumption of alcoholic beverages in the state. 
(d)  It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to examine the identification of patrons to be certain that such patrons are of legal age. A state driver's license, which is apparently valid upon its face, may be accepted by the licensee or his employee as evidence of age. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-70)  
Sec. 4-74. - Age misrepresentation. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor to misrepresent his age in any manner whatsoever for the purpose of evading state or local law. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-71)  
Sec. 4-75. - Minors loitering on premises. 
No person who holds a license to sell alcoholic beverages shall allow any minor to loiter about the premises of the licensee, unless he is present for the purpose of purchasing goods other than alcoholic beverages. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-72)  
Sec. 4-76. - Package stores; standards. 
(a)  Each licensee shall have printed on the front window of the licensed premises the inscription "City Retail License No. _____" in uniform letters not less than four inches in height. 
(b)  No screen, blind, curtain, partition, article or thing which shall prevent a clear view into the interior shall be permitted in the window or upon the doors of any retail package store, and no booth, screen, partition or other obstruction shall be permitted within the interior of any store. Each retail store shall be so lighted that the interior of the store is visible day and night. 
(c)  All premises shall be kept clean and in proper sanitary condition and in full compliance with the provisions and regulations governing the conditions of premises used for the storage and sale of food for human consumption. The fire department shall, upon request of the mayor and council, inspect such premises and report its findings to the mayor and council. All premises licensed under this article shall conform at all times with all fire regulations of the city. 
(d)  No retailer of distilled spirits shall permit on his premises any slot machines or mechanical music boxes or pinball machines of any kind or character or any coin-operated machines or any machines operated for amusement purposes. 
(e)  Any licensee under this article who shall begin the operation of the business and sale of the products, as authorized in the license, but who shall, for a period of six consecutive months thereafter, cease to operate the business and sale of the products authorized in the license shall, upon completion of the six-month period, automatically forfeit his license, which license shall, by virtue of the failure to operate, be cancelled without the necessity of any further action of the mayor and council. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-73)  
Sec. 4-77. - Curb services; signs. 
(a)  Curb service or other sales of alcoholic beverages or wine outside the building licensed to sell is hereby expressly prohibited. 
(b)  No sign shall be erected anywhere within the city advertising or promoting the sale of alcoholic beverages except as may be authorized by state law and regulations of the state department of revenue or other agency having jurisdiction. 
(c)  No lighted signs advertising alcoholic beverages for sale visible from outside the premises shall be permitted. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-74)  
Sec. 4-78. - Hours of sale, food service and other requirements. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided herein, it shall be unlawful for any licensee licensed for on-premises consumption of malt beverages, wine, or distilled spirits hereunder to permit the sale or engage in the sale of such malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits, from 12:01 a.m. Sunday to 12:30 p.m. Sunday and from 12:01 a.m. Monday to 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any licensee licensed to sell packaged malt beverages, packaged wine or packaged distilled spirits hereunder to permit the sale or engage in the sale of such malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits from 12:01 a.m. Sunday to 12:30 p.m. Sunday and from 11:30 p.m. Sunday to 6:00 a.m. Monday. 
(c)  All owners, managers, operators, representatives, agents, employees, corporate officer, or directors of a license shall cease operations of on the premises business for which a license has been issued by the city as of 2:01 a.m. Tuesday through Saturday, and 11:30 p.m. Sunday, and shall require all patrons of parties to vacate the premises from which license has been issued by 2:30 a.m. Tuesday through Saturday, by 12:01 a.m. Sunday and Monday, which shall include parking lots, buildings, and curtilages. 
(d)  Hotels, motels, grocery stores, service stations and restaurants shall not be required to close functions and activities unrelated to alcohol sales and services not licensed under this article, and must ensure any alcohol inventory be and remain in the custody and control of the license or his employees and may not be dispensed in any manner. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-75; Res. of 9-1-2015(2); Res. of 9-4-2015)  
Sec. 4-79. - Sales on election day. 
Pursuant to the delegation of authority granted to the mayor and council by O.C.G.A. § 3-3-20(b), the sale of malt beverages, wine and distilled spirits shall be lawful during the polling hours of any election; provided, however, nothing herein shall authorize the sale of malt beverages, wine or distilled spirits within 250 feet of a polling place during such time as the polls are open. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-75(a))  
Sec. 4-80. - Brown bagging. 
(a)  Brown bagging prohibited . Except as permitted by this section, brown bagging and allowing, facilitating, permitting, or participating in brown bagging is unlawful and prohibited. 
(b)  Operation of a brown bagging establishment prohibited. Except as permitted by this section, operating, allowing, facilitating, permitting, or participating in the operation of a brown bagging establishment is unlawful and prohibited. 
(c)  Brown bagging at nonprofit events. Brown bagging shall not be prohibited at events of a bona fide nonprofit organization, which, for purposes of this section, shall include only those which are charitable, civic, religious, educational, artistic, theatrical, fraternal, or veterans' organizations. 
(d)  Definitions. The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this section, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this subsection, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Bona fide nonprofit civic organization means an entity which is exempt from federal income tax pursuant to the provisions of 26 USC 501(c), (d) or (e). 
Brown bagging means bringing onto and/or consuming upon any premises alcoholic beverages not lawfully purchased upon such premises. 
Brown bagging establishment means any business, commercial establishment, or other facility or location upon which the owner, lessee, operator or his respective employees, agents, or representative thereof allow, facilitate, permit, or participate in brown bagging upon its premises. 
(Ord. of 5-3-2016, § 6-76)  
Secs. 4-81—4-103. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - TAXES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Excise tax on malt beverages, O.C.G.A. § 3-5-80; excise tax on wine, O.C.G.A. § 3-6-60; excise tax on distilled liquor, O.C.G.A. § 3-4-80. 
 
Sec. 4-104. - Malt beverage excise tax; imposition and collection. 
(a)  There is imposed and levied a specific tax upon all retail dealers in malt beverages within the city limits as follows: 
(1)  Where malt beverages, commonly known as tap or draft beer, are sold in or from a barrel or bulk container, a tax of $6.00 on each container sold containing not more than 15½ gallons and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional part of 15½ gallons. 
(2)  Where malt beverages are sold in bottles, cans or other containers, except barrel or bulk containers, a tax of $0.05 per 12 ounces and a proportionate tax at the same rate on all fractional part of 12 ounces. 
(b)  Each distributor, wholesale dealer or manufacturer selling, shipping or delivering malt beverages to any retail dealer in the city shall collect the excise tax as set forth in subsection (a) of this section and shall remit the tax to the city not later than the tenth of the month following collection. Each monthly remittance will be accompanied by invoice copies of all sales or deliveries to all retailers in the city for resale in the city, together with the sworn affidavit of such distributor, wholesale dealer or manufacturer, that the attached invoices are true, correct and complete. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-91)  
Sec. 4-105. - Wine excise tax; imposition and collection. 
(a)  In addition to the annual retail wine license fee, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax on all fractional parts of a liter which shall be paid to the mayor and council on all wine sold, displayed or stored in the incorporated area of the city. The tax shall be collected by wholesale distributors and paid to the mayor and council by the wholesale distributors on all wine sold to retailers in the incorporate area of the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering wines to any retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retailer to possess, own, hold store, display or sell any wine on which the tax has not been paid. 
(c)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the mayor and council a summary of all purchase invoices for wine sold to each retailer in the incorporated area of the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. The invoices shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-92)  
Sec. 4-106. - Retailers' records. 
All retail dealers in malt beverages and/or wine, and all persons selling malt beverages and/or wine at retail, shall keep a complete and correct record of all purchases of malt beverage and wine, and shall require all persons from whom they purchase malt beverages or wine to furnish and deliver to them, at the time of delivery of such beverages, a correct invoice of purchase, which invoice shall be kept and preserved by the retailer at his place of business for a period of six months from the date of purchase. Such invoices and all records of retailers of malt beverages and/or wine shall be subject to inspection by any authorized representative of the city. All records of purchase shall be kept for at least three years from the date of such purchase or sale before being destroyed. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-93)  
Sec. 4-107. - Distilled spirits excise tax. 
(a)  In addition to the annual liquor license fee, there is hereby levied an excise tax computed at the rate of $0.22 per liter and a proportionate tax on all fractional part of a liter which shall be paid to the mayor and council on all distilled spirits displayed and stored in the city. The tax shall be collected by the wholesale distributor and paid to the mayor and council by the wholesale distributor on all distilled spirits sold to retailers in the city as follows: Each wholesale distributor selling, shipping, or in any way delivering distilled spirits to any retailer shall collect the excise tax at the time of delivery and shall remit the tax, together with a summary of all deliveries to each retailer, on or before the tenth day of the following month. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful and a violation of this article for any retailer to possess, own, hold, store, display or sell any distilled spirits on which the tax has not been paid. 
(c)  Each wholesale distributor shall furnish to the mayor and council a summary of all purchase invoices for distilled spirits to each retailer in the city on or before the 15th day of each month following such purchases. The invoice shall show the amount of excise tax paid. 
(Res. of 3-3-2015, § 6-94)  
Chapter 6 - AMUSEMENTS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Amusement Ride Safety Act, O.C.G.A. § 34-12-1 et seq.; state licensing of coin-operated amusement machines, O.C.G.A. § 48-17-1 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 6-1. - Hearing procedure. 
(a)  Generally. Whenever the city clerk has scheduled an appeal under this chapter before the city council, at the time and date set therefor, the council shall receive all relevant testimony and evidence from the licensee or applicant, as applicable, from interested parties and from city staff. The city council may sustain, overrule or modify the action complained of. The action of the city council shall be final. 
(b)  Powers of hearing officer. The hearing officer, appointed pursuant to the procedure set out in this chapter, may receive and rule on admissibility of evidence, hear testimony under oath and call witnesses as he may deem advisable with respect to the conduct of the hearing. 
(c)  Rules of evidence inapplicable. The city council and the hearing officer shall not be bound by the traditional rules of evidence in hearings conducted under this chapter. Rules of evidence as applied in an administrative hearing shall apply. 
(d)  Hearing officer's report. The hearing officer shall, within a reasonable time not to exceed 30 days from the date such hearing is terminated, submit a written report to the council. Such report shall contain a brief summary of the evidence considered and state findings, conclusions and recommendation. All such reports shall be filed with the city clerk, and shall be considered public records. A copy of such report shall be forwarded by certified mail to the licensee/appellant the same day it is filed with the city clerk. 
(e)  Meeting. The city clerk shall place the hearing officer's report on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than ten days after the report is filed and shall notify the licensee/appellant of the date of such meeting at least ten days prior to the meeting, unless the licensee/appellant stipulates to a shorter notice period. 
(f)  Action by council. The city council may adopt or reject the hearing officer's decision in its entirety or may modify the proposed recommendation. If the city council does not adopt the hearing officer's recommendation, it may: 
(1)  Refer the matter to the same or another hearing officer for a completely new hearing, or for the taking of additional evidence on specified points. In either of such cases, the hearing officer shall proceed as provided in this chapter. 
(2)  Decide the case upon a review of the entire record before the hearing officer with or without taking additional evidence. 
(Code 1996, § 10-88)  
Sec. 6-2. - Appeal procedure. 
(a)  The licensee or applicant, as applicable, under this chapter shall, within ten days after he has been notified of an adverse determination, submit a notice of appeal to the city clerk. 
(b)  The notice of appeal shall be addressed to the mayor and council and shall specify the subject matter of the appeal, the date of any original and amended application or requests, the date of the adverse decision or receipt of notice thereof, the basis of the appeal, the action requested of the council and the name and address of the applicant. 
(c)  The clerk shall place the appeal on the agenda of the next regular city council meeting occurring not less than five nor more than 30 days after receipt of the application for council action. 
(d)  When an appeal is placed on the council agenda, the council may take either of the following actions: 
(1)  Set a hearing date and instruct the city clerk to give such notice of hearing as may be required by law. 
(2)  Appoint a hearing officer and fix the time and place for hearing. The hearing officer may or may not be a city employee, and may be appointed for an extended period of time. The clerk shall assume responsibility for such publication of notice of the hearing as may be required by law. If a hearing officer is appointed, the hearing shall be conducted in accordance with the procedures set out in this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 10-87)  
Secs. 6-3—6-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POOL AND BILLIARDS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to license, tax and regulate billiard rooms, O.C.G.A. § 43-8-2. 
 
Sec. 6-23. - License required. 
No person shall operate any pool room, pool hall, billiards parlor or similar public place where a person is permitted to play the game of billiards and for which a charge is made for use of equipment without first obtaining a license from the city for said operations.  
Sec. 6-24. - Authority to enact rules governing operation. 
Subject to O.C.G.A. § 43-8-1 et seq., the mayor and council shall have the authority to enact such rules and regulations governing the operation of pool and billiard rooms within the city as they may from time to time deem necessary. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-2(a); Code 1996, § 10-31)  
Sec. 6-25. - Partitions and screens. 
No billiard or pool room shall permit any screens, curtains, blinds, partitions or other obstructions to be used which would prevent a clear view of the interior. No partitions forming rooms, stalls or other enclosures shall be permitted. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-2(b); Code 1996, § 10-32)  
Sec. 6-26. - Hours of operation. 
Billiard and pool rooms having regulation size tables shall be permitted to open from 6:00 a.m. to 12:00 midnight, Monday through Saturday. No billiard or pool room shall be open for operation on Sunday. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-2(c); Code 1996, § 10-33)  
Sec. 6-27. - Admission of persons under 18 years of age. 
It shall be unlawful for any person who has not reached the age of 18 years to play pool or billiards or to be permitted to remain in a pool or billiard room for any purpose, unless such person is accompanied by a parent or guardian, or unless such person has the written permission or consent of his parent or guardian. Such written permission or consent shall be delivered to any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-2(d); Code 1996, § 10-34)  
Sec. 6-28. - Placards concerning underage persons to be posted by licensee. 
Every licensee shall post in the room where billiard or pool tables are operated a placard having the contents of section 6-27 written thereon. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-2(e); Code 1996, § 10-35)  
Sec. 6-29. - Unnecessary noise and boisterous conduct. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to conduct or operate a billiard or pool room to permit any loud and unnecessary noise or any boisterous conduct upon the premises. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-2(f); Code 1996, § 10-36)  
Secs. 6-30—6-46. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ADULT ENTERTAINMENT  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 6-47. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Adult bookstore means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, books, magazines or other periodicals which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or five percent of its net sales consisting of printed material which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Adult entertainment establishments. 
(1)  The term "adult entertainment establishments" means either: 
a.  Any business which is conducted exclusively for the patronage of adults and as to which minors are specifically excluded from patronage thereat either by law or by the operators of such business; 
b.  Any business other than those expressly specified in this article where employees or patrons expose specified anatomical areas or engage in specified sexual activities; or 
c.  Any other business or establishment which offers its patrons services or entertainment characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing, discussing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
(2)  The term "adult entertainment establishments" includes, but is not limited to, any of the following: 
a.  Adult dancing establishment means a business that features dancers displaying or exposing specified anatomical areas. 
b.  Adult motion picture theater means an enclosed building with a capacity of 50 or more persons, used for presenting material distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas for observation by patrons therein. 
c.  Adult video store means an establishment having a substantial or significant portion of its stock in trade, videotapes or movies or other reproductions, whether for sale or rent, which are distinguished or characterized by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas, or an establishment with a segment or section, comprising five percent of its total floor space, devoted to the sale or display of such material or which derives more than five percent of its net sales from videos which are characterized or distinguished by their emphasis on matter depicting, describing or relating to specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
d.  Erotic dance establishment means a nightclub, theater or other establishment which features live performances by topless and/or bottomless dancers, go-go dancers, strippers or similar entertainers, where such performances are distinguished or characterized by an emphasis on specified sexual activities or specified anatomical areas. 
Good moral character. A person is of good moral character, according to this article, if that person has not been convicted of a felony, or any crime not a felony if it involves moral turpitude, in the past five years. The city may also take into account such other factors as are necessary to determine the good moral character of the applicant or employee. Conviction shall include pleas of nolo contendere or bond forfeiture when charged with such crime. 
Minor means any person who has not attained the age of 21 years. 
Specified anatomical areas shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Less than completely and opaquely covered human genitals or pubic region, buttock, or female breast below a point immediately above the top of the areola; or 
(2)  Human male genitalia in a discernibly turgid state, even if completely and opaquely covered. 
Specified sexual activities shall include any of the following: 
(1)  Actual or simulated sexual intercourse; 
(2)  Clearly depicted human genitals in a state of sexual stimulation, arousal or tumescence; or 
(3)  Fondling or touching of nude human genitals, pubic region, buttocks or female breast. 
(Code 1996, § 10-61)  
Sec. 6-48. - Purpose. 
(a)  The purpose of this article is to regulate adult entertainment establishments to the end that the many types of criminal activities frequently engendered by such businesses will be curtailed. However, it is recognized that such regulation cannot de facto approach prohibition. Otherwise, a protected form of expression would vanish. As to adult dance establishments, this article represents a balancing of competing interests: reduced criminal activity and protection of the neighborhoods through the regulation of adult entertainment establishments versus the protected rights of adult entertainment establishments and patrons. 
(b)  In addition to any penalty imposed pursuant to section 1-11, violation of this article shall also be grounds for immediate suspension or revocation of the license issued pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1996, §§ 10-62, 10-63)  
Secs. 6-49—6-69. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - LICENSING 
 
Sec. 6-70. - License required; does not condone illegal activity. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in conduct or carry on, in or upon any premises within the city any of the adult entertainment establishments defined in this article without a license to do so, which license fee shall be paid upon application and annually thereafter as required by the mayor and council. 
(b)  No license so issued shall condone or make legal any activity thereunder if the same is deemed illegal or unlawful under the laws of the state or the United States. 
(Code 1996, § 10-76)  
Sec. 6-71. - Operation of premises without license unlawful. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to operate any adult entertainment establishment unless such business has a currently valid license or has made proper application for renewal within the time required thereof under this article, and such license shall not be under suspension or permanently or conditionally revoked. 
(Code 1996, § 10-77)  
Sec. 6-72. - Persons prohibited as licensees. 
No license provided for by this article shall be issued to or held by: 
(1)  Any applicant who has not paid all required fees and taxes for a business at that location or property taxes. 
(2)  Any person who is not of good moral character. 
(3)  Any corporation, any of whose officers, directors or stockholders holding five percent of the outstanding issued shares of capital stock are not of good moral character. 
(4)  Any partnership or association, any of whose officers or members holding more than five percent interest therein are not of good moral character. 
(5)  Any person employing, assisted by or financed in whole or in part by any person who is not of good moral character. 
(6)  Any applicant who is not qualified to hold and conduct business according to the laws of the United States, the state or the city. 
(Code 1996, § 10-78)  
Sec. 6-73. - Issuance based on need. 
Should there be a sufficient number of current licenses under this article to meet the needs and desires of the inhabitants of the city, no new licenses shall be issued. In determining the needs and desires of the inhabitants, the standard of review shall be that the market is virtually unrestrained as defined in Young v. American Mini Theaters, Inc., 427 U.S. 50, 81. 
(Code 1996, § 10-79)  
Sec. 6-74. - Adult entertainment establishment license application contents. 
Each application for an adult entertainment establishment license shall contain the following information: 
(1)  The full, true name and any other names used by the applicant. 
(2)  The present address and telephone number of the applicant. 
(3)  The previous addresses of applicant, if any, for a period of five years immediately prior to the date of the application and the dates of residence at each. 
(4)  Acceptable written proof that the applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(5)  The applicant's height, weight, color of eyes and hair and date and place of birth. 
(6)  Two photographs of the applicant, at least two inches by two inches, taken within the last six months. 
(7)  Business, occupation or employment history of the applicant for the five years immediately preceding the date of application. Business or employment records of the applicant, partners in a partnership, directors and officers of a corporation and, if a corporation, all shareholders holding more than five percent of the shares of corporate stock outstanding. 
(8)  The business license history of the applicant and whether such applicant, in previous operations in this or any other city, state or territory under license, has had such license for an adult entertainment business or similar type of business revoked or suspended, the reason therefor and the business activity or occupation subsequent to such action of suspension or revocation. 
(9)  All convictions, including municipal code violations, exclusive of traffic violations, stating the dates and places of any such convictions. 
(10)  If the applicant is a corporation, the name of the corporation shall be set forth exactly as shown in its articles of incorporation or charter, together with the place and date of incorporation, and the names and addresses of each of its current officers and directors, and each stockholder holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation. If the applicant is a partnership, the applicant shall set forth the name, residence address and dates of birth of the partners, including limited partners. If the applicant is a limited partnership, it shall furnish a copy of its certificate of limited partnership filed with the city clerk. If one or more of the partners is a corporation, the provisions of this subsection pertaining to corporations shall apply. The applicant corporation or partnership shall designate one of its officers or general partners to act as its responsible managing officer. Such designated persons shall complete and sign all application forms required of an individual applicant under this article, but only one application fee shall be charged. 
(11)  Such other identification and information as the law enforcement agency may require in order to discover the truth of the matters specified in this section, as required to be set forth in the application. 
(12)  The age and date of birth of the applicant, any partners, any and all officers, any stockholders of more than five percent of the shares of the corporation stock outstanding and directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation. 
(13)  If the applicant, any partners or any of the officers or stockholders holding more than five percent of the outstanding shares of the corporation, or the directors of the applicant if the applicant is a corporation, have ever been convicted of any crime constituting a felony, or any crime not a felony, involving moral turpitude in the past five years and, if so, a complete description of any such crime, including date of violation, date of conviction, jurisdiction and any disposition, including any fine or sentence imposed and whether terms of disposition have been fully completed. 
(14)  The city shall require the individual applicant to furnish fingerprints of the applicant. 
(15)  If applicant is a person doing business under a trade name, a copy of the trade name properly recorded. If applicant is a corporation, a copy of authority to do business in the state, including articles of incorporation, trade name affidavit, if any, and last annual report, if any. 
(16)  At least three character references from individuals who are in no way related to the applicant or individual shareholders, officers or directors of a corporation and who are not or will not benefit financially in any way from the application if the license is granted and who have not been convicted of any felony or a municipal code violation involving moral turpitude in the past five years. The licensing officer shall prepare forms consistent with the provisions of this subsection for the applicant who shall submit all character references on such forms. 
(17)  Address of the premises to receive license. 
(18)  Whether the premises are owned or rented and if applicant has a right to legal possession of the premises, copy of those documents giving such legal right. 
(19)  A map by a registered engineer, licensed by the state, showing the location of the proposed premises in relation to the neighborhood, the surrounding zoning, its proximity to any church, school, public park, governmental building or site or other business hereunder regulated. 
(20)  Each applicant for an adult entertainment establishment license shall be verified and acknowledged under oath to be true and correct by: 
a.  If the applicant is an individual, the individual. 
b.  If a partnership, by the manager or general partner. 
c.  If a corporation, by the president of the corporation. 
d.  If any other organization or association, by the chief administrative official. 
(Code 1996, § 10-80)  
Sec. 6-75. - Applicant to appear for submission of application. 
The applicant for a license under this article, if an individual, or designated responsible managing officer, if a partnership or corporation, shall personally appear before the city council and produce proof that a nonrefundable application fee, established by the mayor and council, has been paid and shall present the application containing the information described in section 6-74. 
(Code 1996, § 10-81)  
Sec. 6-76. - Investigation, granting of license. 
The city manager shall have 30 days from the date the application submission is complete to investigate the application and the background of the applicant for a license under this article. Upon completion of the investigation, the city manager shall schedule the matter for public hearing before the mayor and council and provide notice, as required in section 6-1(e). The city council may grant the license if it finds: 
(1)  The required fee has been paid. 
(2)  The application conforms in all respects to the provisions of this Code. 
(3)  The applicant has not knowingly made a material misrepresentation in the application. 
(4)  The applicant has fully cooperated in the investigation of his application. 
(5)  The applicant, if an individual, or any of the stockholders holding more than five percent of the stock in the corporation, any officers or directors, if the applicant is a corporation, or any of the partners, including limited partners, if the applicant is a partnership, has not been convicted in a court of competent jurisdiction of any offense involving conduct or convicted of an attempt to commit any of the offenses mentioned in this article, or convicted in any state of any offense which if committed or attempted in this state would have been punishable as one or more of the offenses mentioned in this article, or any crime involving dishonesty, fraud, deceit or moral turpitude. 
(6)  The applicant has not had an adult entertainment establishment license or other similar license denied or revoked for cause by this city or county or any other city or county located in or out of this state prior to the date of application. 
(7)  The building, structure, equipment or location of such business, as proposed by the applicant, would comply with all applicable laws, including, but not limited to, health, zoning, distance, fire and safety requirements and standards. 
(8)  The applicant is at least 21 years of age. 
(9)  That the applicant, his employee, agent, partner, director, officer, stockholder or manager has not within five years of the date of the application knowingly allowed or permitted any of the specified sexual activities as defined in this article to be committed or allowed in or upon the premises where such adult entertainment establishment is to be located, or to be used as a place in which solicitations for the specified sexual activities as defined in this article openly occur. 
(10)  That on the date the business for which a license is required under this article commences, and thereafter, there will be a responsible person on the premises to act as manager at all times during which the business is open. 
(11)  That the proposed premises is not to be located within 1,000 feet of any church, school, library, governmental building or other use restricted under this article. 
(12)  That the grant of such license will not cause a violation of this article or any other ordinance or regulation of the city, state or United States. 
(13)  Any other inquiry deemed necessary or desirable by the city to ensure the health, safety and welfare of the citizens of the city or the preservation of its neighborhoods. 
(Code 1996, § 10-82)  
Sec. 6-77. - Refusal; appeal. 
If the city manager following investigation of the applicant deems that the applicant does not fulfill the requirements as set forth in this article, the city manager shall within ten days notify the applicant by certified mail of such denial. Any applicant may appeal such denial to the city council. 
(Code 1996, § 10-83)  
Sec. 6-78. - Adult entertainment employment license application. 
(a)  Qualifications. Employees of an adult use establishment shall be not less than 21 years of age. Every employee must be of good moral character, as defined in this article. Any employee who is convicted of a crime constituting a felony or a crime not a felony involving moral turpitude while employed as an adult use establishment employee shall not thereafter work on any licensed premises for a period of five years from the date of such conviction, unless a longer time is ordered by a court of competent jurisdiction. The term "convicted" includes an adjudication of guilt or a plea of guilty or nolo contendere or the forfeiture of a bond when charged with a crime, and the terms "employed on the licensed premises" and "work on any licensed premises" include work done or services performed while in the scope of employment elsewhere than on the premises holding a license. 
(b)  Approval for employment. Before any person may begin work at a licensed adult entertainment establishment, he shall file a notice with the city manager's office of his intended employment on forms supplied by the city, along with the required application fee to cover the costs of all investigation and processing this application, and shall receive approval of such employment from the city manager. The prospective employee shall supply such information as the city manager requires, including a set of fingerprints. Upon approval, the employee may begin working on the premises holding a license. If approval is denied, the prospective employee may, within ten days of the denial, appeal the decision to the city council, who may issue such order as is proper. An investigation fee, as established by the mayor and council, shall accompany the notice of intended employment, and a receipt of the city evidencing the payment of such fee must be submitted at the time the notice of appeal is filed. 
(Code 1996, § 10-115(a), (b))  
Sec. 6-79. - Renewal; fee. 
Licenses for adult entertainment establishments may be renewed on a year-to-year basis, provided that the licensees continue to meet the requirements set out in this article. The renewal fee for the adult entertainment establishments license shall be established by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1996, § 10-84)  
Sec. 6-80. - Transfer. 
No adult entertainment establishment license may be sold, transferred or assigned by a licensee, or by operation of law, to any other person. Any such sale, transfer or assignment, or attempted sale, transfer or assignment, shall be deemed to constitute a voluntary surrender of such license and such license shall thereafter be null and void; provided and excepting, however, that if the licensee is a partnership and one or more of the partners should die, one or more of the surviving partners may acquire, by purchase or otherwise, the interest of the deceased partner or partners without effecting a surrender or termination of such license, and in such case, the license, upon notification to the city, shall be placed in the name of the surviving partner. An adult entertainment establishment license issued to a corporation shall be deemed terminated and void when either any outstanding stock of the corporation is sold, transferred or assigned after the issuance of a license, or any stock authorized but not issued at the time of the granting of a license is thereafter issued and sold, transferred or assigned. 
(Code 1996, § 10-85)  
Sec. 6-81. - Change of location, name or size of establishment. 
(a)  No adult entertainment establishment shall move from the location specified on its license until a change of location fee, established by the mayor and council, has been deposited with the city and approval has been obtained from the mayor and city council. Such approval shall not be given unless the applicant demonstrates all requirements for licensing approval, as outlined in section 6-76, have been met. 
(b)  No licensee shall operate, conduct, manage, engage in or carry on an adult entertainment establishment under any name other than his name and the name of the business as specified on his license. 
(c)  Any application for an extension or expansion of a building or other place of business where an adult entertainment establishment is located shall require inspection and shall comply with the provisions and regulations of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 10-86)  
Secs. 6-82—6-105. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LIMITS ON ADULT BUSINESS OPERATIONS 
 
Sec. 6-106. - Erotic dance establishments. 
(a)  No person shall advertise, or cause to be advertised, an erotic dance establishment without a valid adult entertainment establishment license issued pursuant to this article. 
(b)  No later than March 1 of each year, an erotic dance establishment licensee shall file a verified report with the licensing officer showing the licensee's gross receipts and amounts paid to dancers for the preceding calendar year. 
(c)  An erotic dance establishment licensee shall maintain and retain for a period of two years the names, addresses, and ages of all persons employed as dancers. 
(d)  No adult entertainment establishment licensee shall employ or contract with as a dancer a person under the age of 21 years or a person not licensed pursuant to this article. 
(e)  No person under the age of 21 years shall be admitted to an adult entertainment establishment. 
(f)  An erotic dance establishment shall be closed daily between 10:00 p.m. and 8:00 a.m. 
(g)  No erotic dance establishment licensee shall serve, sell, distribute or suffer the consumption or possession of any intoxicating liquor or controlled substance upon the premises of the licensee. 
(h)  An adult entertainment establishment licensee shall conspicuously display all licenses required by this article. 
(i)  All dancing shall occur on a platform intended for that purpose which is raised at least two feet from the level of the floor. 
(j)  No dancing shall occur closer than ten feet to any patron. 
(k)  No dancer shall fondle or caress any patron and no patron shall fondle or caress any dancer. 
(l)  No patron shall directly pay or give any gratuity to any dancer. 
(m)  No dancer shall solicit any pay or gratuity from any patron. 
(n)  All areas of an establishment holding licenses pursuant to this article shall be fully lighted at all times patrons are present. The term "full lighting" shall mean illumination equal to 3.5 footcandles per square foot. 
(Code 1996, § 10-111)  
Sec. 6-107. - Exposure of specified anatomical areas. 
No person shall publicly display or expose or suffer the public display or exposure, with less than a full opaque covering, of any portion of a person's genitals, pubic area or buttocks in a lewd and obscene fashion. 
(Code 1996, § 10-112)  
Sec. 6-108. - Minors. 
(a)  Admission. It shall be unlawful for a licensee to admit or permit the admission of minors within a premises holding a license. 
(b)  Sale. It shall be unlawful for any person to sell, barter or give, or to offer to sell, barter or give, to any minor any service, material, device or thing sold or offered for sale by an adult bookstore, adult motion picture theater, adult dancing establishment or other adult entertainment facility. 
(Code 1996, § 10-113)  
Sec. 6-109. - Establishment location. 
(a)  No establishment permitted pursuant to this article shall be located: 
(1)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land which is either named or used for residential uses or purposes; 
(2)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which a church, school, governmental building, library, civic center, public park or playground is located; 
(3)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which another establishment regulated or defined pursuant to this article is located; 
(4)  Within 1,000 feet of any parcel of land upon which any other establishment selling alcoholic beverages is located; or 
(5)  On less than three acres of land containing at least 100 feet of road frontage. 
(b)  For the purposes of this section, distance shall be by airline measurement from the property line, using the closest property lines of the parcels of land involved. The term "parcel of land" means any quantity of land capable of being described by location and boundary, designated and used or to be used as a unit. 
(Code 1996, § 10-114)  
Sec. 6-110. - Employees. 
(a)  License required. All adult entertainment establishments may employ only those individuals licensed as provided by this article. 
(b)  Suspension, revocation of license. Violation of the provisions of this Code, the ordinances of the city or the laws and regulations of the state shall subject an employee to suspension or revocation of license. 
(c)  Independent contractors. For the purpose of this article, independent contractors shall be considered as employees and shall be issued licenses as employees, regardless of the business relationship with the owner or licensee of any adult entertainment establishment. 
(Code 1996, § 10-115(c), (d))  
Sec. 6-111. - Unlawful operation declared nuisance. 
Any adult entertainment establishment operated, conducted or maintained contrary to the provisions of this article is hereby declared to be unlawful and a public nuisance. The city may, in addition to or in lieu of prosecuting a criminal action pursuant to this article, commence an action or proceeding for abatement, removal or enjoinment thereof, in the manner provided by law. It shall take such other steps and shall apply to such courts as may have jurisdiction to grant such relief as will abate or remove such adult entertainment establishment and restrain and enjoin any person from operating, conducting or maintaining an adult entertainment establishment contrary to the provisions of this article. In addition, violation of the provisions of this article shall be per se grounds for suspension or revocation of a license granted pursuant to this article. 
(Code 1996, § 10-116)  
Sec. 6-112. - Cleaning of premises. 
Each premises holding a license under this article shall be maintained in a clean and sanitary condition and shall be cleaned at least once daily and more frequently when necessary. This activity shall be supervised by the person in charge of the premises holding a license. There shall be provided adequate facilities, equipment and supplies on the premises holding a license to meet this requirement and adequate ventilation and illumination shall be provided to permit thorough, complete cleaning of the entire premises holding a license. Trash and garbage shall not be permitted to accumulate or to become a nuisance on or in the immediate vicinity of the licensed premises holding a license but shall be disposed of daily or as often as collections permit. 
(Code 1996, § 10-117)  
Sec. 6-113. - Self-inspection of premises. 
The licensee, or his designated representative, shall make sanitary inspections of the premises holding a license under this article at least once a month and shall record his findings on a form supplied by the officer issuing licenses. Each premises holding a license shall post and maintain in a readily accessible place a schedule for maintaining the sanitation of the premises. 
(Code 1996, § 10-118)  
Sec. 6-114. - Sealing for unsanitary or unsafe conditions. 
A premises holding a license under this article, or any part thereof, may be sealed by order of the officer issuing licenses on his findings of a violation of this article resulting in an unsanitary or unsafe condition. Prior to sealing, the officer issuing licenses shall serve on the licensee, by personal service on him or by posting in a conspicuous place on the premises holding a license, a notice of the violation and an order to correct it within 24 hours after service. If the violation is not so corrected, the officer issuing licenses may physically seal that portion of the premises holding a license causing the violation and order the discontinuance of use thereof until the violation has been corrected and the seal removed by the officer issuing licenses. The officer issuing licenses shall affix to the sealed premises a conspicuous sign labeled "unclean" or "unsafe," as the case may be. 
(Code 1996, § 10-119)  
Sec. 6-115. - Abatement as sanitary nuisance. 
A premises holding a license under this article, or any part thereof, may be abated as a sanitary nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 10-120)  
Chapter 8 - ANIMALS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 8-1. - Purpose. 
The purposes of this chapter are to provide for the safety, good order, general welfare treatment and maintenance of animals; to limit the number and types of animals which may be kept and maintained; to provide for control of animals; to provide for the control of rabies and zoonoses (diseases that can be transmitted to humans); to prohibit fighting dogs, cocks and other animals; to provide seizure, confinement, reclamation, forfeiture, abandonment, surrender, adoption, and disposal of animals; and to provide generally for the public health and welfare of the citizens of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-20)  
Sec. 8-2. - Administration and interpretations. 
The authority and responsibility for administration of this chapter shall rest with the city manager, or his designee. In exercising that authority and discharging that responsibility, the city manager shall designate the animal control department head to be charged with enforcing this chapter. The animal control department shall coordinate and cooperate with the county health department and such other agencies as advisable. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-22)  
Sec. 8-3. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms, and phrases, when used in this chapter shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Animal means a multicellular organism of the kingdom of Animalia, differing from plants in certain typical characteristics, such as capacity for locomotion, non-photosynthetic metabolism, pronounced response to stimuli, restricted growth, and fixed bodily structure. 
Animal control officer means the person charged by the city manager with enforcing this chapter. 
Animal shelter means any facility chosen by the city for the purpose of impounding or harboring seized, stray, diseased, nuisance, dangerous, neglected, deprived, abused, homeless, abandoned, or unwanted animals or birds; any veterinary hospital or clinic operated by a veterinarian which operates for such purpose, in addition to its customary purposes; and any facility operated, owned, or maintained by other nonprofit organizations for the purpose of providing for and promoting the welfare, protection and humane treatment of animals. 
At large means that an animal is in any public street, right-of-way, park or other public grounds, or when off the premises of the owner or person who has custody of the animal and not under restraint or under the immediate control (at heel) of the owner or the person who has custody of the animal. 
Bite means to be seized with the teeth or jaws so that a person or animal has been nipped, gripped, wounded or pierced and saliva of the biting animal has or may have contacted the resulting break or abrasion of the skin. 
Board of health means the county board of health and includes officers, officials and employees of such board of health acting within the scope of their authority. 
Breeder-hobbyist means a person who maintains more than four animals of any breeds or species of animal as a hobby, but produces not more than two litters of any species of animal in any 12-month period. 
Breeder-professional means a person who breeds animals for purposes of sale and maintains a current business license or who produces more than two litters of species of animals in any 12-month period and who maintains affiliation in a nationally recognized society for the betterment, control, and/or competitive display of the animal species. 
Cat means a feline of whatever breed and all ages. 
Court means the municipal court of the city with jurisdiction to hear violations of all city ordinances. 
Custodian means any person within the city whom has responsibility for or exercises custody, charge, or control over an animal or harbors, maintains or keeps an animal. 
Dangerous dog means any dog that: 
(1)  Causes a substantial puncture of a person's skin by teeth without causing serious injury; provided, however, that a nip, scratch, or abrasion shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; 
(2)  Aggressively attacks in a manner that causes a person to reasonably believe that the dog posed an imminent threat of serious injury to such person or another person although no such injury occurs; provided, however, that the acts of barking, growling, or showing of teeth by a dog shall not be sufficient to classify a dog as dangerous under this subsection; or 
(3)  While off the owner's property, kills a pet animal; provided, however, that this subsection shall not apply where the death of such pet animal is caused by a dog that is working or training as a hunting dog, herding dog, or predator control dog. 
Dead animal means the carcass, parts of the carcass, effluent, and blood of deceased animals. 
Diseased animal means any animal which is suffering from any disease or condition for which the animal is subject to quarantine or which is both contagious and deadly to humans or any other animal. 
Dog means a canine of whatever breed and all ages. 
Domestic animal means dogs, cats, livestock, poultry, confined domestic hares and rabbits, and all other animals and birds raised or maintained in confinement as pets or for work, food or recreational purposes. 
Equine means any member of the equidae species, including horses, mules, and asses. 
Euthanasia means a death brought about by any method which produces rapid loss of consciousness to painless death. 
Exposed to rabies means that a person or an animal has been bitten by, or exposed to any warm-blooded animal known or suspected to have been infected with rabies. 
Fighting or attack dog or animal means that a person or an animal has been bitten by, or exposed to any warm-blooded animal known or suspected to have been infected with rabies. 
Harboring means the keeping of an animal or allowing an animal to return daily for food and care for a period of ten days or more. 
Humane manner means the care of an animal, to include protection from injury, adequate coolness and heat, ventilation, sanitary shelter, wholesome food and water that are consistent with the normal requirements and breeding habit of the animal's size, species and breed. 
Kennel means an establishment kept for the purpose of breeding, selling, training or boarding animals. 
Nuisance animals means an animal that: 
(1)  Damages, defiles, or defecates on private property other than that of the owner of the animal or on public property, unless such waste is immediately removed and properly disposed of by the animal owner; 
(2)  Causes an unsanitary, dangerous or offensive condition; or creates noxious odors or offensive odors which are detectable outside the property of the owner or custodian thereof; provided, however, that such term shall not apply to animals owned as part of farm or ranch operations or to animals at a location which has a current valid kennel license for operation at a location where such activities are permitted, pursuant to the zoning ordinance of the city; or creates an accumulation of excreta which has the potential of becoming an insect breeding site; 
(3)  Causes a disturbance by 15 minutes or more of excessive barking, whining, howling, honking, crowing, braying, or crying or other noise making, where such noise is detectable outside the property of the owner or custodian of such animal; 
(4)  Chases vehicles; or disturbs persons by running at large; or is at large; or is a dangerous animal and is not kept securely confined as required by state law or local ordinance; or continuously barking or attacking passersby or pedestrians, on a bicycle or in a motor vehicle; 
(5)  Does not have proof of rabies inoculation clearly displayed, if required; 
(6)  Is trained, owned or harbored for the purpose, primary or in part, for animal fighting; 
(7)  Is kept or maintained contrary to the public health, welfare or safety according to the rules and regulations promulgated by the health department, which rules and regulations are incorporated and made a part of this chapter as if fully set out; 
(8)  Is in estrus (heat or season) and is located upon and in any road or street or public property, outside property owned or controlled by the owner or custodian of the animal or outside property owned or controlled by a person who has granted express permission for the animal to be upon such person's property; or 
(9)  Is repeatedly found at large. 
Poison means a substance that, through its chemical action, usually kills, injures or impairs an organism. 
Potentially dangerous dog means any dog with a known propensity, tendency or disposition to attack unprovoked, to cause injury or to otherwise threaten persons without provocation; or any dog that, unprovoked: 
(1)  Chases or approaches a human being or other domestic animal on any public or private property in a vicious or terrorizing manner in an apparent attitude of attack; or 
(2)  Attempts to attack a human or another domestic animal. 
Poultry means any domestic fowl including, but not limited to, chickens and water fowl, such as geese and ducks; birds which are bred for meat and egg production, exhibition, or competition; and game birds such as pheasants, partridge, quail, and grouse, as well as guinea fowl, pigeons, doves, and peafowl, to include ratite, rhea, emus and ostrich. 
Pound means those premises designated by the mayor and council, the city manager or the animal control department head for the purpose of holding and caring for animals found to be at large by those persons charged with the enforcement of this chapter. 
Proper enclosure means an enclosure for keeping a dangerous dog or potentially dangerous dog while on the owner's property securely enclosed indoors or in a securely enclosed and locked pen, fence or structure suitable to prevent the entry of young children and designed to prevent the dog from escaping. Any such pen or structure shall have secure sides and a secure top; and, if the dog is enclosed with a fence, all sides of the fence shall be of sufficient height and the bottom of the fence constructed or secured in such a manner as to prevent the dog's escape either from over or from under the fence. Any such enclosure shall also provide protection from the elements for the dog. 
Serious injury means any physical injury that creates a substantial risk of death; results in death, broken or dislocated bones, lacerations requiring multiple sutures, or disfiguring avulsions; requires plastic surgery or admission to a hospital; or results in protracted impairment of health, including transmission of an infection or contagious disease, or impairment of the function of any bodily organ. 
Stray means an animal running at large in the city that no one claims ownership of. 
Swine means any hog or pig or other member of the porcine family, whether domestic or exotic. 
Under restraint means secured by a leash or lead, not to exceed six feet in length, held by a responsible, able-bodied person. 
Vicious dog means a dog that inflicts serious injury on a person or causes serious injury to a person resulting from reasonable attempts to escape from the dog's attack. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-24)  
Sec. 8-4. - Rights of officials to enter premises. 
(a)  Whenever an animal control officer, health department representative, or his authorized representative, any law enforcement officer, or other city official has reasonable cause to believe that there exists in any building or upon any premises any violation of the provisions of this chapter or any other applicable law, or whenever it is necessary for such official to make an inspection to enforce any provision or perform any duty imposed by this chapter, or any other applicable law, he shall have the right to enter such property at any reasonable time to inspect and perform any duty imposed by this chapter or any other applicable law, provided that: 
(1)  If such property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and request entry, explaining his reasons; 
(2)  If such property is unoccupied, he shall first make a reasonable effort to locate the owner or the person having charge or control of the property and request entry, explaining his reasons; and 
(3)  If such entry is refused or cannot be obtained because the owner or other person having charge or control of the property cannot be found after due diligence, recourse shall be had to every remedy provided by law to secure lawful entry and inspection of the property. 
(b)  Nothing in this section shall affect or otherwise abridge the right of any animal control officer to pursue or impound an animal or to issue a citation when an animal is on property other than that of the owner of the animal or that of a person who has a right to control such animal. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-25)  
Sec. 8-5. - Rights of officials for emergency entry. 
If an animal control officer, health department representative, any law enforcement officer, or other city official has reasonable cause to believe that the keeping or maintaining of any animal is so hazardous, unsafe or dangerous as to require immediate inspection to save the animal or protect the public health or safety, he shall have the right to immediately enter and inspect such property, and may use reasonable means required to effect such entry and make inspection, whether such property is occupied or unoccupied and whether or not permission to inspect has been obtained. If the property is occupied, he shall first present proper credentials to the occupant and demand entry, explaining his reasons and the purpose of the inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-26)  
Sec. 8-6. - Interference with officials prohibited. 
No person shall resist or interfere with an animal control officer or any other city official in the performance of his official duty in enforcing this chapter; nor shall any person fail or refuse to exhibit the vaccination certificate of any animal required to be vaccinated by this chapter when required to do so by any animal control officer or other city official. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-27)  
Sec. 8-7. - Interference with animal control shelter or facility. 
It shall be unlawful for anyone to interfere with the operation of any animal shelter or facility maintained for the confinement of animals under the supervision of the city, or to remove any animal kept therein from any such animal shelter or facility without the consent of the operator of the animal shelter or facility; or to resist, hinder, delay, interfere with or molest any person, agent, employee or member of any organization or entity operating such animal shelter or facility in the performance of his duties or responsibilities. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-28)  
Secs. 8-8—8-32. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - REGULATION OF ANIMALS 
 
Sec. 8-33. - Disposition of strays. 
Any stray dog, cat, other pet animal or other animal found upon the streets or public places of the city shall be disposed of in such humane manner as determined by the city manager. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-29)  
Sec. 8-34. - Dead animals, removal and disposal of remains. 
The owner of any dead animal found in the city, whether on public lands, rights-of-way, or private property, shall remove the remains and dispose of the carcass, as provided by O.C.G.A. § 4-5-5.  
Sec. 8-35. - Allowing animals to roam at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or the custodian exercising care and control over a dog or any domestic animal or livestock to permit the animal to be at large. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-34)  
Sec. 8-36. - Livestock at large. 
No one shall allow or permit any livestock to run at large. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-35)  
Sec. 8-37. - Fowl and poultry at large. 
It shall be unlawful for the owner or keeper of any fowl or poultry to run at large. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-36)  
Sec. 8-38. - Abandonment of animals. 
No person shall release an animal or leave an animal on any property, public or private with the intention of abandoning the animal. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-38)  
Sec. 8-39. - Liability of owner or custodian for damages to livestock, poultry and property by an animal. 
(a)  The owner of or, if no owner can be found, the custodian exercising care and control over any animal that goes upon land of another and causes injury, death or damage directly or indirectly to any livestock, poultry or property shall be civilly liable to the owner of the livestock, poultry or property for damages, death, or injury caused by the animal. The liability of the owner or custodian of the dog or other animal causing such damage, death or injury shall include consequential damages. 
(b)  This section is to be considered cumulative of other remedies provided by law. There is no intent to do away with or limit other causes of action that might inure to any damaged owner of livestock, poultry or property. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-39)  
Sec. 8-40. - Prohibited animals. 
Except to the extent otherwise authorized in this chapter, no person shall own, have, keep or maintain within the city any of the following: 
(1)  Any poisonous or venomous biting or injecting species of amphibian or reptile, including snakes. 
(2)  Any animal listed as inherently dangerous to humans pursuant to the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 27-5-4 or determined by regulation of the state board of natural resources. 
(3)  Any animal, bird, fish or insect, either dead or alive, and including any body or part thereof, which then appears on the endangered species list designated by the United States Secretary of the Interior and published in the Code of Federal Regulations pursuant to the Endangered Species Act of 1973 or which is protected under any federal or state law or regulation which has as its purpose the protection of endangered or threatened species. 
(4)  Any animal, which is afflicted with any disease, which is contagious to humans or other animals and is not under treatment for that disease. 
(5)  Any carnivorous animal which has not been domesticated or which has a dangerous propensity toward any person, any other animal or any property of anyone other than the owner or custodian thereof. 
(6)  Any animal pet which has not been currently inoculated for rabies as required by state law. 
(7)  Any animal pet which has been inoculated for rabies without identifiable proof of inoculation for rabies. 
(8)  The provisions of this section shall not apply to the following as long as they have a current valid license for such business: 
a.  Animal dealers; 
b.  Livestock dealers; 
c.  Livestock market operators; 
d.  Kennels or professional breeders. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-41)  
Sec. 8-41. - Dangerous dogs. 
(a)  Upon receiving a report of a dog believed to be subject to classification as a dangerous dog is within the city, the city manager, or his designee, shall make such investigations as necessary to determine whether such dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog, as defined in this chapter. 
(b)  When the city manager, or other designated officer, determines that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog, the officer shall mail a dated notice to the dog's owner within 72 hours. Such notice shall include a summary of the officer's determination and shall state that the owner has a right to request a hearing within seven days after the date shown on the notice; provided, however, that if an authority has not been established for the jurisdiction, the owner shall be informed of the right to request a hearing from the probate court for such jurisdiction where the dog was found or confiscated within seven days after the date shown on the notice. The notice shall provide a form for requesting the hearing and shall state that if a hearing is not requested within the allotted time, the officer's determination shall become effective for all purposes under this chapter. If an owner cannot be located within ten days of the officer's determination that a dog is subject to classification as a dangerous dog, such dog may be released to an animal shelter or humanely euthanized, as determined by the city manager. 
(c)  When a hearing is requested by a dog owner in accordance with subsection (b) of this section, such hearing shall be scheduled within 30 days after the request is received; provided, however, that such hearing may be continued by the authority or probate court for good cause shown. At least ten days prior to the hearing, the authority or probate court conducting the hearing shall mail to the dog owner written notice of the date, time, and place of the hearing. At the hearing, the dog owner shall be given the opportunity to testify and present evidence and the authority or probate court conducting the hearing shall receive other evidence and testimony as may be reasonably necessary to sustain, modify, or overrule the officer's determination. 
(d)  Within ten days after the hearing, the authority or probate court which conducted the hearing shall mail written notice to the dog owner of its determination on the matter. If such determination is that the dog is a dangerous dog, the notice of classification shall specify the date upon which that determination shall be effective. If the determination is that the dog is to be euthanized pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 4-8-26, the notice shall specify the date by which the euthanasia shall occur. 
(e)  Judicial review of the authority's final decision may be had in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 15-9-30.9. Judicial review of a probate court's final decision shall be in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 5-3-2 and costs shall be paid, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-3-22.  
Sec. 8-42. - Potentially dangerous dogs. 
Any dog meeting the definition of a potentially dangerous dog, as defined, shall be kept in a proper enclosure, as defined in this chapter. The city manager may, in his discretion, provide notice to any owner or custodian that a dog is deemed or accused as potentially dangerous. The investigation, notice and determination of a potentially dangerous dog by the city manager, or his designee, shall be administered as provided in this chapter for dangerous dogs.  
Sec. 8-43. - Nuisance animals. 
No person shall knowingly keep, own, harbor, or act as custodian of an animal constituting a nuisance.  
Secs. 8-44—8-74. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - BIRDS 
 
Sec. 8-75. - City designated bird sanctuary. 
The entire area embraced within the corporate limits of the city is hereby designated as a bird sanctuary. 
(Code 1984, § 11-4-1; Code 1996, § 14-1; Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-1)  
Sec. 8-76. - Birds protected; abatement of conditions creating nuisance or a menace to health and property. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful to trap, hunt, shoot or attempt to shoot or molest in any manner any bird or wild fowl or to rob bird's nests or wild fowl nests; provided, however, that if starlings or similar birds are found congregating in such numbers in a particular locality so that they constitute a nuisance or menace to health or property, in the opinion of the proper authorities of the city, then, in such event, such authorities, or others designated by the mayor and council, shall meet with representatives of the Audubon Society, Bird Club, Garden Club or Humane Society, or as many of these clubs as are found to exist in the city, after having given such clubs at least three days' actual notice of the time and place of the meeting to the representatives of these clubs. 
(b)  If, as a result of the meeting, no satisfactory alternative is found to abate such nuisance, then the birds may be destroyed in such numbers and such manner as is deemed advisable by the designee of the mayor and council, under the supervision and at the direction of the chief of police. 
(Code 1984, § 11-4-2; Code 1996, § 14-2; Ord. of 8-4-2009(2), § 14-2)  
Chapter 10 - BUILDINGS AND BUILDING REGULATIONS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 10-1. - Fire limits. 
The fire limits of the city shall be as shown on a map thereof on file in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-13; Code 1996, § 18-1)  
Sec. 10-2. - Building permit. 
(a)  Required. It shall be unlawful to commence the excavation or filling of any lot for any construction of any building, to commence construction of any building or to commence the moving or alteration of any building, or to commence the development of land for a use not requiring a building, until the building official has issued a building permit for such work. 
(b)  Application. All applications to the building official for building permits shall be accompanied by plans in duplicate, drawn to scale, showing: 
(1)  The actual dimensions of the lot to be built upon. 
(2)  The size of the building to be erected. 
(3)  The location of the building on the lot. 
(4)  The location of existing structures on the lot, if any. 
(5)  The number of dwelling units the building is designed to accommodate. 
(6)  The setback lines of buildings on adjoining lots. 
(7)  Such other information as may be essential for determining whether the provisions of this chapter are being observed. 
(Code 1984, §§ 8-6-72, 8-6-73; Code 1996, §§ 98-32, 98-33)  
Sec. 10-3. - Permit fees. 
(a)  The permits required to be obtained by virtue of the provisions of any of the codes which have been adopted in section 10-55 shall, notwithstanding any provision contained in any of the codes, not be issued until the fees provided for in this chapter shall have been paid. Such fees shall be as established by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The fees referred to in subsection (a) of this section shall apply to permits required to be obtained by virtue of the provisions of any of the standard construction codes adopted in section 10-55, but the costs of any portion of the work shall be counted only once in determining the amount of the required fee regardless of the fact that such work might otherwise be subject to a fee under more than one of the adopted codes. 
(c)  Notwithstanding any other provisions of state or local law which may provide to the contrary, the contractor with the ultimate responsibility for the work shall obtain the permit and pay the fee required under this chapter for the work, regardless of the fact that a subcontractor may actually perform the work. 
(d)  A plan-checking fee shall be paid to the building official at the time of submitting plans and specifications for checking. Such plan-checking fee shall be equal to one-half of the building permit fee as established by the mayor and council. The fee paid under this section shall be credited to any fee that becomes due under this section. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-4; Code 1996, §§ 18-90, 18-91; Ord. of 1-3-1995(3))  
Sec. 10-4. - Permit fees; double fee provision. 
Where work for which a permit is required by this chapter is started or proceeded with prior to obtaining such permit, the required fees shall be doubled, but the payment of such double fee shall not relieve any persons from fully complying with the requirements of this chapter in the execution of the work nor from any other penalties prescribed in this chapter. 
(Code 1996, § 18-92)  
Secs. 10-5—10-26. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 10-27. - Office created. 
The office of building official is hereby created and the executive official in charge shall be known as the building official. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-1(a); Code 1996, § 18-46)  
Sec. 10-28. - Appointment; removal. 
The building official shall be appointed by the city manager with confirmation by the mayor and council. His appointment shall continue during good behavior and satisfactory service. He shall not be removed from office except for cause after full opportunity has been given him to be heard on specific charges. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-1(b); Code 1996, § 18-47)  
Sec. 10-29. - Temporary absence or disability. 
During the temporary absence or disability of the building official, the mayor and council shall designate an acting building official. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-1(c); Code 1996, § 18-48)  
Sec. 10-30. - Duties generally. 
Except where this chapter expressly provides to the contrary, it shall be the duty of the building official to enforce all provisions of this Code and laws relating to the construction, alteration, removal and demolition of buildings and structures. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-2; Code 1996, § 18-49)  
Sec. 10-31. - Right of entry. 
The building official, in the discharge of his official duties, and upon proper identification, shall have the authority to enter any building, structure or premises at any reasonable hour. 
(Code 1984, § 8-2-3; Code 1996, § 18-50)  
Sec. 10-32. - Appeals. 
Notwithstanding any provision to the contrary contained in any of the codes which have been adopted by reference in this chapter, any decision by the building official or any assistant of his, under any of the codes, may be appealed by the aggrieved party only to the board of adjustments and appeals. 
(Code 1996, § 18-94)  
Sec. 10-33. - Established; jurisdiction. 
There is hereby established a board to be called the "Donalsonville Board of Adjustments and Appeals," referred to in this Code as the board of adjustments and appeals, which shall consist of five members. Such board shall be appointed by the chief appointing authority, whose qualifications shall be such as shall be deemed satisfactory to the chief appointing authority. The board of adjustments and appeals shall have jurisdiction to hear and decide all appeals from decisions of the building official as provided in section 10-32. 
(Code 1996, § 18-66)  
Secs. 10-34—10-54. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - CONSTRUCTION CODES[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to adopt technical codes, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(12); construction standards generally, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 10-55. - Adoption of minimum standards codes. 
Pursuant to minimum state construction codes, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-25; enforcement of minimum state construction codes O.C.G.A. § 8-2-26; fire escapes in buildings, O.C.G.A. § 8-2-50; and access to and use of public facilities by physically handicapped persons, O.C.G.A. § 30-3-1 et seq., the city council adopts the following minimum standard codes as adopted and amended by the state department of community affairs: 
(1)  International Building Code. 
(2)  International Mechanical Code. 
(3)  International Fuel Gas Code. 
(4)  International Plumbing Code. 
(5)  National Electrical Code. 
(6)  International Fire Code. 
(7)  International Residential Code (CABO One and Two Family Dwelling Code). 
(8)  International Energy Conservation Code. 
(9)  International Swimming Pool and Spa Code. 
(Ord. No. 09-08-14, 2-6-2018)  
Sec. 10-56. - Penalty for violation of article. 
In addition to all other remedies provided by the Code, the city shall decline to render electrical and water utility services to any construction falling within the purview of any of the codes which does not comply with the provisions of the codes applicable thereto. 
(Code 1996, § 18-88)  
Secs. 10-57—10-85. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - DONALSONVILLE DERELICT PROPERTY ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 10-86. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Donalsonville Derelict Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-129)  
Sec. 10-87. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Applicable codes means any building or housing standards provided in O.C.G.A. § 8-2-1 et seq. as adopted in this Code or operation of law, or other property maintenance standards as adopted by ordinance or operation of law, or general nuisance law, relative to the safe use of real property; any fire or life safety code as provided for in O.C.G.A. § 25-2-1 et seq. 
Closing means causing a dwelling, building, or structure to be vacated and secured against unauthorized entry. 
Drug crime means an act which is a violation of O.C.G.A. § 16-13-20 et seq., known as the "Georgia Controlled Substances Act." 
Dwellings, buildings, or structures means any building or structure or part thereof used and occupied for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business uses, or intended to be so used, and includes any outhouses, improvements, and appurtenances belonging thereto or usually enjoyed therewith and also includes any building or structure of any design. As used in this article, the term "dwellings, buildings, or structures" shall not mean or include any farm, any building or structure located on a farm, or any agricultural facility or other building or structure used for the production, growing, raising, harvesting, storage, or processing of crops, livestock, poultry, or other farm products. 
Governing authority means the city council. 
Graffiti means any inscriptions, words, figures, paintings, or other defacements that are written, marked, etched, scratched, sprayed, drawn, painted, or engraved on or otherwise affixed to any surface of public or private property by means of any aerosol paint container, broad-tipped marker, gum label, paint stick, graffiti stick, etching equipment, brush, or other device capable of scarring or leaving a visible mark on any surface without prior authorization from the owner or occupant of the property. 
Interested party means: 
(1)  The owner; 
(2)  Persons in possession of said property and premises; 
(3)  Those parties having an interest in the property as revealed by a certification of title to the property conducted in accordance with the title standards of the state bar; 
(4)  Those parties having filed a notice in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 48-3-9; and 
(5)  Any other party having an interest in the property whose identity and address are reasonably ascertainable from the records of the municipality or records maintained in the county courthouse or by the clerk of court; provided, however, the term "interested party" shall not include the holder of the benefit or burden of any easement or right-of-way whose interest is properly recorded, which interest shall remain unaffected. 
Municipality means the City of Donalsonville, Georgia. 
Owner means the holder of the title in fee simple and every mortgagee of record. 
Public authority means any member of the governing authority, any director of a public housing authority, or any officer who is in charge of any department or branch of government (municipal, county or state) relating to health, fire, life safety, building regulations, or to other activities concerning dwellings, buildings, or structures, or use of private property within the city. 
Public officer means the city manager, who is authorized to exercise the powers prescribed by this article, and any officer or employee of the city to whom he delegates such authority. 
Repair means altering or improving a dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes in the jurisdiction where the property is located and the cleaning or removal of debris, trash, and other materials present and accumulated which create a health or safety hazard in or about any dwelling, building, or structure. 
Resident means any person residing in the jurisdiction where the property is located on or after the date on which the alleged nuisance arose. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-130)  
Sec. 10-88. - Duty of owners of real property and structures thereon. 
It is the duty of the owner of every dwelling, building, structure, or private property within the jurisdiction to construct and maintain such dwelling, building, structure, or property in conformance with applicable codes in force within the city or such laws and ordinances which regulate and prohibit activities on private property and which declare it to be a public nuisance to construct or maintain any dwelling, building, structure, or use private property in violation of such codes, laws or ordinances. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-131)  
Sec. 10-89. - Declaration of public nuisance. 
(a)  Every dwelling, building, or structure within the city which: 
(1)  Is constructed or maintained in violation of applicable codes in force within the city; 
(2)  Is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use or occupancy due to inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, sanitation, or open spaces; 
(3)  Poses an imminent harm to life or other property due to fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm or other natural catastrophe; 
(4)  Is vacant and used in the commission of drug crimes; 
(5)  Is occupied and used repeatedly for the commission of illegal activities, including facilitating organized crime or criminal enterprises, after written notice to the owner of such activities conducted therein; 
(6)  Is abandoned; or 
(7)  Otherwise constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions; 
is hereby declared a public nuisance. 
(b)  Every private property within the city on which is being regularly conducted any activity or land use in violation of applicable laws and ordinances, including the zoning ordinance of this city, is hereby declared to be a public nuisance. 
(c)  Property which may be deemed aesthetically substandard or deteriorating shall not meet the definition of a public nuisance unless the overall condition or use of the property results in impaired health, safety, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-132)  
Sec. 10-90. - Powers of city manager or his designee. 
(a)  In carrying out his duties pursuant to this article, the city manager or his designee to whom his authority is assigned shall, in addition to those powers otherwise conferred upon or delegated to him by the Charter and other ordinances of the city, be empowered to: 
(1)  Investigate and inspect the condition of dwellings, buildings, structures, and private property within the city to determine those structures and property uses in violation of this article. Entries onto private property shall be made in a manner so as to cause the least possible inconvenience; provided, however, the public officer shall not enter into any occupied dwelling or structure without first having obtained the consent of the owner or a person in possession. In those cases where consent to entry is denied after reasonable request, the public officer may apply to the municipal court for an administrative search warrant upon showing probable cause that a violation exists; 
(2)  Retain experts, including certified real estate appraisers, qualified building contractors, and qualified building inspectors, engineers, surveyors, accountants, and attorneys; 
(3)  Appoint and fix the duties of such officers and employees of the city as he deems necessary to carry out the purposes of this article; and 
(4)  Delegate any of his functions and powers under this article to such officers, employees and agents as he may designate. 
(b)  In addition to the procedures set forth in this article, the city manager or his designee may issue citations for violations of state minimum standard codes, optional building, fire, life safety and other codes adopted by ordinance, and conditions declared to constitute a public health or safety hazard or general nuisance, and to seek enforcement of such citations before the municipal court prior to issuing a complaint in rem as provided in this article. Nothing in this article shall be construed to impair or limit in any way the power of the city to define and declare nuisances and to cause their removal or abatement by other summary proceedings. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-133)  
Sec. 10-91. - Complaint in rem in municipal court; procedure; lien; appeal. 
(a)  Whenever a request is filed with the public officer by a public authority or by at least five residents of the municipality charging that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer may make an investigation or inspection of the specific dwelling, building, structure, or property and make a written report of his findings. Such officer shall be guided in his investigation by documenting conditions, which include, but are not limited to: 
(1)  Defects therein increasing the hazards of fire, accidents, or other calamities; 
(2)  Lack of adequate ventilation, light, or sanitary facilities; 
(3)  Dilapidation; 
(4)  Disrepair by failure to conform to applicable codes and ordinances; 
(5)  Structural defects which render the structure unsafe for human habitation or occupancy; 
(6)  Uncleanliness; or 
(7)  The presence of graffiti which is visible from adjoining public or private property. 
(b)  If the public officer's investigation or inspection identifies that any dwelling, building, structure, or property is unfit for human habitation or for commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the public officer shall file a complaint in rem in the municipal court of the city against the lot, tract, or parcel of real property on which such dwelling, building, or structure is situated or where such public health hazard or general nuisance exists and shall cause a summons and a copy of the complaint to be served on the interested parties in such dwelling, building, or structure. The complaint shall identify the subject real property by appropriate street address and official tax map reference; identify the interested parties; state with particularity the factual basis for the action; and contain a statement of the action sought by the public officer to abate the alleged nuisance. The summons shall notify the interested parties that a hearing will be held before the municipal court at a certain date and time and at a place within the county or municipality where the property is located. Such hearing shall be held not less than 15 days nor more than 45 days after the filing of said complaint in the proper court. The interested parties shall have the right to file an answer to the complaint and to appear in person or by attorney and offer testimony at the time and place fixed for the hearing. 
(c)  If, after such notice and hearing, the court determines that the dwelling, building, or structure in question is unfit for human habitation or is unfit for its current commercial, industrial, or business use and not in compliance with applicable codes; is vacant and being used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or constitutes an endangerment to the public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions, the court shall state, in writing, findings of fact in support of such determination and shall issue and cause to be served upon the interested parties that have answered the complaint or appeared at the hearing an order: 
(1)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure can be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to repair, alter, or improve such dwelling, building, or structure so as to bring it into full compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violation; and, if applicable, to secure by closing the structure so that it cannot be used in connection with the commission of drug crimes; or 
(2)  If the repair, alteration, or improvement of the said dwelling, building, or structure in order to bring it into full compliance with applicable codes relevant to the cited violations cannot be made at a reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure, requiring the owner, within the time specified in the order, to demolish and remove such dwelling, building, or structure and all debris from the property. 
For purposes of this section, the court shall make its determination of reasonable cost in relation to the present value of the dwelling, building, or structure without consideration of the value of the land on which the structure is situated; provided, however, that costs of the preparation necessary to repair, alter, or improve a structure may be considered; and, provided further, that if the unsatisfactory condition is limited solely to the presence of graffiti, the dwelling, building or structure shall not be ordered demolished or closed, but its owner may be ordered to repair the same by cleaning or removal of the graffiti. Income and financial status of the owner shall not be a factor in the court's determination. The present value of the structure and the costs of repair, alteration, or improvement may be established by affidavits of real estate appraisers with a state appraiser classification as provided in O.C.G.A. § 43-39A-1 et seq., qualified building contractors, or qualified building inspectors, without actual testimony presented. Costs of repair, alteration, or improvement of the structure shall be the cost necessary to bring the structure into compliance with the applicable codes relevant to the cited violations in force in the jurisdiction. 
(d)  If the owner fails to comply with an order to repair or demolish the dwelling, building, or structure, the public officer shall cause such dwelling, building, or structure to be repaired, altered, or improved, or to be vacated and closed, or demolished within 270 days of the expiration of time specified in the order for abatement by the owner. Any time during which such action is prohibited by a court order issued pursuant to subsection (c) of this section or any equitable relief granted by a court of competent jurisdiction shall not be counted toward the 270 days in which such abatement action shall commence. The public officer shall cause to be posted on the main entrance of the building, dwelling, or structure a placard with the following words: "This building is unfit for human habitation or commercial, industrial, or business use and does not comply with the applicable codes or has been ordered secured to prevent its use in connection with drug crimes or constitutes an endangerment to public health or safety as a result of unsanitary or unsafe conditions. The use or occupation of this building is prohibited and unlawful." 
(e)  If the public officer has the structure demolished, reasonable effort shall be made to salvage reusable materials for credit against the cost of demolition. The proceeds of any monies received from the sale of salvaged materials shall be used or applied against the cost of the demolition and removal of the structure, and proper records shall be kept showing application of sales proceeds. Any such sale of salvaged materials may be made without the necessity of public advertisement and bid. The public officer and governing authority are relieved of any and all liability resulting from or occasioned by the sale of any such salvaged materials, including, without limitation, defects in such salvaged materials. 
(f)  The amount of the cost of demolition, including all court costs, appraisal fees, administrative costs incurred by the tax commissioner, and all other costs necessarily associated with the abatement action, including restoration to grade of the real property after demolition, shall be a lien against the real property upon which such cost was incurred. 
(g)  The lien provided for in subsection (f) of this section shall attach to the real property upon the filing of a certified copy of the order requiring repair, closure, or demolition in the office of the clerk of superior court in the county and shall relate back to the date of the filing of the lis pendens notice required under section 10-92(a)(4). The clerk of superior court shall record and index such certified copy of the order in the deed records of the county and enter the lien on the general execution docket. The lien shall be superior to all other liens on the property, except liens for taxes to which the lien shall be inferior, and shall continue in-force until paid. After filing a certified copy of the order with the clerk of superior court, the public officer shall, within 90 days of the completion of repairs, demolition or closure, forward a copy of the order and a final statement of costs to the county tax commissioner. 
(h)  It shall be the duty of the county tax commissioner to collect the amount of the lien in conjunction with the collection of ad valorem taxes on the property and to collect the amount of the lien as if it were a real property ad valorem tax, using all methods available for collecting real property ad valorem taxes, including specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-4-5; provided, however, that the limitation of O.C.G.A. § 48-4-78, which requires 12 months of delinquency before commencing a tax foreclosure, shall not apply; provided, further, that redemption of property from the lien may be made in accordance with the provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 48-4-80 and 48-4-81. The tax commissioner may initiate enforcement of liens imposed under this section at any time following receipt of the final determination of costs from the public officer. The unpaid lien amount shall bear interest and penalties from and after the date of final determination of costs in the same amount as applicable to interest and penalties on unpaid real property ad valorem taxes. 
(i)  The tax commissioner shall remit the amount collected to the governing authority of the municipality whose ordinance is being enforced. The tax commissioner may retain an amount equal to the cost of administering collection of the lien. Any such amount collected and retained for administration shall be deposited in the general fund of the county to pay the cost of administering the lien. 
(j)  The governing authority may waive and release any such lien imposed on property upon the owner of such property entering into a contract with the municipality agreeing to a timetable for rehabilitation of the real property or the dwelling, building, or structure on the property and demonstrating the financial means to accomplish such rehabilitation. 
(k)  Review of a court order requiring the repair, alteration, improvement, or demolition of a dwelling, building, or structure shall be by direct appeal to the superior court under O.C.G.A. § 5-3-29. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-134)  
Sec. 10-92. - Service of complaints or orders upon owners and parties in interest. 
(a)  A summons and copies of the complaint shall be served in the following manner: 
(1)  In all cases, a copy of the complaint and summons shall be conspicuously posted on the subject dwelling, building, structure, or property within three business days of filing of the complaint and at least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing; 
(2)  At least 14 days prior to the date of the hearing, the public officer shall mail copies of the complaint and summons by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery, return receipt requested, to all interested parties whose identities and addresses are readily ascertainable. Copies of the complaint and summons shall also be mailed by first class United States mail to the property address to the attention of the occupants, if any; 
(3)  For interested parties whose mailing address is unknown, a notice stating the date, time, and place of the hearing shall be published in the newspaper in which the sheriff's advertisements appear in such county once a week for two consecutive weeks prior to the hearing; and 
(4)  A notice of lis pendens shall be filed in the office of the clerk of superior court in which the dwelling, building, structure, or property is located at the time of filing the complaint in the municipal court. 
(b)  The public officer shall cause an affidavit of service to be filed of record in the municipal court prior to the hearing showing compliance with the service requirements of this section. Such affidavit shall constitute a prima facie showing of minimum procedural due process and shall constitute sufficient proof that service was perfected. 
(c)  Orders and other filings made subsequent to service of the initial complaint shall be served in the manner provided in this section on every interested party who answers the complaint or appears at the hearing. Any interested party who fails to answer or appear at the hearing shall be deemed to have waived all further notice in the proceedings. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-135)  
Sec. 10-93. - Limitation of liability for Code enforcement; no special duty created. 
It is the intent of this article to protect the public health, life safety and general welfare of properties and occupiers of buildings and structures within the city in general, but not to create any special duty or relationship with any individual person or to any specified property within or without the boundaries of the city. Approval of a permit and inspection of a property shall in no manner guarantee or warrant to the owner or occupants thereof that said property has been constructed, maintained, or operated in conformance with applicable codes, laws and regulations. The city reserves the right to assert all available immunities and defenses in any action seeking to impose monetary damages upon the city, its officers, employees and agents arising out of any alleged failure or breach of duty or relationship as may now exist or hereafter be created. To the extent any federal or state law, regulation, or ordinance requires compliance as a condition precedent to the issuance of a permit, plan or design approval, inspection or other activity by the city, its officers, employees and agents, issuance of such permit, approval, or inspection shall not be deemed to constitute a waiver or estoppel of the condition precedent, and it shall remain the obligation and responsibility of the owner, his design professional, and his contractor to satisfy such legal requirements. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-136)  
Secs. 10-94—10-114. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - DONALSONVILLE BLIGHTED PROPERTY ORDINANCE 
 
Sec. 10-115. - Short title. 
This article shall be known as the "Donalsonville Blighted Property Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-141)  
Sec. 10-116. - Purpose. 
(a)  The existence of real property which is maintained in a blighted condition increases the burden of the state and local government by increasing the need for government services, including, but not limited to, social services, public safety services, and code enforcement services. Rehabilitation of blighted property decreases this need for such government services. 
(b)  In recognition of the need for enhanced governmental services and in order to encourage private property owners to maintain their real property and the buildings, structures and improvement thereon in good condition and repair, and as an incentive to encourage community redevelopment, a community redevelopment tax incentive program is hereby established as authorized by Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VII(d). 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-142)  
Sec. 10-117. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Blighted property , blighted , or blight means any urbanized or developed property which: 
(1)  Presents two or more of the following conditions: 
a.  Uninhabitable, unsafe, or abandoned structures; 
b.  Inadequate provisions for ventilation, light, air, or sanitation; 
c.  An imminent harm to life or other property caused by fire, flood, hurricane, tornado, earthquake, storm, or other natural catastrophe respecting which the governor has declared a state of emergency under the state law or has certified the need for disaster assistance under federal law; provided, however, this article shall not apply to property unless the relevant public agency has given notice in writing to the property owner regarding specific harm caused by the property and the owner has failed to take reasonable measures to remedy the harm; 
d.  A site identified by the Federal Environmental Protection Agency as a superfund site, pursuant to 42 USC 9601 et seq., or having environmental contamination to an extent that requires remedial investigation or a feasibility study; 
e.  Repeated illegal activity on the individual property, of which the property owner knew or should have known; or 
f.  The maintenance of the property is below state, county, or municipal codes for at least one year after written notice of the code violation to its owner; and 
(2)  Is conducive to ill health, transmission of disease, infant mortality, or crime in the immediate proximity of the property. 
Property shall not be deemed blighted solely because of aesthetic conditions. 
Building inspector means a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
Community redevelopment means any activity, project, or service necessary or incidental to achieving the redevelopment or revitalization of a redevelopment area or portion thereof designated for redevelopment through an urban redevelopment plan or thorough local ordinances relating to the repair, closing, and demolition of buildings and structures unfit for human habitation. 
Governing authority means the city council. 
Millage or millage rate means the levy, in mills, which is established by the governing authority for purposes of financing, in whole or in part, the levying jurisdiction's general fund expenses for the fiscal year. 
Public officer means the city manager or such officer or employee of the city as designated by the city manager to perform the duties and responsibilities hereafter set forth in this article. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-143)  
Sec. 10-118. - Ad valorem tax increase on blighted property. 
(a)  There is hereby levied on all real property within the city, which has been officially identified as maintained in a blighted condition, an increased ad valorem tax by applying a factor of seven to the millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a higher millage rate than generally applied in the municipality, or otherwise provided by general law; provided, however, real property on which there is situated a dwelling house which is being occupied as the primary residence of one or more persons shall not be subject to official identification as maintained in a blighted condition and shall not be subject to increased taxation. 
(b)  Such increased ad valorem tax shall be applied and reflected in the first tax bill rendered following official designation of a real property as blighted. 
(c)  Revenues arising from the increased rate of ad valorem taxation shall, upon receipt, be segregated by the city manager and used only for community redevelopment purposes, as identified in an approved urban redevelopment program, including defraying the cost of the city's program to close, repair, or demolish unfit building and structures. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-144)  
Sec. 10-119. - Identification of blighted property. 
(a)  In order for a parcel of real property to be officially designated as maintained in a blighted condition and subject to increased taxation, the following steps must be completed: 
(1)  An inspection must be performed on the parcel of property. In order for an inspection to be performed: 
a.  A request may be made by the public officer or by at least five residents of the city; or 
b.  The public officer may cause a survey of existing housing conditions to be performed, or may refer to any such survey conducted or finalized within the previous five years, to locate or identify any parcels which may be in a blighted condition and for which a full inspection should be conducted to determine if that parcel of property meets the criteria set out in this article for designation as being maintained in a blighted condition. 
(2)  A written inspection report of the findings for any parcel of property inspected pursuant to subsection (a)(1) of this section shall be prepared and submitted to the public officer. Where feasible, photographs of the conditions found to exist on the property on the date of inspection shall be made and shall supplement the inspection report. Where compliance with minimum construction, housing, occupancy, fire and life safety codes in effect within the city are in question, the inspection shall be conducted by a certified inspector possessing the requisite qualifications to determine minimal code compliance. 
(3)  Following completion of the inspection report, the public officer shall make a determination, in writing, that a property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article, and is subject to increased taxation. 
(4)  The public officer shall cause a written notice of his determination that the real property at issue is being maintained in a blighted condition to be served upon the person shown on the most recent tax digest of the county as responsible for payment of ad valorem taxes assessed thereon; provided, however, where through the existence of reasonable diligence, it becomes known to the public officer that the real property has been sold or conveyed since publication of the most recent tax digest, written notice shall be given to the person known or reasonably believed to then own the property or be chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes thereon, at the best address available. Service in the manner set forth at O.C.G.A. § 41-2-12 shall constitute sufficient notice to the property's owner or person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes for purpose of this section, except that posting of the notice on the property will not be required. 
(b)  The written notice given to the person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall notify such person of the public officer's determination that the real property is being maintained in a blighted condition and shall advise such person of the hours and location at which the person may inspect and copy the public officer's determination and any supporting documentation. Persons notified that the real property of which the person is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes shall have 30 days from the receipt of notice in which to request a hearing before the city's municipal court. Written request for a hearing shall be filed with the public officer and shall be date stamped upon receipt. Upon receipt of a request for a hearing, the public officer shall notify the municipal court and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. 
(c)  Within 30 days of the receipt of a request for a hearing, the municipal court clerk shall set a date, time and location for the hearing and shall give at least ten business days' notice to the person requesting the hearing, the public officer and the building inspector or person who performed the inspection and prepared the inspection report. Notice of scheduled hearings shall be published as a legal advertisement in the official newspaper of the city, or other designated legal organ in the county, at least five days prior to the hearing. Hearings may be continued by the municipal court judge upon request of any party, for good cause. 
(d)  At the hearing, the public officer shall have the burden of demonstrating by a preponderance of the evidence that the subject property is maintained in a blighted condition, as defined by this article. The municipal court judge shall cause a record of the evidence submitted at the hearing to be maintained. Upon hearing from the public officer and/or his witnesses and the person requesting the hearing and/or his witnesses, the judge of the municipal court shall make a determination either affirming or reversing the determination of the public officer. The determination shall be in writing and copies thereof shall be served on the parties by certified mail or statutory overnight delivery. The determination by the court shall be deemed final. A copy of such determination shall also be served upon the tax commissioner of the county, who shall include the increased tax on the next regular tax bill rendered on behalf of the city. 
(e)  Persons aggrieved by the determination of the court affirming the determination of the public officer may petition the superior court of the county for a writ of certiorari within 30 days of issuance of the court's written determination. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-145)  
Sec. 10-120. - Remediation or redevelopment. 
(a)  A property owner or person who is chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on real property which has been officially designated pursuant to this article as property maintained in a blighted condition may petition the public officer to lift the designation, upon proof of compliance with the following: 
(1)  Completion of work required under a plan of remedial action or redevelopment approved by the city's planning and development director which addresses the conditions of blight found to exist on or within the property, including compliance with all applicable minimum codes; or 
(2)  Completion of work required under a court order entered in a proceeding brought pursuant to this article. 
(b)  Before action on a petition to lift the designation, the public officer shall cause the property to be thoroughly inspected by a building inspector who, by written inspection report, shall certify that all requisite work has been performed to applicable code in a workmanlike manner, in accordance with the specifications of the plan of remedial action or redevelopment, or applicable court order. Upon finding required work to be satisfactorily performed, the public officer shall issue a written determination that the real property is no longer maintained in a blighted condition. Copies of this determination shall be served upon the person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes, and upon the tax commissioner of the county. 
(c)  All plans for remedial action or redevelopment shall be in writing, signed by the person chargeable with the payment of ad valorem taxes on the real property and the director of the city's planning and development department, and contain the following: 
(1)  The plan shall be consistent with the city's comprehensive plan and all laws and ordinances governing the subject property, and shall conform to any urban redevelopment plan adopted for the area within which the property lies; 
(2)  The plan shall set forth in reasonable detail the requirements for repair, closure, demolition, or restoration of existing structures, in accordance with minimal statewide codes; where structures are demolished, the plan shall include provisions for debris removal, stabilization and landscaping of the property; 
(3)  On parcels of five acres or greater, the plan shall address the relationship to local objectives respecting land uses, improved traffic, public transportation, public utilities, recreational and community facilities, and other public improvements; 
(4)  The plan shall contain verifiable funding sources which will be used to complete its requirements and show the feasibility thereof; 
(5)  The plan shall contain a timetable for completion of required work; and 
(6)  Any outstanding ad valorem taxes (state, school, county and city, including the increased tax pursuant to this article) and governmental liens due and payable on the property must be satisfied in full. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-146)  
Sec. 10-121. - Decrease of tax rate. 
(a)  Real property which has had its designation as maintained in a blighted condition removed by the public officer, as provided in section 10-119, shall be eligible for a decrease in the rate of city ad valorem taxation by applying a factor of 0.5 to the city millage rate applied to the property, so that such property shall be taxed at a lower millage rate than the millage rate generally applied in the municipality or otherwise provided by general law; such decreased rate of taxation shall be applied beginning with the next tax bill rendered following removal of official designation of a real property as blighted. The decreased rate of taxation may be given in successive years, depending on the amount of cost expended by the person chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property to satisfy its remediation or redevelopment, with every $25,000.00 or portion thereof equaling one year of tax reduction; provided, however, that no property shall be entitled to reduction in city ad valorem taxes for more than four successive years. 
(b)  In order to claim entitlement for a decreased rate of taxation, the person chargeable with payment of ad valorem taxes on the property shall submit a notarized affidavit to the public officer, supported by receipts or other evidence of payment of the amount expended. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-147)  
Sec. 10-122. - Notice to tax commissioner. 
It shall be the duty of the public officer to notify the tax commissioner of the county in writing as to designation or removal of designation of a specific property as maintained in a blighted condition. Such notice shall identify the specific property by street address and tax map, block and parcel number, as assigned by the county tax assessor's office. The public officer shall cooperate with the tax commissioner to ensure accurate tax billing of those properties subject to increased or reduced ad valorem taxation under this article. 
(Ord. of 5-7-2013, § 18-148)  
Chapter 12 - BUSINESS REGULATIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on expanding the power of municipal regulation over any business activity regulated by the public service commission, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(5); evidence of state license as prerequisite to local business license, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-6; taxes and regulatory fees on businesses, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-5 et seq.; local taxes and fees, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 12-1—12-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OCCUPATION TAXES 
 
Sec. 12-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Administrative fee means the component of the occupation tax which approximates the reasonable cost of handling and processing the occupation tax. 
Employee. 
(1)  Except as otherwise provided in subsection (2) of this definition, the term "employee" means an individual whose work is performed under the direction and supervision of the employer and whose employer withholds FICA, federal income tax, or state income tax from such individual's compensation or whose employer issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation a form I.R.S. W-2 but not a form I.R.S. 1099. 
(2)  The term "employee" means an individual who performs work under the direction and supervision of one business or practitioner in accordance with the terms of a contract or agreement with another business which recruits such individual as an employee of the business or practitioner which issues to such individual for purposes of documenting compensation on a form I.R.S. W-2. 
Location or office means any structure or vehicle where a business, profession or occupation is conducted, but shall not include a temporary or construction work site which serves a single customer or project, or a vehicle used for sales or delivery by a business or practitioner of a profession. The renter's or lessee's location which is the site of personal property which is rented or leased from another does not constitute a location or office for the personal property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor. The site of real property which is rented or leased to another does not constitute a location or office for the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor unless the real property's owner, lessor, or the agent of the owner or lessor, in addition to showing the property to prospective lessees or tenants and performing maintenance or repair of the property, otherwise conducts the business of renting or leasing the real property at such site or otherwise conducts any other business, profession, or occupation at such site. 
Occupation tax means a tax levied for revenue purposes on persons, partnerships, corporations or other entities for engaging in an occupation, profession or business in the city and enacted by a local government as a revenue-raising ordinance or resolution. 
Occupation tax certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of the occupation tax and administrative fee. 
Regulatory fee means a fee which is collected pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 39-71-2(8) to offset the costs of the city as an exercise of its police power and as a part of or as an aid to regulation of an occupation, profession, or business and which approximates the cost of regulatory activity by the city. 
Regulatory fee certificate means a document issued by the city acknowledging payment of a regulatory fee. 
(Code 1996, § 22-31; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-1)  
Sec. 12-20. - Administrative fee. 
A non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee, as established by the mayor and council is required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 
(Code 1996, § 22-32; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-2)  
Sec. 12-21. - Regulatory fee. 
(a)  Businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in section 12-22 must pay an annual nonrefundable regulatory fee in accordance with the rate set forth in section 12-22. 
(b)  Every business, individual and location subject to payment of a regulatory fee levied by this article shall display a current regulatory fee certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the regulatory fee certificate or an unaltered duplicate of such certificate shall be shown to any police officer, building official or city clerk upon request. 
(Code 1996, § 22-33; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-3)  
Sec. 12-22. - Annual regulatory fees of certain businesses and individuals. 
In accordance with section 12-21, businesses and individuals engaging in the occupations or businesses set forth in this section and who do not otherwise pay an occupation tax in the city must pay an annual nonrefundable regulatory fee in the amount set forth for that category in which their business or occupation is listed as follows: 
(1)  Category A. The occupations or businesses listed in category A shall pay an annual regulatory fee as established by the mayor and council. Such occupations or businesses include: 
a.  Auto and motorcycle racing; 
b.  Boxing and wrestling promoters; 
c.  Carnivals or circuses; 
d.  Escort services; 
e.  Fortunetellers; 
f.  Handwriting analysts; 
g.  Hypnotists; 
h.  Massage parlors; 
i.  Peddlers; and 
j.  Tattoo artists. 
(2)  Category B. The occupations or businesses listed in category B shall pay an annual regulatory fee as established by the mayor and council. Such occupations or businesses include: 
a.  Building and construction contractors, subcontractors and workers; 
b.  Boardinghouses; 
c.  Burglar and fire alarm installers; 
d.  Businesses which provide appearance bonds; 
e.  Dealers in precious metals; 
f.  Electricians or electrical contractors; 
g.  Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning contractors; 
h.  Hotels and motels; 
i.  Modeling agencies; 
j.  Plumbers or plumbing contractors; 
k.  Restaurants or food service businesses or establishments; 
l.  Scrap metal processors; 
m.  Shooting galleries and firearm ranges; 
n.  Swimming pool contractors or service companies; 
o.  Taxicab and limousine operators; and 
p.  Any other business or practitioner not specifically covered by the occupational tax ordinance which may, in the judgment of city officials, require local government regulation. 
(3)  Category C. The occupations or businesses listed in category C shall pay an annual regulatory fee as established by the mayor and council. Such occupations or businesses include: 
a.  Firearms dealers; 
b.  Health clubs, gyms and spas; 
c.  Pawnbrokers; 
d.  Stone or monument companies; 
e.  Welding services or companies; and 
f.  Special home occupations, such as mail and online sales occupations and activities. 
(4)  Category D. The occupations or businesses listed in category D shall pay an annual regulatory fee as established by the mayor and council. Such occupations or businesses include: 
a.  Nursing and personal care homes or services; 
b.  Parking lots; 
c.  Lawn care services or companies; 
d.  Locksmiths; and 
e.  Stump grinders. 
(5)  Category E. The occupations or businesses listed in category E shall pay an annual regulatory fee as established by the mayor and council. Such occupations or businesses include: 
a.  Newspaper vending boxes. 
(Code 1996, § 22-34; Ord. of 12-5-1995, app. A; Ord. of 11-3-2009(1), § 22-34)  
Sec. 12-23. - Occupation tax levied; limitations. 
(a)  An occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state is levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and, pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-13-7, upon out-of-state businesses with no location or office within the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state, in accordance with the schedule of fees and charges as established by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The city shall not require the payment of more than one occupation tax for each location of a business or practitioner. 
(c)  A business or practitioner which is subject to an occupation tax by another local government and claiming an exemption from or limitation to the occupation tax imposed by this article shall submit documentation as to current payment of the occupation tax to the other local government and the basis of such tax. 
(1)  If a business or practitioner with no location or office in the state provides to the city proof of payment of a local business or occupation tax in another state which purports to tax the business's or practitioner's sales or services in this state, then the business or practitioner shall be exempt from this occupation tax. 
(2)  A business or practitioner with no location or office in the state shall only be required to pay occupation tax to the local government in the state where the largest dollar volume of business is done or service is performed by such business or practitioner. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof as to the applicability of this subsection. 
(3)  A business or practitioner which has locations in the state subject to occupation tax by more than one local government in the state shall only be subject to occupation tax by the city for the number of employees who are employed within the corporate limits of the city. This limitation shall only apply when the business or practitioner has provided to the city satisfactory proof of current payment of the occupation tax of the other local governments. 
(4)  If an employee works for the same business or practitioner in more than one municipal corporation or county and the business or practitioner submits proof of this, the employee shall be counted as an employee in the city only if the city is the jurisdiction where such employee works for the longest period of time within the calendar year. 
(d)  If a business or practitioner commences business in the city on or after July 1 in any year, the occupation tax for the remaining portion of the year shall be 50 percent of the tax imposed for the entire year. The administrative fee, however, shall not be reduced. 
(e)  If a business or practitioner does not know how many employees which are the basis of this occupation tax will be employed by the business or practitioner during the current calendar year, then the business or practitioner shall file a return estimating the number of employees which are the basis of this occupation tax. If such estimate is not accurate, then no later than December 31 the business or practitioner shall file an amended return indicating the actual number of employees during the previous calendar year. Any overpayment of the occupation tax may be credited to the business or practitioner's account for future tax liability, offset against other amounts due and owing to the city for any reason, or paid to the business or practitioner at the discretion of the city clerk. 
(f)  Real estate brokers shall be subject to occupation tax pursuant to this article only if they maintain a principal or branch office in the city. 
(Code 1996, § 22-35; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-4)  
Sec. 12-24. - Occupation tax certificate. 
Every business, practitioner and location subject to payment of the occupation tax levied by this article shall display a current occupation tax certificate in a conspicuous place at the location for which such certificate was issued. If the taxpayer does not have a permanent location within the city, the occupation tax certificate shall be shown to any police officer upon request. 
(Code 1996, § 22-36; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-5)  
Sec. 12-25. - Practitioners of professions and occupations. 
Practitioners of professions and occupations as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 12-23 or shall pay an occupation tax per practitioner as established by the mayor and council. The practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. Such election shall be changed for subsequent calendar years only by a written request filed by the practitioner on or before February 1 of the year in which the election is to be changed. 
(Code 1996, § 22-37; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-6)  
Sec. 12-26. - Exemptions. 
(a)  No occupation tax shall be levied on the following: 
(1)  Any practitioner whose office is maintained by and who is employed in practice exclusively by the United States, the state, a municipality or county of the state, or instrumentality of the United States, the state, or a municipality or county of the state; 
(2)  Those businesses regulated by the state public service commission and the department of public safety; 
(3)  Those electrical service businesses organized under O.C.G.A. § 46-3-1 et seq.; 
(4)  Any farm operation for the production from or on the land of agricultural products, but not including agribusiness; 
(5)  Nonprofit agricultural product cooperative marketing associations pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 2-10-105; 
(6)  Persons purchasing guano, meats, meal, flour, bran, cottonseed or cottonseed meal or hulls in carload lots for distribution among the purchasers for use and not sale pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-355; 
(7)  Persons who qualify for a state veteran's or disabled indigent person's exemption from occupation tax shall secure evidence of qualification from the proper authorities. Upon receipt of this required information, a city occupation tax certificate shall be issued without cost and shall be marked so as to reflect the exemption from the payment of the tax. Notwithstanding the exemption from the payment of the tax, such exempted persons are required to comply with the same laws and regulations as are other licensed businesses within the city; 
(8)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356 for persons selling or introducing into the city agricultural products or livestock, including animal products, raised in this state when the sale and introduction are made by the producer of the product and the sale is made within 90 days of the introduction of the product into the city; 
(9)  Any state or local authority, or any nonprofit organization; 
(10)  Depository institutions pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-6-3; or 
(11)  Any business where the levy of such occupation tax is prohibited by the laws of the state or the United States. 
(b)  The exemptions and limitations contained in this article shall not be construed to repeal or otherwise affect in any way any franchise fees, business taxes or other fees or taxes allowed by law. 
(Code 1996, § 22-39; Ord. of 12-5-1995, §§ 3-2-7, 3-2-51; Ord. of 1-3-1995(1), § 3-2-51) 
State Law reference— Exemption from local licensing of disabled veterans and blind persons, O.C.G.A. § 43-12-1; exemption from taxation of agricultural products and livestock raised in state, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-356.  
Sec. 12-27. - Evidence of state registration; when required. 
Each person who is licensed under O.C.G.A. § 43-1-1 et seq. shall provide evidence of proper and current state licensure before any city occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate may be issued. 
(Code 1996, § 22-40; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-8)  
Sec. 12-28. - Evidence of qualification required, if applicable. 
(a)  Any business required to obtain health permits, bonds, certificates of qualification, certificates of competency or any other regulatory matter shall first, before the issuance of an occupation tax certificate or regulatory fee certificate, show evidence of such qualification. 
(b)  Any business required to submit an annual application for continuance of the business shall do so before the registration is issued. 
(Code 1996, § 22-41; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-9)  
Sec. 12-29. - Filing returns; other information required or requested. 
(a)  On or before November 1 of each year, an individual, business or practitioner subject to this requirement to pay a tax pursuant to this article shall file with the city clerk, on a form approved by and available from the city, a signed return attesting to the number of employees of such business or practitioner during the calendar year. 
(b)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners doing business in the city shall submit to the city clerk or make available within 30 days such information as may be required or requested by the city to determine the applicability and amount of the occupation tax or regulatory fee or to facilitate levying or collection of the occupation tax and/or regulatory fee. 
(Code 1996, § 22-42; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-10)  
Sec. 12-30. - Confidentiality. 
(a)  Any occupation tax or regulatory fee due pursuant to this article shall be due and payable annually on January 1. If any person commences business or initially engages in a regulated activity in the city after January 1 in any year, the tax and/or fee shall be due and payable on the date of the commencement of the business or regulated activity. 
(b)  Any individual, business or practitioner subject to any occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article which is unpaid for 90 days after the date on which payment was due shall be subject to a penalty of ten percent of the tax or fee due. 
(Code 1996, § 22-43; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-11)  
Sec. 12-31. - Enforcement; violations; penalty for violations of article; additional remedies. 
(a)  It is the duty of the city clerk to administer and enforce the provisions of this article, to perform all functions necessary to administer and enforce this article and to summon violators of this article to appear before the municipal court. The city clerk may issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. 
(b)  The city clerk shall issue executions against individuals, businesses and practitioners for taxes and fees which are due and owing. Such executions shall bear interest at the rate of 1½ percent per month as authorized by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-21(b) or, if such statute should be repealed, one percent per month. The lien shall cover the property of the individual, business or practitioner liable for payment of the delinquent occupation tax or regulatory fee and become fixed as of the date and time the occupation tax or regulatory fee became delinquent. The execution shall be levied by the city clerk upon property of the delinquent tax or fee payer located in the city and sufficient property shall be advertised and sold to pay the amount of the execution, including penalty, interest and costs. All other proceedings in relation thereto shall be as provided by this Code, the Charter and the laws of the state. The defendants at execution shall have the rights of defense, by affidavit of illegality of the tax or otherwise as provided by the Charter and the laws of the state in regard to tax executions. 
(c)  When a nulla bona entry has been entered upon an execution, the person against whom the entry is made shall not be allowed or entitled to have or collect any fees or charges whatever for services rendered after the entry of the nulla bona. If, at any time after the nulla bona entry has been made, the person against whom the execution issues pays the tax in full together with all interest and costs accrued on the tax, the person may collect any fees and charges due to such person as if such person had never defaulted in the payment of the tax. 
(d)  Individuals, businesses and practitioners who fail or refuse to make a timely or truthful tax return, or make available truthful and accurate information the city requests, or requires for determining applicability or amount of occupation tax or regulatory fee, shall be subject to suspension of the right to conduct business in addition to other penalties provided in this Code. 
(e)  All persons subject to the occupation tax or regulatory fee imposed by this article shall be required to file for and pay such tax or fee. For failure to do so, any officers or agents soliciting for or obtaining such person's business shall be subject to the same penalty as other persons, businesses or practitioners who fail to obtain and make a return for or pay the applicable occupation tax or regulatory fee. 
(Code 1996, § 22-44; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-12)  
Sec. 12-32. - Public hearing. 
The city shall conduct at least one public hearing before adopting any ordinance or resolution which will increase the occupation tax provided herein. 
(Code 1996, § 22-45; Ord. of 12-5-1995, § 3-2-14)  
Secs. 12-33—12-52. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - INSURERS[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local tax on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1; local tax on other than life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2; local license fees on life insurance companies, O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8; general assembly authorized to provide for taxation of insurance companies based on gross direct premiums received from insurance policies within the unincorporated areas of counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I(c). 
 
Sec. 12-53. - License fee; license fee for additional locations generally. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee, as established by the mayor and council, upon every insurance company engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits of the city, and there is hereby levied an additional annual license fee in such amount for each separate business location in excess of one operated and maintained by any such company within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-41(a); Code 1996, § 22-71)  
Sec. 12-54. - License fee for businesses lending money or offering term financing of sales; taking insurance applications. 
There is hereby levied a license fee, as established by the mayor and council, on each insurance company for each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under section 12-53, which company is operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and which, in connection with the loans or sales involving term financing, offers, solicits, or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of the insurance company for insurance. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-41(b); Code 1996, § 22-72)  
Sec. 12-55. - License fee for additional locations of independent agencies and brokers. 
There is hereby levied an annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted, and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by either section 12-53 or 12-54, in the amount established by the mayor and council, for each such location within the city. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-41(c); Code 1996, § 22-73)  
Sec. 12-56. - Gross direct premiums tax. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax based solely upon gross direct premiums upon each insurer writing life, accident and sickness insurance within the city in an amount equal to one percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.1. The expression "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-4. The premium tax levied by this section is in addition to the license fees imposed by sections 12-53 and 12-54. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-41(d); Code 1996, § 22-74)  
Sec. 12-57. - Gross direct premiums tax on classes of insurance other than life, accident and sickness. 
There is hereby levied an annual tax upon each insurer, other than an insurer transacting business in the class of insurance designated in O.C.G.A. § 33-3-5(1), doing business as provided in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2 in an amount equal to 2½ percent of the gross direct premiums received during the calendar year, in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2. The expression "gross direct premiums," as used in this section, means gross direct premiums as used in O.C.G.A. § 33-8-8.2(a). 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-41(e); Code 1996, § 22-75)  
Sec. 12-58. - Due date for license fees. 
License fees imposed in this article shall be due and payable February 1 of each year. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-41(f); Code 1996, § 22-76)  
Secs. 12-59—12-89. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - FINANCIAL INSTITUTIONS[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Local depository financial institutions business license tax, O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
 
Sec. 12-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Gross receipts has the same meaning as is ascribed to the term "gross receipts" for each such depository financial institution in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-42(a); Code 1996, § 22-106)  
Sec. 12-91. - Tax levied. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority contained in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93, there is levied for each year, upon each state and national bank, each federal savings and loan association, and each state building and loan association located in the city, not exempted by state law, an annual business license tax at the rate of 0.25 percent of the gross receipts of each such institution, or $1,000.00, per annum, whichever amount is greater. 
(b)  The taxes levied by subsection (a) of this section for each year are levied on the amount of gross receipts received by each such depository financial institution during the immediately preceding calendar year. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-4(a); Code 1996, § 22-107)  
Sec. 12-92. - Returns. 
Each depository financial institution subject to the tax levied by this article shall file with the city not later than March 1 of each year a return of its gross receipts received by it during the immediately preceding calendar year. The returns shall be made in the manner and in the form prescribed by the commissioner of the department of banking and shall be based on the allocation method set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-6-93(d). The tax levied pursuant to this article shall be assessed and collected based upon the information provided in the return. 
(Code 1984, § 3-2-42(b); Code 1996, § 22-108)  
Chapter 14 - CIVIL EMERGENCIES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 14-1—14-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT ORGANIZATION 
 
Sec. 14-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Emergency means a condition as defined or declared by the President of the United States, the governor of the state or the mayor and council when the threat or actual occurrence of a disaster, epidemic or subversive activities in the city is of such severity and magnitude to warrant extraordinary public service and/or relief efforts. 
Emergency management means measures necessary to provide for the mobilization, organization and direction of civilian populace and necessary support agencies to prevent or minimize the effects of fire, flood, storm, earthquake and epidemic as well as the effects of enemy or subversive activities directed against the populace, communities, industrial plants, facilities and other installations. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-1; Code 1996, § 26-31) 
State Law reference— Similar provisions, O.C.G.A. § 38-3-3.  
Sec. 14-20. - Penalty for violation of article. 
During an emergency, no person shall: 
(1)  Willfully obstruct, hinder or delay any member of the emergency management corps in the enforcement of any lawful rule or regulation issued pursuant to this article or in the performance of any duty imposed upon him by the virtue of this article. 
(2)  Do any act forbidden by any lawful rules or regulations issued pursuant to this article if such act is of such a nature as to give assistance to the enemy or to imperil the life or property of any inhabitant of the city or to prevent, hinder or delay the defense or protection thereof. 
(3)  Wear or carry or display without authority any mark or identification specified by the council of defense. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-10; Code 1996, § 26-32)  
Sec. 14-21. - Council of defense created; membership. 
The city council of defense is hereby created and shall include the following: 
(1)  Mayor; 
(2)  Emergency management director; 
(3)  Chief of police; 
(4)  Fire chief; 
(5)  County health officer; 
(6)  City manager; 
(7)  Utility superintendent; 
(8)  County welfare officer; 
(9)  American Red Cross representative; and 
(10)  Others, including representatives of business, labor, civic and patriotic organizations, as appointed by the city council. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-2; Code 1996, § 26-33)  
Sec. 14-22. - Council of defense powers and duties. 
It shall be the duty of the council of defense and it is hereby empowered to: 
(1)  Develop a city emergency management plan. This plan shall provide for the effective mobilization of all the resources of the city, both private and public. 
(2)  Prepare, and recommend for consideration by the city, an ordinance necessary to implement the emergency management plan. 
(3)  Consider, and recommend to the mayor and council for approval, mutual aid plans and agreements. 
(4)  Perform such other duties as directed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-3; Code 1996, § 26-34)  
Sec. 14-23. - Director office created; appointment. 
There is hereby created the office of the emergency management director. Such officer shall be recommended to the governor for appointment by the mayor and council. In the event such appointment is not made, the city manager is designated as the emergency management director. The city may also enter into an agreement with the office of the county emergency management director to perform the duties and functions of this office. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-4; Code 1996, § 26-35)  
Sec. 14-24. - Director functions. 
The emergency management director is hereby directed to: 
(1)  Represent the mayor on all matters pertaining to emergency management; 
(2)  Require and direct cooperation of city officials in the preparation and implementation of emergency management plans; 
(3)  During periods of emergency, direct the services of city officers or employees; and 
(4)  During periods of emergency, obtain vital supplies and equipment needed for the protection of life and property of people and bind the city for the value thereof and, if required immediately, to requisition the same. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-5; Code 1996, § 26-36)  
Sec. 14-25. - Emergency management corps composition. 
Officers and employees of the city, with volunteer forces enrolled to aid them during an emergency and all groups, organizations and persons who make the agreements on operation of law, charged with duties necessary for the protection of the life and property in the city during such an emergency, shall constitute the emergency management corps. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-6; Code 1996, § 26-37)  
Sec. 14-26. - Emergency management corps distribution of functions and duties. 
The functions and duties of the emergency management corps shall be distributed among the divisions as listed in section 14-27. Each division shall be under the direction of a chief and deputy chief appointed by the council of defense. The chiefs of divisions will include public officials such as sheriffs, chiefs of police and fire departments and heads of agencies dealing with transportation, communications, and other sundry services as well as private businessmen who, through their profession, knowledge and experience, are particularly qualified to head divisions requiring specialized knowledge and experience. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-7; Code 1996, § 26-38)  
Sec. 14-27. - Emergency management corps divisions established; designated. 
The divisions of the emergency management corps are established as follows: 
(1)  Law enforcement division; 
(2)  Fire services division; 
(3)  Transportation division; 
(4)  Medical and health division; 
(5)  Communications division; 
(6)  Welfare division; 
(7)  Information and education division; and 
(8)  Others, as determined by the council of defense. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-8; Code 1996, § 26-39)  
Sec. 14-28. - Volunteers; compensation and immunities. 
All persons, other than officers and employees of the city, volunteering in service pursuant to the provisions of this article shall serve without compensation. While engaged in such service they shall have the same immunities as persons and employees of the city performing similar duties. 
(Code 1984, § 4-3-9; Code 1996, § 26-40)  
Chapter 16 - COURT[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Municipal courts, O.C.G.A. § 36-32-1 et seq.; establishment of municipal courts authorized and jurisdiction thereof, Ga. Const. art. VI, § I, ¶ I. 
 
Sec. 16-1. - Appointment and term of judge. 
The judge of the municipal court shall be appointed by the mayor and council and shall serve at their pleasure. 
(Code 1996, § 30-1)  
Sec. 16-2. - Docket. 
It shall be the duty of the court clerk to keep a docket showing the disposition of all cases brought before the municipal court. 
(Code 1996, § 30-2)  
Sec. 16-3. - Service of summonses. 
Summonses directed to any offender shall be served personally by some member of the police force. 
(Code 1996, § 30-3)  
Sec. 16-4. - Holding defendant when court lacks jurisdiction. 
If, after an investigation of any case, it should appear that the municipal court has no jurisdiction to determine it, the judge or the mayor shall require the defendant to enter into bond conditioned to appear before the next term of the court having jurisdiction, to answer such offense, which bond shall be turned over to the proper officer of such court. In default of such bond, the judge or the mayor shall have power to commit the defendant to jail to answer the offense at the next term of court having jurisdiction thereof. 
(Code 1996, § 30-4)  
Sec. 16-5. - Procedure for service of process on corporations. 
(a)  In addition to any other means provided by law, corporations may be served in accordance with the provisions of this section. 
(b)  Whenever any charge shall be brought against a corporation doing business in the city for violation of this Code or other ordinance of the city, the city clerk shall issue an original and copy notice to the defendant corporation of the charge against such corporation, specifying the time when such charge shall be heard by the municipal court, which copy notice shall be served by the chief of police, any police officer, or the sheriff of the county, at least ten days before the time fixed for trial in the municipal court, upon any officer of such corporation to be found in the city, or upon any agent of such corporation, or employee in charge of the business of such corporation in such city. The officer serving such copy notice shall make an entry of such service on the original notice, and return the notice to the municipal court of the city. Such service shall be service upon the corporation, and such case shall, upon the return of such notice as provided in this section, stand for trial before the municipal court at the time stated in such notice. 
(Code 1996, § 30-5)  
Sec. 16-6. - Failure to appear at trial; failure to plead; judge's entry of plea; conviction. 
At the time fixed for trial in municipal court, if the defendant corporation fails to appear, or after appearing fails to plead, the municipal court judge or other official presiding over the municipal court of the city shall cause to be entered a plea of not guilty, and the trial shall proceed as though the defendant had appeared and pleaded. Upon the conviction of any corporation in any such trial, there shall be rendered a judgment against it for the fine imposed, upon which an execution shall issue signed by the municipal court judge and city clerk in favor of the city against the property of the defendant corporation. 
(Code 1996, § 30-6)  
Chapter 18 - ELECTIONS[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Municipal Election Code, O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 18-1. - Compliance with state law. 
All elections and challenges thereto shall be in compliance with the Georgia Election Code codified at O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.  
Sec. 18-2. - General elections. 
In accordance with section 2.02 of the Charter, general municipal elections shall be held on the Tuesday next following the first Monday in November of each odd-numbered year.  
Sec. 18-3. - Special elections. 
Special elections shall be held as needed according to section 2.03 of the Charter and shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-1 et seq.  
Sec. 18-4. - Superintendents. 
The city clerk shall serve as the municipal superintendent in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-70.1. The council shall provide for the superintendent in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-71.  
Sec. 18-5. - Conducting elections. 
The city shall coordinate all elections with the Seminole County Commission and Seminole County Probate Court. The city may contract or otherwise decide by agreement with the Seminole County Probate Court to serve as municipal superintendent and to coordinate and conduct all elections in the city.  
Sec. 18-6. - Notice of candidacy. 
Filing of notice of candidacy for municipal office shall be conducted in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132 as amended.  
Sec. 18-7. - Fees. 
(a)  Except as provided in subsection (b) of this section, each candidate shall pay a fee of three percent of the total salary of the office sought. 
(b)  A pauper's affidavit may be filed in lieu of the qualifying fee in accordance with O.C.G.A. § 21-2-132.  
Sec. 18-8. - Electors to be registered by county. 
The city council shall provide for the use of the county voter registration list. Any person who is a resident of the city and who is registered as an elector with the county shall be eligible to vote in any municipal primary or election. Only residents of a particular council district within the city who are registered as electors with the county shall be eligible to vote in the municipal primary, general or special election for a councilmember of that particular district. Any resident of the city who is registered as an elector with the county shall be eligible to vote in at-large elections.  
Sec. 18-9. - Polling place. 
The polling places shall be as fixed from time to time by resolution of the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 2-2-5; Code 1996, § 34-5)  
Chapter 20 - EMERGENCY SERVICES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 20-1—20-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ALARM SYSTEMS 
 
Sec. 20-19. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Alarm system means an assembly of equipment and/or devices designed and arranged to detect and signal an unauthorized intrusion into premises or to signal a fire, emergency, including, but not limited to, an attempted burglary or robbery on protected premises, and, with respect to such signal, law enforcement or emergency personnel are expected to respond. 
Automatic dialing device means any device connected to an alarm system which automatically sends a prerecorded message or coded signal indicating the activation of the alarm system to a predetermined location. 
Calendar year means the period of time from January 1 through December 31. 
False alarm means the activation of an alarm system by other than a forced entry or attempted forced entry to the premises and at a time when no fire or other emergency, including, but not limited to, a burglary or robbery, is being committed or attempted on the premises. 
Public safety officers means both fire and police officers. 
Response means the dispatch of law enforcement or emergency personnel to the premises where an alarm system has been activated. 
(Code 1996, § 38-31)  
Sec. 20-20. - City exempt from compliance with article. 
The city shall be exempt from compliance with this article for alarm systems installed in city-owned facilities within the boundaries of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 38-32)  
Sec. 20-21. - Prohibited acts. 
(a)  It is unlawful for anyone to activate any fire or security alarm system for the purpose of summoning public safety officers except in the event of an actual fire or an actual or attempted burglary or robbery or other unauthorized intrusion into premises. 
(b)  It is unlawful for anyone to notify the departments of public safety of an activated fire or security alarm system while having knowledge that such activation was apparently caused by an electrical or other malfunction of the alarm system or by maintenance or service to the alarm system and/or to fail at the same time to notify the police or fire department of such apparent malfunction or repair. 
(c)  It is unlawful for any person to knowingly communicate any false information or to make calls of a harassing, obscene, or unnecessary nature to any emergency service provider agency within the city utilizing either the E911 Emergency Response System or by the use of regular telephone, cellular telephone, or two-way radio communication systems. 
(Code 1996, § 38-33; Ord. of 1-4-2000)  
Sec. 20-22. - False alarm fines. 
(a)  For a response to any false alarm, the municipal court shall fine and collect such fines as follows from the person or business having and/or maintaining an alarm system on the premises owned or occupied by such person: 
(1)  For a first response to premises at which no other false alarm has occurred within a calendar year, there shall be no penalty. 
(2)  The second false alarm in a calendar year is billed at $100.00. 
(3)  The third false alarm in a calendar year is billed at $200.00. 
(4)  The fourth through sixth false alarms in a calendar year are billed at $300.00 per event not to exceed $500.00 per calendar day. 
(b)  The person having or maintaining such fire or security alarm shall, within three working days after notice to do so, make a written report to the chief of the responding public safety department, and if applicable, on prescribed forms setting forth the cause of such false alarm, the corrective action taken, whether such alarm has been inspected by an authorized service person, and such other information as may be required to determine the cause of such false alarm and necessary corrective action. Provision of this information is the sole responsibility of the offender. 
(Code 1996, § 38-34)  
Sec. 20-23. - User fees. 
Any person or business which maintains a security alarm system or fire alarm system which has a direct connection to an alarm display panel located in the communications center of either the fire or police department shall be charged a fee per month, as established by the mayor and council, for such connection. 
(Code 1996, § 38-35)  
Sec. 20-24. - Requirements for owners of businesses, residences or structures. 
The owner of each business, residence, or structure equipped with a fire or security alarm system must provide the fire or police department or his alarm company with a minimum of three emergency telephone numbers of persons who can be contacted in the case of an emergency or malfunction of the system. Listed persons must be able to enter the business, residence, or structure and secure the system within 30 minutes of its reported failure. These names and numbers shall also be posted in a conspicuous location on the premises where an independent alarm is located. 
(Code 1996, § 38-36)  
Chapter 22 - ENVIRONMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 22-1—22-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - SOIL EROSION AND SEDIMENTATION CONTROL[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 22-19. - Title. 
This article will be known as the "Donalsonville Soil Erosion and Sedimentation Control Ordinance." 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § I)  
Sec. 22-20. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Best management practices (BMPs) means a collection of structural practices and vegetative measures which, when properly designed, installed and maintained, will provide effective erosion and sedimentation control. The term "properly designed" means designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
Board means the board of natural resources. 
Buffer means the area of land immediately adjacent to the banks of state waters in its natural state of vegetation, which facilitates the protection of water quality and aquatic habitat. 
Commission means the state soil and water conservation commission. 
Cut means a portion of land surface or area from which earth has been removed or will be removed by excavation; the depth below original ground surface to excavated surface. Also known as excavation. 
Department means the department of natural resources. 
Director means the director of the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
District means the Flint River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Division means the environmental protection division of the department of natural resources. 
Drainage structure means a device composed of a virtually non-erodible material, such as concrete, steel, plastic or other such material, that conveys water from one place to another by intercepting the flow and carrying it to a release point for stormwater management, drainage control, or flood control purposes. 
Erosion means the process by which land surface is worn away by the action of wind, water, ice or gravity. 
Erosion and sedimentation control plan means a plan for the control of soil erosion and sedimentation resulting from a land disturbing activity. Also known as the "plan." 
Fill means a portion of land surface to which soil or other solid material has been added; the depth above the original ground. 
Finished grade means the final elevation and contour of the ground after cutting or filling and conforming to the proposed design. 
Grading means altering the shape of ground surfaces to a predetermined condition; this includes stripping, cutting, filling, stockpiling and shaping or any combination thereof and shall include the land in its cut or filled condition. 
Ground elevation means the original elevation of the ground surface prior to cutting or filling. 
Land disturbing activity means any activity which may result in soil erosion from water or wind and the movement of sediments into state waters or onto lands within the state, including, but not limited to, clearing, dredging, grading, excavating, transporting, and filling of land, but not including agricultural practices as described in section 22-21(5). 
Larger common plan of development or sale means a contiguous area where multiple separate and distinct construction activities are occurring under one plan of development or sale. For the purposes of this definition, the term "plan" means an announcement; piece of documentation, such as a sign, public notice or hearing, sales pitch, advertisement, drawing, permit application, zoning request, or computer design; or physical demarcation, such as boundary signs, lot stakes, or surveyor markings, indicating that construction activities may occur on a specific plot. 
Local issuing authority means the governing authority of any county or municipality which is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). 
Metropolitan River Protection Act (MRPA) means a state law referenced as O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq., which addresses environmental and developmental matters in certain metropolitan river corridors and their drainage basins. 
Natural ground surface means the ground surface in its original state before any grading, excavation or filling. 
Nephelometric turbidity units (NTU) means numerical units of measure based upon photometric analytical techniques for measuring the light scattered by finely divided particles of a substance in suspension. This technique is used to estimate the extent of turbidity in water in which colloidally dispersed particles are present. 
Operator means the party that has: 
(1)  Operational control of construction project plans and specifications, including the ability to make modifications to those plans and specifications; or 
(2)  Day-to-day operational control of those activities that are necessary to ensure compliance with a stormwater pollution prevention plan for the site or other permit conditions, such as a person authorized to direct workers at a site to carry out activities required by the stormwater pollution prevention plan or to comply with other permit conditions. 
Permit means the authorization necessary to conduct a land disturbing activity under the provisions of this article. 
Project means the entire proposed development project regardless of the size of the area of land to be disturbed. 
Qualified personnel means any person who meets or exceeds the education and training requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-19. 
Roadway drainage structure means a device, such as a bridge, culvert, or ditch, composed of a virtually non-erodible material, such as concrete, steel, plastic, or other such material, that conveys water under a roadway by intercepting the flow on one side of a traveled way consisting of one or more defined lanes, with or without shoulder areas, and carrying water to a release point on the other side. 
Sediment means solid material, both organic and inorganic, that is in suspension, is being transported, or has been moved from its site of origin by air, water, ice, or gravity as a product of erosion. 
Sedimentation means the process by which eroded material is transported and deposited by the action of water, wind, ice or gravity. 
Soil and water conservation district approved plan means an erosion and sedimentation control plan approved in writing by the Flint River Soil and Water Conservation District. 
Stabilization means the process of establishing an enduring soil cover of vegetation by the installation of temporary or permanent structures for the purpose of reducing to a minimum the erosion process and the resultant transport of sediment by wind, water, ice or gravity. 
State general permit means the National Pollution Discharge Elimination System general permit for stormwater runoff from construction activities as is now in effect or as may be amended or reissued in the future pursuant to the state's authority to implement the same through federal delegation under the Federal Water Pollution Control Act, as amended, 33 USC 1251 et seq., and O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). 
State waters means any and all rivers, streams, creeks, branches, lakes, reservoirs, ponds, drainage systems, springs, wells, and other bodies of surface or subsurface water, natural or artificial, lying within or forming a part of the boundaries of the state which are not entirely confined and retained completely upon the property of a single individual, partnership, or corporation. 
Structural erosion and sedimentation control practices means practices for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by utilizing the mechanical properties of matter for the purpose of either changing the surface of the land or storing, regulating or disposing of runoff to prevent excessive sediment loss. Examples of structural erosion and sediment control practices are riprap, sediment basins, dikes, level spreaders, waterways or outlets, diversions, grade stabilization structures, sediment traps and land grading, etc. Such practices can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Trout streams means all streams or portions of streams within the watershed as designated by the game and fish division of the state department of natural resources under the provisions of the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. Streams designated as primary trout waters are defined as water supporting a self-sustaining population of rainbow, brown or brook trout. Streams designated as secondary trout waters are those in which there is no evidence of natural trout reproduction, but are capable of supporting trout throughout the year. First order trout waters are streams into which no other streams flow except springs. 
Vegetative erosion and sedimentation control measures means measures for the stabilization of erodible or sediment-producing areas by covering the soil with: 
(1)  Permanent seeding, sprigging or planting, producing long-term vegetative cover; 
(2)  Temporary seeding, producing short-term vegetative cover; or 
(3)  Sodding, covering areas with a turf of perennial sod-forming grass. 
Such measures can be found in the publication "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
Watercourse means any natural or artificial watercourse, stream, river, creek, channel, ditch, canal, conduit, culvert, drain, waterway, gully, ravine, or wash in which water flows either continuously or intermittently and which has a definite channel, bed and banks, and including any area adjacent thereto subject to inundation by reason of overflow or floodwater. 
Wetlands means those areas that are inundated or saturated by surface or groundwater at a frequency and duration sufficient to support and that, under normal circumstances, do support a prevalence of vegetation typically adapted for life in saturated soil conditions. Wetlands generally include swamps, marshes, bogs, and similar areas. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § II)  
Sec. 22-21. - Exemptions. 
This article shall apply to any land disturbing activity undertaken by any person on any land except for the following: 
(1)  Surface mining, as the same is defined in O.C.G.A. § 12-4-72, "Mineral Resources and Caves Act"; 
(2)  Granite quarrying and land clearing for such quarrying; 
(3)  Such minor land disturbing activities as home gardens and individual home landscaping, repairs, maintenance work, fences, and other related activities which result in minor soil erosion; 
(4)  The construction of single-family residences, when such construction disturbs less than one acre and is not a part of a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre and not otherwise exempted under this subsection; provided, however, that construction of any such residence shall conform to the minimum requirements as set forth in section 22-22 and this subsection. For single-family residence construction covered by the provisions of this subsection, there shall be a buffer zone between the residence and any state waters classified as trout streams pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq. In any such buffer zone, no land disturbing activity shall be constructed between the residence and the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action from the banks of the trout waters. For primary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. For secondary trout waters, the buffer zone shall be at least 50 horizontal feet, but the director may grant variances to no less than 25 feet. Regardless of whether a trout stream is primary or secondary, for first order trout waters, which are streams into which no other streams flow except for springs, the buffer shall be at least 25 horizontal feet, and no variance to a smaller buffer shall be granted. The minimum requirements of section 22-22 and the buffer zones provided by this subsection shall be enforced by the issuing authority; 
(5)  Agricultural operations, as defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3, to include raising, harvesting or storing of products of the field or orchard; feeding, breeding or managing livestock or poultry; producing or storing feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; the production of aqua culture, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs and apiarian products; farm buildings and farm ponds; 
(6)  Forestry land management practices, including harvesting; provided, however, that when such exempt forestry practices cause or result in land disturbing or other activities otherwise prohibited in a buffer, as established in sections 22-22(c)(15) and (16), no other land disturbing activities, except for normal forest management practices, shall be allowed on the entire property upon which the forestry practices were conducted for a period of three years after completion of such forestry practices; 
(7)  Any project carried out under the technical supervision of the Natural Resources Conservation Service of the United States Department of Agriculture; 
(8)  Any project involving less than one acre of disturbed area; provided, however, that this exemption shall not apply to any land disturbing activity within a larger common plan of development or sale with a planned disturbance of equal to or greater than one acre or within 200 feet of the bank of any state waters, and for purposes of this subsection, the term "state waters" excludes channels and drainageways which have water in them only during and immediately after rainfall events and intermittent streams which do not have water in them yearround; provided, however, that any person responsible for a project which involves less than one acre, which involves land disturbing activity, and which is within 200 feet of any such excluded channel or drainageway, must prevent sediment from moving beyond the boundaries of the property on which such project is located; and provided, further, that nothing contained herein shall prevent the local issuing authority from regulating any such project which is not specifically exempted by subsection (1), (2), (3), (4), (5), (6), (7), (9) or (10) of this section; 
(9)  Construction or maintenance projects, or both, undertaken or financed in whole or in part, or both, by the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state tollway authority; or any road construction or maintenance project, or both, undertaken by any county or municipality; provided, however, that construction or maintenance projects of the department of transportation or state tollway authority which disturb one or more contiguous acres of land shall be subject to provisions of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7.1; except where the department of transportation, the state highway authority, or the state road and tollway authority is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case a copy of a notice of intent under the state general permit shall be submitted to the local issuing authority, and the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; 
(10)  Any land disturbing activities conducted by any electrical membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power; except where an electrical membership corporation or municipal electrical system or any public utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the public service commission, any utility under the regulatory jurisdiction of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, any cable television system as defined in O.C.G.A. § 36-18-1, or any agency or instrumentality of the United States engaged in the generation, transmission, or distribution of power is a secondary permittee for a project located within a larger common plan of development or sale under the state general permit, in which case the local issuing authority shall enforce compliance with the minimum requirements set forth in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6 as if a permit had been issued, and violations shall be subject to the same penalties as violations by permit holders; and 
(11)  Any public water system reservoir. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § III)  
Sec. 22-22. - Minimum requirements for erosion and sedimentation control using best management practices. 
(a)  General provisions. 
(1)  Excessive soil erosion and resulting sedimentation can take place during land disturbing activities. Therefore, plans for those land disturbing activities which are not exempted by this article shall contain provisions for application of soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices. The provisions shall be incorporated into the erosion and sedimentation control plans. Soil erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall conform to the minimum requirements of subsections (b) and (c) of this section. The application of measures and practices shall apply to all features of the site, including street and utility installations, drainage facilities and other temporary and permanent improvements. 
(2)  Measures shall be installed to prevent or control erosion and sedimentation pollution during all stages of any land disturbing activity. 
(b)  Minimum requirements/BMPs. 
(1)  Best management practices (BMPs), as set forth in this subsection and subsection (c) of this section, shall be required for all land disturbing activities. Proper design, installation, and maintenance of best management practices shall constitute a complete defense to any action by the director or to any other allegation of noncompliance with subsection (b)(2) of this section or any substantially similar terms contained in a permit for the discharge of stormwater issued pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f). As used in this subsection, the terms "proper design" and "properly designed" mean designed in accordance with the hydraulic design specifications contained in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" specified in O.C.G.A. § 12-7-6(b). 
(2)  A discharge of stormwater runoff from disturbed areas where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained shall constitute a separate violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), for each day on which such discharge results in the turbidity of receiving waters being increased by more than 25 nephelometric turbidity units for waters supporting warm water fisheries or by more than ten nephelometric turbidity units for waters classified as trout waters. The turbidity of the receiving waters shall be measured in accordance with guidelines to be issued by the director. This subsection shall not apply to any land disturbance associated with the construction of single-family homes which are not part of a larger common plan of development or sale unless the planned disturbance for such construction is equal to or greater than five acres. 
(3)  Failure to properly design, install, or maintain best management practices shall constitute a violation of any land disturbing permit issued by a local issuing authority or of any state general permit issued by the division pursuant to Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-30(f), for each day on which such failure occurs. 
(4)  The director may require, in accordance with regulations adopted by the board, reasonable and prudent monitoring of the turbidity level of receiving waters into which discharges from land disturbing activities occur. 
(c)  Other rules and regulations. The rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions adopted pursuant to this article for the purpose of governing land disturbing activities shall require, as a minimum, protections at least as stringent as the state general permit; and best management practices, including sound conservation and engineering practices to prevent and minimize erosion and resultant sedimentation, which are consistent with, and no less stringent than, those practices contained in the Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia as published by the Georgia Soil and Water Conservation Commission as of January 1 of the year in which the land disturbing activity was permitted, as well as the following: 
(1)  Stripping of vegetation, regrading and other development activities shall be conducted in a manner so as to minimize erosion; 
(2)  Cut-fill operations must be kept to a minimum; 
(3)  Development plans must conform to topography and soil type so as to create the lowest practical erosion potential; 
(4)  Whenever feasible, natural vegetation shall be retained, protected and supplemented; 
(5)  The disturbed area and the duration of exposure to erosive elements shall be kept to a practicable minimum; 
(6)  Disturbed soil shall be stabilized as quickly as practicable; 
(7)  Temporary vegetation or mulching shall be employed to protect exposed critical areas during development; 
(8)  Permanent vegetation and structural erosion control practices shall be installed as soon as practicable; 
(9)  To the extent necessary, sediment in runoff water must be trapped by the use of debris basins, sediment basins, silt traps, or similar measures until the disturbed area is stabilized. As used in this subsection, a disturbed area is stabilized when it is brought to a condition of continuous compliance with the requirements of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-1 et seq.; 
(10)  Adequate provisions must be provided to minimize damage from surface water to the cut face of excavations or the sloping of fills; 
(11)  Cuts and fills may not endanger adjoining property; 
(12)  Fills may not encroach upon natural watercourses or constructed channels in a manner so as to adversely affect other property owners; 
(13)  Grading equipment must cross flowing streams by means of bridges or culverts except when such methods are not feasible, provided, in any case, that such crossings are kept to a minimum; 
(14)  Land disturbing activity plans for erosion and sedimentation control shall include provisions for treatment or control of any source of sediments and adequate sedimentation control facilities to retain sediments on-site or preclude sedimentation of adjacent waters beyond the levels specified in subsection (b)(2) of this section; 
(15)  Except as provided in subsection (c)(16) of this section, there is established a 25-foot buffer along the banks of all state waters, as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, except where the director determines to allow a variance that is at least as protective of natural resources and the environment, where otherwise allowed by the director pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-2-8, or where a drainage structure or a roadway drainage structure must be constructed, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications, and are implemented; provided, however, the buffers of at least 25 feet established pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-440 et seq. shall remain in force unless a variance is granted by the director as provided in this subsection. The following requirements shall apply to any such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees perpendicular to the stream; that they cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines; and 
(16)  There is established a 50-foot buffer as measured horizontally from the point where vegetation has been wrested by normal stream flow or wave action, along the banks of any state waters classified as trout streams, pursuant to the Georgia Water Quality Control Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-5-20 et seq., except where a roadway drainage structure must be constructed; provided, however, that small springs and streams classified as trout streams which discharge an average annual flow of 25 gallons per minute or less shall have a 25-foot buffer or they may be piped, at the discretion of the landowner, pursuant to the terms of a rule providing for a general variance promulgated by the board, so long as any such pipe stops short of the downstream landowner's property and the landowner complies with the buffer requirement for any adjacent trout streams. The director may grant a variance from such buffer to allow land disturbing activity, provided that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated in the project plans and specifications and are implemented. The following requirements shall apply to such buffer: 
a.  No land disturbing activities shall be conducted within a buffer and a buffer shall remain in its natural, undisturbed, state of vegetation until all land disturbing activities on the construction site are completed. Once the final stabilization of the site is achieved, a buffer may be thinned or trimmed of vegetation as long as a protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; provided, however, that any person constructing a single-family residence, when such residence is constructed by or under contract with the owner for his own occupancy, may thin or trim vegetation in a buffer at any time as long as protective vegetative cover remains to protect water quality and aquatic habitat and a natural canopy is left in sufficient quantity to keep shade on the streambed; and 
b.  The buffer shall not apply to the following land disturbing activities, provided that they occur at an angle, as measured from the point of crossing, within 25 degrees perpendicular to the stream; that they cause a width of disturbance of not more than 50 feet within the buffer; and that adequate erosion control measures are incorporated into the project plans and specifications and are implemented: 
1.  Stream crossings for water lines; or 
2.  Stream crossings for sewer lines. 
(d)  Other requirements by local issuing authority. Nothing contained in this article shall prevent any local issuing authority from adopting rules and regulations, ordinances, or resolutions which contain stream buffer requirements that exceed the minimum requirements in subsections (b) and (c) of this section. 
(e)  Injury. The fact that land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof of nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § IV)  
Sec. 22-23. - Application/permit process. 
(a)  General. The property owner, developer and designated planners and engineers shall review the general development plans and detailed plans of the local issuing authority that affect the tract to be developed and the area surrounding it. They shall review the zoning ordinance, stormwater management ordinance, subdivision ordinance, flood damage prevention ordinance, this article, and other ordinances which regulate the development of land within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority. However, the operator is the only party who may obtain a permit. 
(b)  Application requirements. 
(1)  No person shall conduct any land disturbing activity within the jurisdictional boundaries of the city without first obtaining a permit from the city to perform such activity. 
(2)  The application for a permit shall be submitted to the building official and must include the applicant's erosion and sedimentation control plan with supporting data, as necessary. Said plans shall include, as a minimum, the data specified in subsection (c) of this section. Soil erosion and sedimentation control plans shall conform to the provisions of section 22-22(b) and (c). Applications for a permit will not be accepted unless accompanied by four copies of the applicant's soil erosion and sedimentation control plans. All applications shall contain a certification stating that the plan preparer or the designee thereof visited the site prior to creation of the plan or that such a visit was not required in accordance with rules and regulations established by the board. 
(3)  A fee, in the amount established by the mayor and council, shall be charged for each acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
(4)  In addition to the local permitting fees, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(a)(5), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. All applicable fees shall be paid prior to issuance of the land disturbance permit. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17(9) or (10) shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 
(5)  Immediately upon receipt of an application and plan for a permit, the local issuing authority shall refer the application and plan to the district for its review and approval or disapproval concerning the adequacy of the erosion and sedimentation control plan. A district shall approve or disapprove a plan within 35 days of receipt. Failure of a district to act within 35 days shall be considered an approval of the pending plan. The results of the district review shall be forwarded to the issuing authority. No permit will be issued unless the plan has been approved by the district, and any variances required by section 22-22(c)(15) and (16), and bonding, if required as per subsection (b)(7) of this section, have been obtained. Such review will not be required if the issuing authority and the district have entered into an agreement which allows the issuing authority to conduct such review and approval of the plan without referring the application and plan to the district. 
(6)  If a permit applicant has had two or more violations of previous permits, this section, or the Erosion and Sedimentation Act, as amended, within three years prior to the date of filing of the application under consideration, the local issuing authority may deny the permit application. 
(7)  The local issuing authority may require the permit applicant to post a bond in the form of government security, cash, irrevocable letter of credit, or any combination thereof up to, but not exceeding, $3,000.00 per acre or fraction thereof of the proposed land disturbing activity, prior to issuing the permit. If the applicant does not comply with this article or with the conditions of the permit after issuance, the local issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. These provisions shall not apply unless there is in effect an ordinance or statute specifically providing for hearing and judicial review of any determination or order of the local issuing authority with respect to alleged permit violations. 
(c)  Plan requirements . 
(1)  Minimum requirements. Plans must be prepared to meet the minimum requirements as contained in section 22-22(b) and (c). Conformance with the minimum requirements may be attained through the use of design criteria in the current issue of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia," published by the state soil and water conservation commission as a guide; or through the use of more stringent, alternate design criteria which conform to sound conservation and engineering practices. The "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia" is hereby incorporated by reference into this article. The plan for the land disturbing activity shall consider the interrelationship of the soil types, geological and hydrological characteristics, topography, watershed, vegetation, proposed permanent structures, including roadways, constructed waterways, sediment control and stormwater management facilities, local ordinances and state laws. 
(2)  Data required for site plan. 
a.  Narrative or notes, and other information. Narrative or notes to be located on the site plan in general notes or in erosion and sediment control notes. 
b.  Description of existing land use at project site and description of proposed project. 
c.  Name, address, and telephone number of the property owner. 
d.  Name and telephone number of 24-hour local contact who is responsible for erosion and sedimentation controls. 
e.  Size of project, or phase under construction, in acres. 
f.  Activity schedule showing anticipated starting and completion dates for the project. Include the statement in bold letters, "The installation of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices shall occur prior to or concurrent with land disturbing activities." 
g.  Stormwater and sedimentation management systems storage capacity, hydrologic study, and calculations, including off-site drainage areas. 
h.  Vegetative plan for all temporary and permanent vegetative measures, including species, planting dates, and seeding, fertilizer, lime, and mulching rates. The vegetative plan should show options for yearround seeding. 
i.  Detail drawings for all structural practices. Specifications may follow guidelines set forth in the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
j.  Maintenance statement. Include the statement, "Erosion and sedimentation control measures will be maintained at all times. If full implementation of the approved plan does not provide for effective erosion and sediment control, additional erosion and sediment control measures shall be implemented to control or treat the sediment source." Maps, drawings, and supportive computations shall bear the signature/seal of a registered or certified professional in engineering, architecture, landscape architecture, land surveying, or erosion and sedimentation control. After December 31, 2006, all persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements as developed by the commission pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. The certified plans shall contain: 
1.  Graphic scale and north point or arrow indicating magnetic north. 
2.  Vicinity maps showing location of project and existing streets. 
3.  Boundary line survey. 
4.  Delineation of disturbed areas within project boundary. 
5.  Existing and planned contours, with an interval in accordance with the following: 
Countour Intervals 
Map Scale 	Ground Slope 	Contour Interval 
(Feet) 
1 inch = 100 feet 	Flat 0—2% 	0.5 or 1 
or larger scale 	Rolling 2—8% 	1 or 2 
	Steep 8%+ 	2.5 or 10 
 
6.  Adjacent areas and feature areas, such as streams, lakes, residential areas, etc., which might be affected should be indicated on the plan. 
7.  Proposed structures or additions to existing structures and paved areas. 
8.  Delineate the 25-foot horizontal buffer adjacent to state waters and the specified width in MRPA areas. 
9.  Delineate the specified horizontal buffer along designated trout streams, where applicable. 
10.  Location of erosion and sedimentation control measures and practices using coding symbols from chapter 6 of the "Manual for Erosion and Sediment Control in Georgia." 
(3)  Soil erosion and sedimentation control practices. Maintenance of all soil erosion and sedimentation control practices, whether temporary or permanent, shall be at all times the responsibility of the property owner. 
(d)  Permits. 
(1)  Permits shall be issued or denied as soon as practicable but in any event not later than 45 days after receipt by the local issuing authority of a completed application, provided that variances and bonding are obtained, where necessary. 
(2)  No permit shall be issued by the local issuing authority unless the erosion and sedimentation control plan has been approved by the district and the local issuing authority has affirmatively determined that the plan is in compliance with this article, any variances required by sections 22-22(c)(15) and (16) are obtained, bonding requirements, if necessary, as per subsection (b)(7) of this section are met and all ordinances and rules and regulations in effect within the jurisdictional boundaries of the local issuing authority are met. If the permit is denied, the reason for denial shall be furnished to the applicant. 
(3)  If the tract is to be developed in phases, then a separate permit shall be required for each phase. 
(4)  The permit may be suspended, revoked, or modified by the local issuing authority, as to all or any portion of the land affected by the plan, upon finding that the holder or his successor in the title is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sedimentation control plan or that the holder or his successor in title is in violation of this article. A holder of a permit shall notify any successor in title to him as to all or any portion of the land affected by the approved plan of the conditions contained in the permit. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § V)  
Sec. 22-24. - Inspection and enforcement. 
(a)  The building official will periodically inspect the sites of land disturbing activities for which permits have been issued to determine if the activities are being conducted in accordance with the plan and if the measures required in the plan are effective in controlling erosion and sedimentation. Also, the local issuing authority shall regulate both primary and secondary permittees as such terms are defined in the state general permit. Primary permitees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the primary permitee is conducting land disturbing activities. Secondary permitees shall be responsible for installation and maintenance of best management practices where the secondary permittee is conducting land disturbing activities. If, through inspection, it is deemed that a person engaged in land disturbing activities as defined herein has failed to comply with the approved plan, with permit conditions, or with the provisions of this article, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article. 
(b)  The building official shall have the power to conduct such investigations as it may reasonably deem necessary to carry out duties as prescribed in this article, and for this purpose to enter at reasonable times upon any property, public or private, for the purpose of investigation and inspecting the sites of land disturbing activities. 
(c)  No person shall refuse entry or access to any authorized representative or agent of the issuing authority, the commission, the district, or division who requests entry for the purposes of inspection, and who presents appropriate credentials, nor shall any person obstruct, hamper or interfere with any such representative while in the process of carrying out his official duties. 
(d)  The districts or the commission or both shall periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). The districts or the commission or both may provide technical assistance to any county or municipality for the purpose of improving the effectiveness of the county's or municipality's erosion and sedimentation control program. The districts or the commission shall notify the division and request investigation by the division if any deficient or ineffective local program is found. 
(e)  The board, from time to time, shall promulgate rules and regulations setting forth the requirements and standards for certification and the procedures for decertification of a local issuing authority. The division may periodically review the actions of counties and municipalities which have been certified as local issuing authorities pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a). Such review may include, but shall not be limited to, review of the administration and enforcement of a governing authority's ordinance and review of conformance with an agreement, if any, between the district and the governing authority. If such review indicates that the governing authority of any county or municipality certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a) has not administered or enforced its ordinances or has not conducted the program in accordance with any agreement entered into pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-7(e), the division shall notify the governing authority of the county or municipality in writing. The governing authority of any county or municipality so notified shall have 30 days within which to take the necessary corrective action to retain certification as a local issuing authority. If the county or municipality does not take necessary corrective action within 30 days after notification by the division, the division may revoke the certification of the county or municipality as a local issuing authority. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § VI)  
Sec. 22-25. - Penalties and incentives. 
(a)  Failure to obtain a permit for land disturbing activity. If any person commences any land disturbing activity requiring a land disturbing permit as prescribed in this article without first obtaining said permit, the person shall be subject to revocation of his business license, work permit or other authorization for the conduct of a business and associated work activities within the jurisdictional boundaries of the issuing authority. 
(b)  Stop-work orders. 
(1)  For the first and second violations of the provisions of this article, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a written warning to the violator. The violator shall have five days to correct the violation. If the violation is not corrected within five days, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue a stop-work order requiring that land disturbing activities be stopped until necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred; provided, however, that, if the violation presents an imminent threat to public health or waters of the state or if the land disturbing activities are conducted without obtaining the necessary permit, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order in lieu of a warning. 
(2)  For a third and each subsequent violation, the director or the local issuing authority shall issue an immediate stop-work order. 
(3)  All stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. 
(4)  When a violation in the form of taking action without a permit, failure to maintain a stream buffer, or significant amounts of sediment, as determined by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee, have been or are being discharged into state waters and where best management practices have not been properly designed, installed, and maintained, a stop-work order shall be issued by the local issuing authority or by the director or his designee. All such stop-work orders shall be effective immediately upon issuance and shall be in effect until the necessary corrective action or mitigation has occurred. Such stop-work orders shall apply to all land disturbing activity on the site with the exception of the installation and maintenance of temporary or permanent erosion and sediment controls. 
(c)  Bond forfeiture. If, through inspection, it is determined that a person engaged in land disturbing activities has failed to comply with the approved plan, a written notice to comply shall be served upon that person. The notice shall set forth the measures necessary to achieve compliance with the plan and shall state the time within which such measures must be completed. If the person engaged in the land disturbing activity fails to comply within the time specified, he shall be deemed in violation of this article and, in addition to other penalties, shall be deemed to have forfeited his performance bond, if required to post one under the provisions of section 22-23(b)(7). The issuing authority may call the bond or any part thereof to be forfeited and may use the proceeds to hire a contractor to stabilize the site of the land disturbing activity and bring it into compliance. 
(d)  Monetary penalties. For any permit condition or limitation established pursuant to this article, or who negligently or intentionally fails or refuses to comply with any final or emergency order of the director issued as provided in this article shall be liable for a civil penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 per day. For the purpose of enforcing the provisions of this article, notwithstanding any provisions in any city charter to the contrary, municipal courts shall be authorized to impose penalty not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Notwithstanding any limitation of law as to penalties which can be assessed for violations of county ordinances, any magistrate court or any other court of competent jurisdiction trying cases brought as violations of this article under county ordinances approved under this article shall be authorized to impose penalties for such violations not to exceed $2,500.00 for each violation. Each day during which violation or failure or refusal to comply continues shall be a separate violation. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § VII)  
Sec. 22-26. - Education and certification. 
All persons involved in land development design, review, permitting, construction, monitoring, or inspection or any land disturbing activity shall meet the education and training certification requirements, dependent on their level of involvement with the process, as developed by the commission in consultation with the division and the stakeholder advisory board created pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-20. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § VIII)  
Sec. 22-27. - Administrative appeal; judicial review. 
(a)  Administrative remedies. The suspension, revocation, modification or grant with condition of a permit by the issuing authority upon finding that the holder is not in compliance with the approved erosion and sediment control plan; or that the holder is in violation of permit conditions; or that the holder is in violation of any ordinance; shall entitle the person submitting the plan or holding the permit to a hearing before the mayor and council within 30 days after receipt by the issuing authority of written notice of appeal. 
(b)  Judicial review. Any person, aggrieved by a decision or order of the issuing authority, after exhausting his administrative remedies, shall have the right to de novo appeal to the superior court of the county. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § IX)  
Sec. 22-28. - Liability. 
(a)  Neither the approval of a plan under the provisions of this article, nor the compliance with provisions of this article shall relieve any person from the responsibility for damage to any person or property otherwise imposed by law nor impose any liability upon the issuing authority or district for damage to any person or property. 
(b)  The fact that a land disturbing activity for which a permit has been issued results in injury to the property of another shall neither constitute proof nor create a presumption of a violation of the standards provided for in this article or the terms of the permit. 
(c)  No provision of this article shall permit any persons to violate the Georgia Erosion and Sedimentation Act of 1975, the Georgia Water Quality Control Act or the rules and regulations promulgated and approved thereunder or pollute any waters of the state as defined thereby. 
(Ord. of 9-7-2004, § X(C))  
Secs. 22-29—22-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - AIR POLLUTION[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— The Georgia Air Quality Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-9-1 et seq.; authority to control air quality, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(13). 
 
Sec. 22-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Dense smoke means smoke which is so heavy and thick as to prevent the seeing of objects through it at the point of emission into the external air, or the equivalent of the No. 3 grade of the Ringelmann Smoke Scale, the standard device used by the United States Bureau of Mines. 
(Code 1984, § 11-3-1; Code 1996, § 42-151)  
Sec. 22-61. - Emission of dense smoke; time limit. 
It shall be unlawful to permit the emission of dense smoke from any steam boiler, furnace, incinerator or similar device or contrivance, or from the smokestack or chimney of any house, apartment house, office building, institution, place, premises or any building whatsoever used as a factory or for any purpose of trade or business, except for a period of six minutes in any one hour during which the furnace is being cleaned or a fresh fire is being made in the furnace. 
(Code 1984, § 11-3-2; Code 1996, § 42-152)  
Sec. 22-62. - Applicability of section 22-61. 
The provisions of section 22-61 shall apply to the chimneys of locomotives, steamrollers, steam shovels, steam hoisting engines, tar kettles or any other similar machine, device or contrivance. 
(Code 1984, § 11-3-3; Code 1996, § 42-153)  
Sec. 22-63. - Escape of soot, ash, fumes, other noxious emissions into air. 
It shall be unlawful to cause, permit or allow the escape into the open air of such quantities of soot, ash, dust, steam, cinders, dirt or other material, or noxious gas or fumes, in such place or manner as to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury, detriment or annoyance to any person or to the public, or to endanger the comfort and repose, health or safety of any person or the public, or in such a manner as to cause or have a natural tendency to cause injury or damage to business or property. 
(Code 1984, § 11-3-4; Code 1996, § 42-154)  
Sec. 22-64. - Right to inspect premises, machinery and appliances. 
Such person as may be designated by the mayor and council shall have the right and authority at all reasonable times to visit and inspect premises and machinery, boilers, furnaces or other appliances connected therewith necessary to such inspection, for the purpose of ascertaining the kind of character of fuel used and manner of using the fuel, and any facts showing compliance with or violation of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 11-3-5; Code 1996, § 42-155)  
Sec. 22-65. - Investigation of complaints. 
It shall be the duty of the mayor and council or such person as may be designated by them to investigate all complaints made to him of a violation of any of the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 11-3-6; Code 1996, § 42-156)  
Secs. 22-66—22-88. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - WELLHEAD PROTECTION 
 
Sec. 22-89. - Short title and purpose. 
(a)  This article shall be known as the "Wellhead Protection Ordinance." 
(b)  The purpose of this article is to ensure the provisions of a safe and sanitary drinking water supply for the city by establishment of wellhead protection zones surrounding the wellheads for all wells or springs which are the supply sources for the city water system and by the designation and regulation of property uses and conditions which may be maintained within such zones. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2003, § 1)  
Sec. 22-90. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Hazardous waste or material means any waste or material which, because of its quantity, concentration or physical, chemical or infectious characteristics, may: 
(1)  Cause or significantly contribute to an increase in mortality or an increase in serious irreversible or reversible incapacitation or illness; or 
(2)  Pose a substantial present or potential hazard to human health or to the environment when improperly treated, stored, transported, disposed of or otherwise managed. 
Sanitary landfill means a disposal site where solid wastes, including putrescible wastes or hazardous wastes, is disposed of on land by placing earth cover thereon. 
Wellhead means the upper terminal of a well, including adapters, ports, seals, valves and other attachments. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2003, § 2)  
Sec. 22-91. - Establishment of wellhead protection zone. 
There is hereby established a use district known as a wellhead protection zone, identified and described as all the area within a circle the center of which is the center of any city water supply wellhead and the radius of which is 500 feet. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2003, § 3)  
Sec. 22-92. - Permitted uses. 
The following uses shall be permitted within wellhead protection areas: 
(1)  Any use permitted within existing agricultural or single-family residential districts, except that the minimum residential lot size for a lot portion of which lies within the wellhead protection zone shall not be less than one acre; and 
(2)  Any open land use where any building located on the property is incidental and accessory to the primary open land use. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2003, § 4)  
Sec. 22-93. - Prohibited uses. 
The following uses of conditions shall be and are hereby prohibited within wellhead protection zones, whether or not such use or condition may otherwise be ordinarily included as a part of a use permitted under section 22-92: 
(1)  Surface use or storage of hazardous material, expressly including commercial use of agricultural pesticides; 
(2)  Septic tanks or drain fields appurtenant thereto; 
(3)  Impervious surfaces other than roofs of buildings and street and driveways and walks serving buildings permitted under section 22-92; 
(4)  Sanitary landfills; 
(5)  Hazardous waste disposal sites; 
(6)  Stormwater infiltration basins; 
(7)  Underground storage tanks; 
(8)  Sanitary sewer lines within 150 feet of a wellhead. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2003, § 5)  
Sec. 22-94. - Administration. 
The policies and procedures for administration of any wellhead protection zone established under this article, including without limitation those applicable to nonconforming uses, exceptions, enforcement and penalties, shall be the same as provided in the existing zoning ordinance for the city, as the same is presently enacted or may from time to time be amended. 
(Ord. of 8-5-2003, § 6)  
Chapter 24 - FIRE PREVENTION AND PROTECTION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide police and fire protection, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(1). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 24-1. - Tampering with alarm system. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to willfully, maliciously or mischievously interfere or tamper with any fire alarm box or any of the appliances or apparatus connected therewith, located within the corporate limits. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-4; Code 1996, § 46-1)  
Secs. 24-2—24-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FIRE DEPARTMENT[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Local fire departments generally, O.C.G.A. § 25-3-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 24-21. - Composition. 
The fire department shall be headed by a fire chief and shall be composed of such other paid and volunteer members and employees as may be determined necessary by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-1; Code 1996, § 46-31)  
Sec. 24-22. - Interfering with equipment. 
No person other than a duly enrolled member of the fire department shall ride upon the fire trucks of the city, nor shall any person use, borrow or interfere with any fire department equipment, including attempting to use the equipment at the scene of a fire, unless authorized to do so by the fire chief. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-2; Code 1996, § 46-32)  
Sec. 24-23. - Empowerment of members at scene of fire or other emergency. 
Whenever the fire department is answering an alarm or operating at the scene of a fire or other emergency, every enrolled member of the department is hereby empowered and authorized to control and direct motor vehicle traffic, stop or move vehicles, and enforce all provisions of this article and any other Code provisions the enforcement of which is deemed necessary to assist in the control of the fire or other emergency. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-3; Code 1996, § 46-33)  
Sec. 24-24. - Workers' compensation for volunteer firefighters. 
All official volunteer firefighters will be considered as employees for the purpose of providing workers' compensation insurance against bodily injury received while in the course of performing their duties within the city. 
(Code 1984, § 4-2-5; Code 1996, § 46-34)  
Chapter 26 - FLOODS  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 26-1—26-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - FLOOD DAMAGE PREVENTION  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 26-19. - Authorization. 
Ga. Const. art. IX, § II and O.C.G.A. § 36-1-20(a) have delegated the responsibility to local governmental units to adopt regulations designed to promote the public health, safety, and general welfare of its citizenry. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 1, § A)  
Sec. 26-20. - Findings of fact. 
(a)  The flood hazard areas of the city are subject to periodic inundation which results in loss of life and property, health and safety hazards, disruption of commerce and governmental services, extraordinary public expenditures for flood relief and protection, and impairment of the tax base, all of which adversely affect the public health, safety and general welfare. 
(b)  These flood losses are caused by the occupancy in flood hazard areas of uses vulnerable to floods, which are inadequately elevated, floodproofed, or otherwise unprotected from flood damages, and by the cumulative effect of obstructions in floodplains causing increases in flood heights and velocities. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 1, § B)  
Sec. 26-21. - Statement of purpose. 
It is the purpose of this article to promote the public health, safety and general welfare and to minimize public and private losses due to flood conditions in specific areas by provisions designed to: 
(1)  Require that uses vulnerable to floods, including facilities which serve such uses, be protected against flood damage at the time of initial construction; 
(2)  Restrict or prohibit uses which are dangerous to health, safety and property due to water or erosion hazards, or which increase flood heights, velocities, or erosion; 
(3)  Control filling, grading, dredging and other development which may increase flood damage or erosion; 
(4)  Prevent or regulate the construction of flood barriers which will unnaturally divert floodwaters or which may increase flood hazards to other lands; and 
(5)  Control the alteration of natural floodplains, stream channels, and natural protective barriers, which are involved in the accommodation of floodwaters. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 1, § C)  
Sec. 26-22. - Objectives. 
The objectives of this article are to: 
(1)  Protect human life and health; 
(2)  Minimize damage to public facilities and utilities, such as water and gas mains, electrical, telephone and sewer lines, streets and bridges, located in floodplains; 
(3)  Help maintain a stable tax base by providing for the sound use and development of floodprone areas in such a manner as to minimize flood blight areas; 
(4)  Minimize expenditure of public money for costly flood control projects; 
(5)  Minimize the need for rescue and relief efforts associated with flooding and generally undertaken at the expense of the general public; 
(6)  Minimize prolonged business interruptions; and 
(7)  Ensure that potential homebuyers are notified that property is in a flood area. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 1, § D)  
Sec. 26-23. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory structure means a structure having minimal value and used for parking, storage and other non-habitable uses, such as garages, carports, storage sheds, pole barns, hay sheds and the like. 
Addition (to an existing building) means any walled and roofed expansion to the perimeter of a building in which the addition is connected by a common load-bearing wall other than a firewall. Any walled and roofed addition, which is connected by a firewall or is separated by an independent perimeter load-bearing wall, shall be considered "new construction." 
Appeal means a request for a review of the building official's interpretation of any provision of this article. 
Area of shallow flooding means a designated AO or AH Zone on a community's flood insurance rate map (FIRM) with base flood depths from one to three feet and/or where a clearly defined channel does not exist, where the path of flooding is unpredictable and indeterminate, and where velocity flow may be evident. 
Area of special flood hazard means the land in the floodplain within a community subject to a one percent or greater chance of flooding in any given year. In the absence of official designation by the Federal Emergency Management Agency, areas of special flood hazard shall be those designated by the local community and referenced in section 26-25. 
Base flood means the flood having a one percent chance of being equaled or exceeded in any given year. 
Base flood elevation (BFE) means the elevation shown on the flood insurance rate map for Zones AE, AH, A1-A30, AR, AR/A, AR/AE, AR/A1-A30, AR/AH, AR/AO, V1-V30, and VE that indicates the water surface elevation resulting from a flood that has a one percent chance of equaling or exceeding that level in any given year. 
Basement means that portion of a building having its floor subgrade (below ground level) on all sides. 
Building means any structure built for support, shelter, or enclosure for any occupancy or storage. 
Critical facility means any public or private facility, which, if flooded, would create an added dimension to the disaster or would increase the hazard to life and health. Critical facilities include: 
(1)  Structures or facilities that produce, use, or store highly volatile, flammable, explosive, toxic, or water-reactive materials; 
(2)  Hospitals and nursing homes, and housing for the elderly, which are likely to contain occupants who may not be sufficiently mobile to avoid the loss of life or injury during flood and storm events; 
(3)  Emergency operation centers or data storage centers which contain records or services that may become lost or inoperative during flood and storm events; and 
(4)  Generating plants, and other principal points of utility lines. 
Development means any manmade change to improved or unimproved real estate, including, but not limited to, buildings or other structures, mining, dredging, filling, grading, paving, excavating, drilling operations, and storage of materials or equipment. 
Elevated building means a non-basement building built to have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area elevated above the ground level by means of fill, solid foundation perimeter walls, pilings, columns, piers, or shear walls adequately anchored so as not to impair the structural integrity of the building during a base flood event. 
Existing construction means, for the purposes of determining rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced before June 17, 1986. 
Existing manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed before November 5, 1975. 
Expansion to an existing manufactured home park or subdivision means the preparation of additional sites by the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either the final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads). 
Flood or flooding means a general and temporary condition of partial or complete inundation of normally dry land areas from: 
(1)  The overflow of inland or tidal waters; or 
(2)  The unusual and rapid accumulation or runoff of surface waters from any source. 
Flood hazard boundary map (FHBM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, where the boundaries of areas of special flood hazard have been defined as Zone A. 
Flood insurance rate map (FIRM) means an official map of a community, issued by the Federal Insurance Administration, delineating the areas of special flood hazard and/or risk premium zones applicable to the community. 
Flood insurance study means the official report by the Federal Insurance Administration evaluating flood hazards and containing flood profiles and water surface elevations of the base flood. 
Floodplain means any land area susceptible to flooding. 
Floodproofing means any combination of structural and non-structural additions, changes, or adjustments to structures, which reduce or eliminate flood damage to real estate or improved real property, water and sanitary facilities, structures and their contents. 
Floodway means the channel of a river or other watercourse and the adjacent land areas that must be reserved in order to discharge the base flood without cumulatively increasing the water surface elevation more than a designated height. 
Freeboard means a factor of safety usually expressed in feet above a flood level for the purposes of floodplain management. The term "freeboard" tends to compensate for the many unknown factors that could contribute to flood heights greater than the height calculated for a selected size flood and floodway conditions, such as wave action, bridge openings, and the hydrological effect of urbanization of the watershed. 
Highest adjacent grade means the highest natural elevation of the ground surface, prior to construction, adjacent to the proposed foundation of a building. 
Historic structure means any structure that is: 
(1)  Listed individually in the National Register of Historic Places (a listing maintained by the U.S. Department of the Interior) or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as meeting the requirements for individual listing on the National Register; 
(2)  Certified or preliminarily determined by the Secretary of the Interior as contributing to the historical significance of a registered historic district or a district preliminarily determined by the Secretary to qualify as a registered historic district; 
(3)  Individually listed on a state inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by states with historic preservation programs which have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
(4)  Individually listed on a local inventory of historic places and determined as eligible by communities with historic preservation programs that have been certified either: 
a.  By an approved state program as determined by the Secretary of the Interior; or 
b.  Directly by the Secretary of the Interior in states without approved programs. 
Lowest floor means the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement. An unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure, used solely for parking of vehicles, building access, or storage, in an area other than a basement, is not considered a building's lowest floor, provided that such enclosure is not built so as to render the structure in violation of other provisions of this Code. 
Manufactured home means a building, transportable in one or more sections, built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities. The term "manufactured home" also includes park trailers, travel trailers, and similar transportable structures placed on a site for 180 consecutive days or longer and intended to be improved property. 
Manufactured home park or subdivision means a parcel (or contiguous parcels) of land divided into two or more manufactured home lots for rent or sale. 
Mean sea level means the average height of the sea for all stages of the tide. It is used as a reference for establishing various elevations within the floodplain. For purposes of the National Flood Insurance Program, the term "mean sea level" means the National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) of 1929 or other datum to which base flood elevations shown on a community's flood insurance rate map are referenced. 
National Geodetic Vertical Datum (NGVD) , as corrected in 1929, is a vertical control used as a reference for establishing varying elevations within the floodplain. 
New construction means, for the purposes of determining insurance rates, structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after June 17, 1986, the effective date of the initial FIRM, and includes any subsequent improvements to such structures. For floodplain management purposes, the term "new construction" means structures for which the "start of construction" commenced after November 5, 1975. 
New manufactured home park or subdivision means a manufactured home park or subdivision for which the construction of facilities for servicing the lots on which the manufactured homes are to be affixed (including, at a minimum, the installation of utilities, the construction of streets, and either final site grading or the pouring of concrete pads) is completed after November 5, 1975. 
North American Vertical Datum (NAVD) has replaced the National Geodetic Vertical Datum of 1929 in existing and future FEMA flood modernization maps. 
Recreational vehicle means a vehicle which is: 
(1)  Built on a single chassis; 
(2)  400 square feet or less when measured at the largest horizontal projection; 
(3)  Designed to be self-propelled or permanently towable by a light-duty truck; and 
(4)  Designed primarily not for use as a permanent dwelling but as temporary living quarters for recreational, camping, travel, or seasonal use. 
Start of construction means the date the development permit was issued, provided the actual start of construction, repair, reconstruction, or improvement was within 180 days of the permit date. The term "actual start" means the first placement of permanent construction of the structure, such as the pouring of slabs or footings, installation of piles, construction of columns, or any work beyond the stage of excavation, and includes the placement of a manufactured home on a foundation. The term "permanent construction" does not include initial land preparation, such as clearing, grading and filling; nor does it include the installation of streets and/or walkways; nor does it include excavation for a basement, footings, piers or foundations or the erection of temporary forms; nor does it include the installation on the property of buildings appurtenant to the permitted structure, such as garages or sheds not occupied as dwelling units or part of the main structure. (Note: Accessory structures are not exempt from any ordinance requirements.) For a substantial improvement, the actual start of construction means the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of a building, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
Structure means a walled and roofed building that is principally above ground, including, but not limited to, a manufactured home or a gas or liquid storage tank. 
Subdivision means the division of a single lot into two or more lots for the purpose of sale or development. 
Substantial damage means damage of any origin sustained by a structure whereby the cost of restoring the structure to its before-damaged condition would equal or exceed 50 percent of the market value of the structure before the damage occurred. 
Substantial improvement. 
(1)  The term "substantial improvement" means any reconstruction, rehabilitation, addition, or other improvement of a structure, taking place during a five-year period, in which the cumulative cost equals or exceeds 50 percent of the market value of the structure prior to the "start of construction" of the improvement. The market value of the structure should be the appraised value of the structure prior to the start of the initial repair or improvement, or, in the case of damage, the value of the structure prior to the damage occurring. 
(2)  The term "substantial improvement" includes structures which have incurred "substantial damage," regardless of the actual amount of repair work performed. 
(3)  For the purposes of this definition, the term "substantial improvement" is considered to occur when the first alteration of any wall, ceiling, floor, or other structural part of the building commences, whether or not that alteration affects the external dimensions of the building. 
(4)  The term "substantial improvement" does not, however, include: 
a.  Those improvements of a structure required to comply with existing violations of state or local health, sanitary, or safety code specifications which are solely necessary to ensure safe living conditions and which have been identified by the code enforcement official, and not solely triggered by an improvement or repair project; or 
b.  Any alteration of a historic structure, provided that the alteration will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure. 
Substantially improved existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions means where the repair, reconstruction, rehabilitation or improvement of the streets, utilities and pads equals or exceeds 50 percent of the value of the streets, utilities and pads before the repair, reconstruction or improvement commenced. 
Variance means a grant of relief from the requirements of this article, which permits construction in a manner otherwise prohibited by this article. 
Violation means the failure of a structure or other development to be fully compliant with the community's floodplain management regulations. A structure or other development without the elevation certificate, or other certifications, or other evidence of compliance required by this article is presumed to be in violation until such time as that documentation is provided. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 6)  
Sec. 26-24. - Lands to which this article applies. 
This article shall apply to all areas of special flood hazard within the jurisdiction of the city. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 2, § A)  
Sec. 26-25. - Basis for area of special flood hazard. 
(a)  The areas of special flood hazard identified by the Federal Emergency Management Agency in its flood insurance study (FIS) dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, are adopted by reference and declared a part of this article. 
(b)  For those land areas acquired by a municipality through annexation, the current effective FIS dated September 25, 2009, with accompanying maps and other supporting data and any revision thereto, for the county is hereby adopted by reference. 
(c)  Areas of special flood hazard may also include those areas known to have flooded historically or defined through standard engineering analysis by governmental agencies or private parties but not yet incorporated in a FIS. 
(d)  The repository for public inspection of the flood insurance study (FIS), accompanying maps and other supporting data is located at the Donalsonville City Hall at 127 E. 2nd Street. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 2, § B)  
Sec. 26-26. - Compliance. 
No structure or land shall hereafter be located, extended, converted or altered without full compliance with the terms of this article and other applicable regulations. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 2, § D)  
Sec. 26-27. - Abrogation and greater restrictions. 
This article is not intended to repeal, abrogate, or impair any existing ordinance, easements, covenants, or deed restrictions. However, where this article and another conflict or overlap, whichever imposes the more stringent restrictions shall prevail. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 2, § E)  
Sec. 26-28. - Interpretation. 
In the interpretation and application of this article, all provisions shall be: 
(1)  Considered as minimum requirements; 
(2)  Liberally construed in favor of the mayor and council; and 
(3)  Deemed neither to limit nor repeal any other powers granted under state statutes. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 2, § F)  
Sec. 26-29. - Warning and disclaimer of liability. 
The degree of flood protection required by this article is considered reasonable for regulatory purposes and is based on scientific and engineering considerations. Larger floods can and will occur; flood heights may be increased by manmade or natural causes. This article does not imply that land outside the areas of special flood hazard or uses permitted within such areas will be free from flooding or flood damages. This article shall not create liability on the part of the city or by any officer or employee thereof for any flood damages that result from reliance on this article or any administrative decision lawfully made hereunder. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 2, § G)  
Sec. 26-30. - Penalties for violation. 
Failure to comply with the provisions of this article or with any of its requirements, including conditions and safeguards established in connection with grants of variance or special exceptions, shall constitute a violation. Any person who violates this article or fails to comply with any of its requirements shall, upon conviction thereof, be fined not more than $1,000.00 or imprisoned for not more than 90 days, or both, and, in addition, shall pay all costs and expenses involved in the case. Each day such violation continues shall be considered a separate offense. Nothing herein contained shall prevent the city from taking such other lawful actions as is necessary to prevent or remedy any violation. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 2, § H)  
Secs. 26-31—26-48. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - ADMINISTRATION 
 
Sec. 26-49. - Designation of administrator. 
Either the chief building official, the assistant building official or the chief of police is hereby appointed to administer and implement the provisions of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 3, § A)  
Sec. 26-50. - Establishment of development permit. 
A development permit shall be required in conformance with the provisions of this article prior to the commencement of any development activities. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 2, § C)  
Sec. 26-51. - Permit procedures. 
Application for a development permit shall be made to the chief building official on forms furnished by the community prior to any development activities, and may include, but not be limited to, plans in duplicate drawn to scale showing the elevations of the area in question and the nature, location, dimensions, of existing or proposed structures, earthen fill placement, storage of materials or equipment, and drainage facilities. Specifically, the following information is required: 
(1)  Application stage. 
a.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all proposed structures; 
b.  Elevation in relation to mean sea level to which any nonresidential structure will be floodproofed; 
c.  Design certification from a registered professional engineer or architect that any proposed nonresidential floodproofed structure will meet the floodproofing criteria of section 26-79(2); 
d.  Description of the extent to which any watercourse will be altered or relocated as a result of a proposed development. 
(2)  Construction stage. 
a.  For all new construction and substantial improvements, the permit holder shall provide to the administrator an as-built certification of the regulatory floor elevation or floodproofing level immediately after the lowest floor or floodproofing is completed. Any lowest floor certification made relative to mean sea level shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a registered land surveyor or professional engineer and certified by same. When floodproofing is utilized for nonresidential structures, said certification shall be prepared by or under the direct supervision of a professional engineer or architect and certified by same. 
b.  Any work undertaken prior to submission of these certifications shall be at the permit holder's risk. 
c.  The chief building official or his designee shall review the submitted certification data as provided in subsection (2)(a) of this section. Deficiencies detected by such review shall be corrected by the permit holder immediately and prior to further progressive work being allowed to proceed. Failure to submit certification or failure to make said corrections required hereby shall be cause to issue a stop-work order for the project. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 3, § B)  
Sec. 26-52. - Duties and responsibilities of the administrator. 
Duties of the chief building official or his designee includes, but is not limited to: 
(1)  Review proposed development to ensure that the permit requirements of this article have been satisfied. 
(2)  Review proposed development to ensure that all necessary permits have been received from governmental agencies from which approval is required by federal or state law, including section 404 of the Federal Water Pollution Control Act Amendments of 1972, 33 USC 1344. Require that copies of such permits be provided and maintained on file. 
(3)  Review all permit applications to determine whether proposed building sites will be reasonably safe from flooding. 
(4)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 26-25, obtain, review and reasonably utilize any base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state or other sources in order to administer the provisions of division 3 of this article. 
(5)  Review and record the actual elevation in relation to mean sea level (or highest adjacent grade) of the lowest floor, including basement, of all new or substantially improved structures in accordance with section 26-51(2). 
(6)  Review and record the actual elevation, in relation to mean sea level, to which any new or substantially improved structures have been floodproofed, in accordance with section 26-51(2). 
(7)  When floodproofing is utilized for a structure, obtain certification of design criteria from a registered professional engineer or architect in accordance with section 26-51(1)c and section 26-79(2) or 26-81(2). 
(8)  Make substantial damage determinations following a flood event or any other event that causes damage to structures in flood hazard areas. 
(9)  Notify adjacent communities and the state department of natural resources prior to any alteration or relocation of a watercourse and submit evidence of such notification to the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA). 
(10)  For any altered or relocated watercourse, submit engineering data/analysis within six months to the FEMA to ensure accuracy of community flood maps through the letter of map revision (LOMR) process. Ensure flood carrying capacity of any altered or relocated watercourse is maintained. 
(11)  Make the necessary interpretation where interpretation is needed as to the exact location of boundaries of the areas of special flood hazard (for example, where there appears to be a conflict between a mapped boundary and actual field conditions). Any person contesting the location of the boundary shall be given a reasonable opportunity to appeal the interpretation as provided in this article. 
(12)  Maintain all records pertaining to the provisions of this article in the office of the building official which shall be open for public inspection. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 3, § C)  
Secs. 26-53—26-77. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - PROVISIONS FOR FLOOD HAZARD REDUCTION 
 
Sec. 26-78. - General standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse or lateral movement of the structure; 
(2)  New construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed with materials and utility equipment resistant to flood damage; 
(3)  New construction or substantial improvements of existing structures shall be constructed by methods and practices that minimize flood damage; 
(4)  Elevated buildings. All new construction or substantial improvements of existing structures that include any fully enclosed area located below the lowest floor formed by foundation and other exterior walls shall be designed so as to be an unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure. The enclosure shall be designed to equalize hydrostatic flood forces on exterior walls by allowing for the automatic entry and exit of floodwaters: 
a.  Designs for complying with this requirement must either be certified by a professional engineer or architect or meet the following minimum criteria: 
1.  Provide a minimum of two openings having a total net area of not less than one square inch for every square foot of enclosed area subject to flooding; 
2.  The bottom of all openings shall be no higher than one foot above grade; and 
3.  Openings may be equipped with screens, louvers, valves or other coverings or devices, provided they permit the automatic flow of floodwaters in both direction; 
b.  So as not to violate the lowest floor criteria of this article, the unfinished or flood-resistant enclosure shall only be used for parking of vehicles, limited storage of maintenance equipment used in connection with the premises, or entry to the elevated area, and the interior portion of such enclosed area shall not be partitioned or finished into separate rooms; 
(5)  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be designed and/or located so as to prevent water from entering or accumulating within the components during conditions of flooding; 
(6)  Manufactured homes shall be anchored to prevent flotation, collapse, or lateral movement. Methods of anchoring may include, but are not limited to, use of over-the-top or frame ties to ground anchors. This standard shall be in addition to and consistent with applicable state requirements for resisting wind forces; 
(7)  New and replacement water supply systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the system; 
(8)  New and replacement sanitary sewage systems shall be designed to minimize or eliminate infiltration of floodwaters into the systems and discharges from the systems into floodwaters; 
(9)  On-site waste disposal systems shall be located and constructed to avoid impairment to them or contamination from them during flooding; and 
(10)  Any alteration, repair, reconstruction or improvement to a structure, which is not compliant with the provisions of this article, shall be undertaken only if the nonconformity is not furthered, extended or replaced. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 4, § A)  
Sec. 26-79. - Specific standards. 
In all areas of special flood hazard, the following provisions are required: 
(1)  New construction and/or substantial improvements. 
a.  Where base flood elevation data is available, new construction and/or substantial improvement of any structure or manufactured home shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. Should solid foundation perimeter walls be used to elevate a structure, openings sufficient to facilitate equalization of flood hydrostatic forces on both sides of exterior walls shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-78(4). 
b.  All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated at or above one foot above the base flood elevation. 
(2)  Nonresidential construction. New construction and/or the substantial improvement of any structure located in A1-30, AE, or AH Zones may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to one foot above the base flood elevation, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water, and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this section and in section 26-52(7). 
(3)  Standards for manufactured homes and recreational vehicles. Where base flood elevation data is available: 
a.  All manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved: 
1.  On individual lots or parcels; 
2.  In new and/or substantially improved manufactured home parks or subdivisions; 
3.  In expansions to existing manufactured home parks or subdivisions; or 
4.  On a site in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision where a manufactured home has incurred substantial damage as the result of a flood; 
must have the lowest floor including basement, elevated no lower than one foot above the base flood elevation. 
b.  Manufactured homes placed and/or substantially improved in an existing manufactured home park or subdivision may be elevated so that either: 
1.  The lowest floor of the manufactured home is elevated no lower than one foot above the level of the base flood elevation; or 
2.  The manufactured home chassis is elevated and supported by reinforced piers (or other foundation elements of at least an equivalent strength) of no less than 36 inches in height above grade. 
c.  All manufactured homes must be securely anchored to an adequately anchored foundation system to resist flotation, collapse and lateral movement, as provided in section 26-78(6). 
d.  All recreational vehicles placed on sites must either: 
1.  Be on the site for fewer than 180 consecutive days; 
2.  Be fully licensed and ready for highway use; or 
3.  Meet all the requirements for new construction, including the anchoring and elevation requirements of subsections (3)a through c of this section. 
A recreational vehicle is ready for highway use if it is licensed, on its wheels or jacking system, attached to the site only by quick disconnect type utilities and security devices, and has no permanently attached structures or additions. 
(4)  Floodway. Located within areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-25 are areas designated as floodways. A floodway may be an extremely hazardous area due to velocity floodwaters, debris or erosion potential. In addition, the area must remain free of encroachment in order to allow for the discharge of the base flood without increased flood heights. Therefore, the following provisions shall apply: 
a.  Encroachments are prohibited, including earthen fill, new construction, substantial improvements or other development, within the regulatory floodway. Development may be permitted, however, provided it is demonstrated through hydrologic and hydraulic analyses performed in accordance with standard engineering practices that the encroachment shall not result in any increase in flood levels or floodway widths during a base flood discharge. A registered professional engineer must provide supporting technical data and certification thereof. 
b.  Only if subsection (4)a of this section is satisfied, then any new construction or substantial improvement shall comply with all other applicable flood hazard reduction provisions of this division 3. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 4, § B)  
Sec. 26-80. - Building standards for streams without established base flood elevations and/or floodway (A-Zones). 
(a)  Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-25, where streams exist but no base flood data have been provided (A-Zones), or where base flood data have been provided but a floodway has not been delineated, the following provisions apply: 
(1)  When base flood elevation data or floodway data have not been provided in accordance with section 26-25, then the building official shall obtain, review, and reasonably utilize any scientific or historic base flood elevation and floodway data available from a federal, state, or other source, in order to administer the provisions of this division. 
(2)  Only if data is not available from these sources, then the following provisions apply: 
a.  No encroachments, including structures or fill material, shall be located within an area equal to the width of the stream or 20 feet, whichever is greater, measured from the top of the stream bank, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that such encroachment shall not result in more than a one foot increase in flood levels during the occurrence of the base flood discharge. 
b.  In special flood hazard areas without base flood elevation data, new construction and substantial improvements of existing structures shall have the lowest floor of the lowest enclosed area, including basement, elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. (Note: Require the lowest floor to be elevated one foot above the estimated base flood elevation in A-Zone areas where a limited detail study has been completed.) Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-78(4). All heating and air conditioning equipment and components (including ductwork), all electrical, ventilation, plumbing, and other service facilities shall be elevated no less than three feet above the highest adjacent grade at the building site. 
(b)  The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 4, § C)  
Sec. 26-81. - Standards for areas of special flood hazard (Zones AE) with established base flood elevations without designated floodways. 
Located within the areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-25, where streams with base flood elevations are provided but no floodways have been designated (AE Zones), the following provisions apply: 
(1)  No encroachments, including fill material, new structures or substantial improvements shall be located within areas of special flood hazard, unless certification by a registered professional engineer is provided demonstrating that the cumulative effect of the proposed development, when combined with all other existing and anticipated development, will not increase the water surface elevation of the base flood more than one foot at any point within the community. The engineering certification should be supported by technical data that conforms to standard hydraulic engineering principles. 
(2)  New construction or substantial improvements of buildings shall be elevated or floodproofed to elevations established in accordance with section 26-79. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 4, § D)  
Sec. 26-82. - Standards for areas of shallow flooding (AO Zones). 
Areas of special flood hazard established in section 26-25 may include designated "AO" shallow flooding areas. These areas have base flood depths of one to three feet above ground, with no clearly defined channel. The following provisions apply: 
(1)  All new construction and substantial improvements of residential and nonresidential structures shall have the lowest floor, including basement, elevated to the flood depth number specified on the flood insurance rate map (FIRM), above the highest adjacent grade. If no flood depth number is specified, the lowest floor, including basement, shall be elevated at least three feet above the highest adjacent grade. Openings sufficient to facilitate the unimpeded movements of floodwaters shall be provided in accordance with standards of section 26-78(4). The building official shall certify the lowest floor elevation level and the record shall become a permanent part of the permit file. 
(2)  New construction or the substantial improvement of a nonresidential structure may be floodproofed in lieu of elevation. The structure, together with attendant utility and sanitary facilities, must be designed to be watertight to the specified FIRM flood level plus one foot above highest adjacent grade, with walls substantially impermeable to the passage of water and structural components having the capability of resisting hydrostatic and hydrodynamic loads and the effect of buoyancy. A registered professional engineer or architect shall certify that the design and methods of construction are in accordance with accepted standards of practice for meeting the provisions of this section, and shall provide such certification to the official as set forth in this section and as required in section 26-51(1)c and (2). 
(3)  Drainage paths shall be provided to guide floodwater around and away from any proposed structure. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 4, § E)  
Sec. 26-83. - Standards for subdivisions. 
(a)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall be consistent with the need to minimize flood damage. 
(b)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have public utilities and facilities, such as sewer, gas, electrical and water systems, located and constructed to minimize flood damage. 
(c)  All subdivision and/or development proposals shall have adequate drainage provided to reduce exposure to flood hazards. 
(d)  For subdivisions and/or developments requiring an erosion and sedimentation plan, according to state law, base flood elevation data shall be provided for subdivision and all other proposed development, including manufactured home parks and subdivisions. Any changes or revisions to the flood data adopted herein and shown on the FIRM shall be submitted to FEMA for review as a conditional letter of map revision (CLOMR) or conditional letter of map amendment (CLOMA), whichever is applicable. Upon completion of the project, the developer is responsible for submitting the "as-built" data to FEMA in order to obtain the final letter of map revision (LOMR). 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 4, § F)  
Sec. 26-84. - Standards for critical facilities. 
(a)  Critical facilities shall not be located in the 100-year floodplain or the 500-year floodplain. 
(b)  All ingress and egress from any critical facility must be protected to the 500-year flood elevation. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 4, § G)  
Secs. 26-85—26-111. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - VARIANCE PROCEDURES 
 
Sec. 26-112. - Requests for variances; procedure for appeal. 
(a)  The mayor and council, as established by the Charter and this Code, shall hear and decide requests for appeals or variance from the requirements of this article. 
(b)  The mayor and council shall hear and decide appeals when it is alleged an error in any requirement, decision, or determination is made by the building official in the enforcement or administration of this article. 
(c)  Any person aggrieved by the decision of the mayor and council may appeal such decision to the superior court of the county, as provided in O.C.G.A. § 5-4-1. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 5, §§ A—C)  
Sec. 26-113. - Issuance of variance for certain purposes. 
(a)  Variances may be issued for the repair or rehabilitation of historic structures upon a determination that the proposed repair or rehabilitation will not preclude the structure's continued designation as a historic structure and the variance is the minimum to preserve the historic character and design of the structure. 
(b)  Variances may be issued for development necessary for the conduct of a functionally dependent use, provided the criteria of this article are met, no reasonable alternative exists, and the development is protected by methods that minimize flood damage during the base flood and create no additional threats to public safety. 
(c)  Variances shall not be issued within any designated floodway if any increase in flood levels during the base flood discharge would result. 
(d)  In reviewing such requests, the mayor and council shall consider all technical evaluations, relevant factors, and all standards specified in this and other sections of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 5, §§ D—G)  
Sec. 26-114. - Conditions for variances. 
(a)  A variance shall be issued only when there is: 
(1)  A finding of good and sufficient cause; 
(2)  A determination that failure to grant the variance would result in exceptional hardship; and 
(3)  A determination that the granting of a variance will not result in increased flood heights, additional threats to public safety, or extraordinary public expense, or create a nuisance, cause fraud on or victimization of the public, or conflict with existing local laws or ordinances. 
(b)  The provisions of this article are minimum standards for flood loss reduction; therefore, any deviation from the standards must be weighed carefully. Variances shall only be issued upon a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary, considering the flood hazard, to afford relief; and, in the instance of a historic structure, a determination that the variance is the minimum necessary so as not to destroy the historic character and design of the building. 
(c)  Any applicant to whom a variance is granted shall be given written notice specifying the difference between the base flood elevation and the elevation of the proposed lowest floor and stating that the cost of flood insurance will be commensurate with the increased risk to life and property resulting from the reduced lowest floor elevation. 
(d)  The building official shall maintain the records of all appeal actions and report any variances to the Federal Emergency Management Agency upon request. 
(e)  Upon consideration of the factors listed in this section and the purposes of this article, the mayor and council may attach such conditions to the granting of variances as it deems necessary to further the purposes of this article. 
(Ord. of 8-4-2009(1), art. 5, §§ H, I)  
Chapter 28 - HISTORIC PRESERVATION[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Historic Preservation Act, O.C.G.A. § 44-10-20 et seq. 
 
Sec. 28-1. - Purpose. 
(a)  The historical, cultural and aesthetic heritage of the city is among its most valued and important assets and the preservation of this heritage is essential to the promotion of the health, prosperity and general welfare of the people. 
(b)  The historic preservation of property stimulates revitalization of the business districts and historic neighborhoods and protects and enhances local historic and aesthetic attractions to tourists and thereby promotes and stimulates business and enhances the opportunities for federal or state tax benefits under relevant provisions of federal or state law. 
(c)  In order to provide for the designation, protection, preservation and rehabilitation of historic properties and historic districts and to participate in federal or state programs to do the same, the mayor and council has established herein a uniform procedure for use in providing for the protection, enhancement, perpetuation and use of places, districts, sites, buildings, structures, objects, and landscape features having a special historical, cultural or aesthetic interest or value. 
(Ord. No. 11-07-17, § I, 2-6-2018)  
Sec. 28-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building means a structure created to shelter any form of human activity, such as a house, barn, church, hotel or similar structure. The term "building" may refer to a historically related complex, such as a courthouse and jail or a house and barn. 
Certificate of appropriateness means a document evidencing approval by the historic preservation commission of an application to make a material change in the appearance of a designated historic property or of a property located within a designated historic district. 
Exterior architectural features means the architectural style, general design and general arrangement of the exterior of a building, structure or object, including, but not limited to, the kind or texture of the building material and the type and style of all windows, doors, signs and other appurtenant architectural fixtures, features, details or elements relative to the forgoing. 
Exterior environmental features means all those aspects of the landscape or the development of a site which affect the historic character of the property. 
Historic district means a geographically definable area, possessing a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of sites, buildings, structures or objects united by past events or aesthetically by plan or physical development. A district may also comprise individual elements separated geographically but linked by association or history. The term "historic district" shall further mean an area designated by the mayor and council as a historic district pursuant to the criteria established in section 28-4(b). 
Historic property means an individual building, structure, site, or object, including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation thereof designated by the mayor and council as a historic property pursuant to the criteria established in section 28-4(c). 
Material change in appearance means a change that will affect either the exterior architectural or environmental features of a historic property or any building, structure, site, object, or landscape feature within a historic district, such as: 
(1)  A reconstruction or alteration of the size, shape or facade of a historic property, including relocation of any doors or windows or removal or alteration of any architectural features, details or elements; 
(2)  Demolition or relocation of a historic structure; 
(3)  Commencement of excavation for construction purposes; 
(4)  A change in the location of advertising visible from the public right-of-way; or 
(5)  The erection, alteration, restoration or removal or any buildings or other structure within a historic property or district, including walls, fences, steps and pavements, or other appurtenant features, except exterior paint alterations. 
Object means a material thing of functional, aesthetic, cultural, historical or scientific value that may be, by nature or design, movable yet related to a specific setting or environment. 
Site means the location of a significant event, a prehistoric or historical occupation or activity, or a building or structure, whether standing, ruined, or vanished, where the location itself maintains historical or archaeological value regardless of the value of any existing structure. 
Structure means a work made up of interdependent and interrelated parts in a definite pattern of organization. Constructed by man, it is often an engineering project large in scale. 
(Ord. No. 11-07-17, § II, 2-6-2018)  
Sec. 28-3. - Historic preservation commission. 
(a)  Creation of the commission. There is hereby created a commission whose title shall be "Donalsonville Historic Preservation Commission." 
(b)  Commission position within the city government. The commission shall be part of the planning functions of the city. 
(c)  Commission members; number, appointment, terms and compensation. 
(1)  The commission shall consist of three members appointed by the mayor and ratified by the mayor and council. All members shall be residents of the city and shall be persons who have demonstrated special interest, experience or education in history, architecture or the preservation of historic resources. 
(2)  To the extent available in the city, at least three members shall be appointed from among professionals in the disciplines of architecture, history, architectural history, planning, archaeology or related professions. 
(3)  Members shall serve three-year terms. Members may not serve more than two consecutive terms. In order to achieve staggered terms, initial appointments shall be: one member for one year; one member for two years; and one member for three years. Members shall not receive a salary, although they may be reimbursed for expenses. 
(d)  Statement of commission's power. The preservation commission shall be authorized to: 
(1)  Prepare and maintain an inventory of all property within the city having the potential for designation as historic property; 
(2)  Recommend to the city council specific districts, sites, buildings, structures, or objects to be designated by ordinance as historic properties or historic districts; 
(3)  Review application for certificates of appropriateness, and grant or deny same in accordance with the provisions of this chapter; 
(4)  Recommend to the city council that the designation of any district, site, building, structure or object as a historic property or as a historic district be revoked or removed; 
(5)  Restore or preserve any historic properties acquired by the city; 
(6)  Promote the acquisition by the city of facade easements and conservation easements, as appropriate, in accordance with the provisions of the Georgia Uniform Conservation Easement Act of 1992, O.C.G.A. §§ 44-10-1 through 44-10-5; 
(7)  Conduct educational programs on historic properties located within the city and on general historic preservation activities; 
(8)  Make such investigation and studies of matters relating to historic preservation, including consultation with historic preservation experts, the mayor and council or the commission itself may, from time to time, deem necessary or appropriate for the purposes of preserving historic resources; 
(9)  Seek out local, state, federal or private funds for historic preservation, and make recommendations to the mayor and council concerning the most appropriate uses of any funds acquired; 
(10)  Submit to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources a list of historic properties of historic districts designated; 
(11)  Perform historic preservation activities as the official agency of the city historic preservation program; 
(12)  Employ persons, if necessary, to carry out the responsibilities of the commission; 
(13)  Receive donations, grants, funds, or gifts of historic property and acquire and sell historic properties. The preservation commission shall not obligate the city without prior consent; 
(14)  Review and make comments to the historic preservation division of the department of natural resources concerning the nomination of properties within its jurisdiction to the National Register of Historic Places; and 
(15)  Participate in private, state and federal historic preservation programs and with the consent of the city council, enter into agreements to do the same. 
(e)  Commission's power to adopt rules and standards. The preservation commission shall adopt rules and standards for the transaction of its business and for consideration of application for designation of certificates of appropriateness, such as bylaws, removal of membership provision, and design guidelines and criteria. The preservation commission shall have the flexibility to adopt rules and standards without amendment to this chapter. The commission shall provide for the time and place of regular meetings and a method for the calling of special meetings. The commission shall select such officers as it deems appropriate from among its members. A quorum shall consist of a majority of the members. 
(f)  Conflict of interest. The commission shall be subject to all conflict of interest laws set forth in state statutes and in the Charter. 
(g)  Commission's authority to receive funding from various sources. The commission shall have the authority to accept donations and shall ensure that these funds do not displace appropriated governmental funds. 
(h)  Records of commission meetings. A public record shall be kept of the commission resolution, proceedings and actions. 
(Ord. No. 11-07-17, § III, 2-6-2018)  
Sec. 28-4. - Recommendation and designation of historic districts and properties. 
(a)  Preliminary research by the commission. 
(1)  Commission's mandate to conduct a survey of local historical resources. The commission shall compile and collect information and conduct surveys of historic resources within the city. 
(2)  Commission's power to recommend districts and buildings to the mayor and council for designation. The commission shall present to the mayor and council recommendations for historic districts and properties. 
(3)  Commission's documentation of proposed designation. Prior to the commission's recommendation of a historic district or historic property to the mayor and council for designation, the commission shall prepare a report for nomination consisting of: 
a.  A physical description; 
b.  A statement of the historical, cultural, architectural and/or aesthetic significance; 
c.  A map showing district boundaries and classification (i.e., contributing, non-contributing or historic, non-historic, vacant, intrusive) of individual properties therein, or showing boundaries of individual historic properties; and 
d.  Representative photographs. 
(b)  Designation of a historic district. 
(1)  Criteria for selection of historic districts. A historic district is a geographically definable area, which contains buildings, structures, sites, objects, and landscape features or a combination thereof, which: 
a.  Has special character or special historic/aesthetic value or interest; 
b.  Represents one or more periods, styles or types of architecture typical of one or more eras in the history of the municipality, county, state or region; and 
c.  Causes such area, by reason of such factors, to constitute a visibly perceptible section of the municipality or county. 
(2)  Boundaries of a historic district. Boundaries of a historic district shall be included in the separate ordinances designating such districts and shall be shown on the official zoning map of the city, or in the absence of zoning, on an official map designated as a public record. 
(3)  Evaluation of properties within historic districts. Individual properties within historic districts shall be classified as either: 
a.  Contributing (contributes to the district); 
b.  Non-contributing (does not contribute to the district, as provided for in subsection (b)(1) of this section); 
c.  Historic (more than 50 years old); 
d.  Non-historic (less than 50 years old, yet possessing architectural character); 
e.  Intrusion (a structure less than 50 years old which does not contribute to the character of the district); or 
f.  Vacant. 
(c)  Designation of a historic property; criteria for selection of historic properties. A historic property is a building, structure, site, or object; including the adjacent area necessary for the proper appreciation or use thereof, deemed worthy of preservation by reason of value to the city, the region or the state for one of the following reasons: 
(1)  It is an outstanding example of a structure representative of its era; 
(2)  It is one of the few remaining examples of a past architectural style; 
(3)  It is a place or structure associated with an event or persons of historic or cultural significance to the city, state, or the region; or 
(4)  It is the site of natural or aesthetic interest that is continuing to contribute to the cultural or historical development and heritage of the municipality, county, state or region. 
(d)  Requirements for adopting an ordinance for the designation of historic districts and historic properties. 
(1)  Application for designation of historic districts or property. Designations may be proposed by the city council, the commission, or: 
a.  For historic districts, a historical society, neighborhood association or group of property owners may apply to the commission for designation; 
b.  For historic properties, a historical society, neighborhood association or property owner may apply to the commission for designation. 
(2)  Required components of a designation ordinance. Any ordinance designating any property or district as historic shall: 
a.  List each property in a proposed historic district of describe the proposed individual historic property; 
b.  Set forth the name of the owner of the designated property; 
c.  Require that a certificate of appropriateness be obtained from the commission prior to any material change in appearance of the designated property; and 
d.  Require that the property or district be shown on the official zoning map of the city and be kept as a public record to provide notice of such designation. 
(3)  Require public hearings. The commission or the city council shall hold a public hearing on any proposed ordinance for the designation of any historic district or property. Notice of the hearing shall be published in at least three consecutive issues in the principal newspaper of local circulation, and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of such properties. All such notices shall be published or mailed not less than ten nor more than 20 days prior to the date set for the public hearing. A notice sent via the first class United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via attention of the occupant shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this section. 
(4)  Notification of historic preservation division. No less than 30 days prior to making a recommendation on any ordinance designating a property or district as historic, the commission must submit the report, required in subsection (a)(3) of this section, to the historic preservation division of the state department of natural resources. 
(5)  Recommendations on proposed designations. A recommendation to affirm, modify or withdraw the proposed ordinance for designation shall be made by the commission within 15 days following the public hearing and shall be in the form of a resolution to the city council. 
(6)  The city council actions on the commission's recommendation. Following receipt of the commission recommendation, the city council may adopt the ordinance as proposed, may adopt the ordinance with any amendments it deems necessary, or reject the ordinance. 
(7)  Notification of adoption of ordinance for designation. Within 30 days following the adoption of the ordinance for designation by the city council, the owner and occupant of each designated historic property, and the owner and occupant of each structure, site or work of art located within a designated historic district, shall be given written notification of such designation by the city council, which notice shall apprise said owner and occupant of the necessity of obtaining a certificate of appropriateness prior to undertaking any material change in appearance of the historic property designated or within the historic district designated. A notice sent via the first class United States mail to the last known owner of the property shown on the city tax digest and a notice sent via first class United States mail shall constitute legal notification to the owner and occupant under this chapter. 
(8)  Notification of other agencies regarding designation. The commission shall notify all necessary agencies within the city of the ordinance for designation. 
(9)  Moratorium on applications for alteration or demolition while ordinance for designation is pending. If an ordinance for designation is being considered, the commission shall have the power to freeze the status of the involved property. 
(Ord. No. 11-07-17, § IV, 2-6-2018)  
Sec. 28-5. - Application to preservation commission for certificate of appropriateness. 
(a)  Approval of material change in appearance in historic districts or involving historic properties. After the designation by ordinance of a historic property of a historic district, no material changes in the appearance of such historic property, or of a contributing or non-contributing building, structure, site or object within such historic district, shall be made or be permitted to be made by the owner or occupant thereof, unless or until the application for a certificate of appropriateness has been submitted to and approved by the commission. A building permit shall not be issued without a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Submission of plans to commission. An application for a certificate of appropriateness shall be accompanied by such drawings, photographs, plans and documentation as may be required by the commission. 
(c)  Interior alterations. In its review of applications for certificates of appropriateness, the commission shall not consider interior arrangement or use having no effect on exterior architectural features. 
(d)  Technical advice. The commission shall have the power to seek technical advice from outside its members on any application. 
(e)  Public hearings on applications for certificates of appropriateness, notices, and right to be heard. 
(1)  The commission shall hold a public hearing at which each proposed certificate of appropriateness is discussed. Notice of the hearing shall be published in the principal newspaper of local circulation in the city and written notice of the hearing shall be mailed by the commission to all owners and occupants of the subject property. The written and published notice shall be provided in the same manner and time frame as notices are provided before a public hearing for rezoning. 
(2)  The commission shall give the property owner and/or applicant an opportunity to be heard at the certificate of appropriateness hearing. 
(f)  Acceptable commission reaction to applications for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  Approval, modification or rejection of certificate. The commission may approve the certificate of appropriateness as proposed, approve the certificate of appropriateness with any modifications it deems necessary, or reject it. 
(2)  Application approval, issuance of certificate; findings and criteria. The commission shall approve the application and issue a certificate of appropriateness if it finds that the proposed material change in the appearance would not have a substantial adverse effect on the aesthetic, historical, or architectural significance and value of the historic property or the historic district. In making this determination, the commission shall consider, in addition to any other pertinent factors, the following criteria for each of the following acts: 
a.  Reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation. The commission shall issue certificates of appropriateness for reconstruction, alteration, new construction or renovation if those actions conform in design, scale, building materials, setback and site features, and to the Secretary of Interior's Standards for Rehabilitation and Guidelines for Rehabilitating Historic Buildings. 
b.  Relocation. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the relocation of a building, structure, or object shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic character and aesthetic interest the building, structure or object contributes to its present setting. 
2.  Whether there are definite plans for the area to be vacated and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area will be. 
3.  Whether the building, structure or object can be moved without significant damage to its physical integrity. 
4.  Whether the proposed relocation area is compatible with the historical and architectural character of the building, structure, site or object. 
c.  Demolition. A decision by the commission approving or denying a certificate of appropriateness for the demolition of buildings, structures, sites, trees judged to be 50 years old or older, or objects shall be guided by: 
1.  The historic, scenic or architectural significance of the building, structure, site, tree or object. 
2.  The importance of the building, structure, site, tree, or object to the ambiance of a district. 
3.  The difficulty or the impossibility of reproducing such a building, structure, site, tree, or object because of its design, texture, material, detail, or unique location. 
4.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is one of the last remaining examples of its kind in the neighborhood or the city. 
5.  Whether there are definite plans for use of the property if the proposed demolition is carried out, and what the effect of those plans on the character of the surrounding area would be. 
6.  Whether reasonable measures can be taken to save the building, structure, site, tree, or object from collapse. 
7.  Whether the building, structure, site, tree, or object is capable of earning reasonable economic return on its value. 
(g)  Undue hardship. When, by reason of unusual circumstances, the strict application of any provision of this chapter would result in the exceptional practical difficulty or undue economic hardship upon any owner of a specific property, the commission, in passing upon applications, shall have the power to vary or modify strict provisions, so as to relieve such difficulty or hardship, provided such variances and modifications interpretations shall remain in harmony with the general purpose and intent of said provisions, so that the architectural or historical integrity, or character of the property shall be conserved and substantial justice done. In granting variances, the commission may impose such reasonable and additional stipulations and conditions as will, in its judgment, best fulfill the purpose of this chapter. An undue hardship shall not be a situation of the person's own making. 
(h)  Deadline for approval or rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  The commission shall approve or reject an application for a certificate of appropriateness within 45 days after the filing thereof by the owner or occupant of a historic property, or of a building structure, site, or object, located within a historic district. Evidence of approval shall be by a certificate of appropriateness issued by the commission. Notice of the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness shall be sent by first class United States mail to the applicant and all other persons who have requested such notice in writing filed with the commission. 
(2)  Failure of the commission to act within said 45 days shall constitute approval, and no other evidence of approval shall be needed. 
(i)  Necessary action to be taken by commission upon rejection of application for certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  In the event the commission rejects an application, it shall state its reasons for doing so and shall transmit a record of such actions and reasons, in writing, to the applicant. The commission may suggest alternative courses of action it thinks proper if it disapproves of the application submitted. The applicant, if he so desires, may make modifications to the plans and may resubmit the application at any time after doing so. 
(2)  In cases where the application covers a material change in the appearance of a structure which would require the issuance of a building permit, the rejection of the application for a certificate of appropriateness by the commission shall be binding upon the building inspector or other administrative officer charged with issuing building permits and, in such a case, no building permit shall be issued. 
(j)  Requirement of conformance with certificate of appropriateness. 
(1)  All work performed pursuant to an issued certificate of appropriateness shall conform to the requirements of such certificate. In the event work is performed not in accordance with such certificate, the commission shall issue a cease and desist order and all work shall cease. 
(2)  The commission and the city council shall be authorized to institute any appropriate action or proceeding in a court of competent jurisdiction to prevent any material change in appearance of a designated historic property or historic district, except those changes made in compliance with the provisions of this chapter or to prevent any illegal act or conduct with respect to such historic property or historic district. 
(k)  Certificate of appropriateness void if construction not commenced. A certificate of appropriateness shall become void unless construction is commenced within six months of the date of issuance. A certificate of appropriateness shall be issued for a period of 18 months and is renewable. 
(l)  Recording applications for certificates of appropriateness. The commission shall keep a public record of all applications for certificates of appropriateness, and/or all the commission's proceedings in connection with said application. 
(m)  Acquisition of property. The commission may, where such action is authorized by the city council and is reasonably necessary or appropriate for the preservation of a unique historic property, enter into negotiations with the owner for the acquisition by gift, purchase, exchange, or otherwise to the property or any interest therein. 
(n)  Appeals. Any person adversely affected by any determination made by the commission relative to the issuance or denial of a certificate of appropriateness may appeal such determination to the city council. Any such appeal must be filed with the city council within 15 days after the issuance of the determination pursuant to subsection (h)(1) of this section or, in the case of a failure of the commission to act, within 15 days of the expiration of the 45-day period allowed for the commission's action, pursuant to subsection (h)(2) of this section. Appeals for properties within the city shall be made to the city council. The city council may approve, modify, or reject the determination made by the commission if the council finds that the commission abused its discretion in reaching its decision. Appeals from decisions of the city council may be taken to the superior court of the county in the manner provided by law for appeals from conviction for city ordinance violations. 
(Ord. No. 11-07-17, § V, 2-6-2018)  
Sec. 28-6. - Maintenance of historic properties and building and zoning code provisions. 
(a)  Ordinary maintenance or repair. Ordinary maintenance or repair of any exterior architectural or environmental feature in or on a historic property to correct deterioration, decay, or to sustain the existing form, and that does not involve a material change in design, material or outer appearance thereof and does not require a certificate of appropriateness. 
(b)  Failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. Property owners of historic properties or properties within historic districts shall not allow their buildings to deteriorate by failing to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. The commission shall be charged with the following responsibilities regarding deterioration by neglect: 
(1)  The commission shall monitor the condition of historic properties and existing buildings in historic districts to determine if they are being allowed to deteriorate by neglect. Such conditions as broken windows, doors and exterior openings which allow the elements and vermin to enter, or the deterioration of a building's structural system, shall constitute failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair. 
(2)  In the event the commission determines a failure to provide ordinary maintenance or repair, the commission will notify the owner of the property and set forth the steps which need to be taken to remedy the situation. The owner of such property will have 30 days in which to do this. 
(3)  In the event that the condition is not remedied in 30 days, at the direction of the city council, the commission may perform such maintenance or repair as is necessary to prevent deterioration by neglect. The owner of the property, in addition to other penalties provided in this Code, shall be liable for the cost of such maintenance and repair performed by the commission. 
(c)  Affirmation of existing building and zoning codes. Nothing in this chapter shall be constructed as to exempt property owners from complying with existing city building and zoning codes, nor prevent any property owner from making any use of this property not prohibited by other statutes, ordinances or regulations. 
(Ord. No. 11-07-17, § VI, 2-6-2018)  
Chapter 30 - LAW ENFORCEMENT  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 30-1. - Towing and storage of vehicles. 
The city adopts Policy 31 of the county sheriff's office, "Wrecker Qualification/Rotation Lists" and the "Georgia Department of Public Safety Maximum Rate Tariff for Nonconsensual Town Services," both as same may be amended from time to time. The police department shall utilize the rotation list and impose fees pursuant to these policies and documents. Nothing in this section shall prevent the owner or operator of the vehicle from securing towing and storage services from the towing service of their choosing with applicable rates to be determined between the towing service and the owner or operator of the vehicle. 
(Ord. No. 04-02-19, 5-7-2019)  
Secs. 30-2—30-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - POLICE DEPARTMENT 
 
Sec. 30-19. - Chief of police; appointment. 
The police department shall be headed by a chief of police appointed by the mayor and council from time to time. 
(Code 1996, § 54-31)  
Sec. 30-20. - Composition. 
The police department shall consist of those officers and employees of those ranks and positions as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 4-1-1; Code 1996, § 54-32)  
Sec. 30-21. - Responsibilities. 
The police department shall be responsible for patrol, traffic control, investigation of accidents, investigation of crimes, apprehension of offenders, court appearances, security of business establishments and for any other matters of public safety and law enforcement as directed by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 4-1-2; Code 1996, § 54-33)  
Sec. 30-22. - Interfering with equipment. 
No person other than a duly authorized member of the police department shall ride in any vehicle belonging to the police department, nor use, borrow, or otherwise interfere with any equipment of the police department unless authorized to do so by the chief of police. 
(Code 1996, § 54-34)  
Chapter 32 - MANUFACTURED HOMES 
 
Sec. 32-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Building permit means a duly authorized form, signed by the city council, authorizing the location of a mobile home or the construction of an accessory structure, cabana or other improvement. 
Cabana means a semipermanent addition to a mobile home measuring no greater than 900 square feet. 
Manufactured home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet, and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein; except that the term "manufactured home" shall include any structure which meets all the requirements of this definition except the size requirements and with respect to which the manufacturer voluntarily files a certification required by the Secretary of Housing and Urban Development and complies with the standards established under the National Manufactured Housing Construction and Safety Standards Act of 1974, 42 USC 5401 et seq. 
Mobile home means a structure, transportable in one or more sections, which, in the traveling mode, is eight body feet or more in width or 40 body feet or more in length or, when erected on-site, is 320 or more square feet and which is built on a permanent chassis and designed to be used as a dwelling with or without a permanent foundation when connected to the required utilities, and includes the plumbing, heating, air conditioning, and electrical systems contained therein. The unit must bear a HUD certificate. A mobile home is constructed in accordance with the Federal Manufactured Home Construction and Safety Standards and bears an insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
Mobile home pad means the paved portion of a mobile home stand equal to the length and width of the mobile home placed on the stand. 
Mobile home park means any park, court, camp, site, lot, parcel or tract of land designed, maintained or intended for the purpose of supplying a location of accommodations for mobile homes and upon which any mobile homes are parked, and shall include all buildings used or intended for use as part of the equipment thereof whether a charge is made for the use of the mobile home park and its facilities or not. The term "mobile home park" shall not include automobile or mobile home sales lots on which unoccupied mobile homes are parked for purposes of inspection and sale. 
Mobile home stand means the improved site designed for the placement of a mobile home and its accessory structures, utility connections and off-street parking facilities. 
Modular home means an industrialized single-family dwelling which is manufactured in accordance with the applicable state law. Each unit must bear a seal of approval issued by the commissioner of the state department of community affairs (DCA). 
Recreational vehicle means a boat trailer and any type of portable structure without permanent foundations, which can be towed, hauled or driven and may be designed as temporary living accommodation for recreational, camping and travel use, and includes travel trailers, truck campers on or off the truck, camping trailers and self-propelled motor homes. 
Trailer means any vehicle or structure constructed so as to permit occupancy thereof as sleeping or living quarters, or the conduct of any business, trade or occupation, or use as a selling or advertising device, or use for storage or conveyance for chattel, tools, equipment or machinery, and so designed that it is or may be mounted on wheels and used as a conveyance on highways and streets propelled or drawn by its own or other motive power. The term "trailer" shall include, but not be limited to, automobiles, motorcycles, boat utility trailers, trailer coaches and mobile homes. 
Trailer, camping, means any portable structure or vehicle designed for highway travel at legal speed limits without a special permit which is intended for temporary living. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-1; Code 1996, § 58-1)  
Sec. 32-2. - General requirements. 
(a)  Zoning compliance. All mobile homes, as well as mobile home parks within the city limits, shall comply with the city's comprehensive zoning requirements for location. Mobile home subdivisions will meet the minimum lot development standards for the zoning district in which the subdivision is to be located. 
(b)  Building and construction codes compliance. Any mobile home placed within the municipal limits of the city for a period exceeding 48 hours must bear an insignia issued by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD). 
(c)  Health; water and sewer system regulations. Prior to the allowance of permanent occupancy of a mobile home within the city, the mobile home shall be connected with an approved water source, and an approved sewage disposal system in such a manner as to comply with the state department of public health and state water quality control board regulations and the state health code, which codes are, as insofar as applicable, hereby made a part of this chapter. 
(d)  Requirements for safety tie-downs. All mobile homes shall be provided with safety tie-downs in compliance with state laws and regulations. 
(e)  Frontage. All mobile homes, except in mobile home parks, shall generally face the street in which they are located. However, variations from this subsection may be allowed by the planning commission/city council if special lot considerations warrant a different street orientation. 
(f)  Skirting to enclose undercarriage. Within 30 days of installation, all mobile homes within the city must have a permanent skirt which completely encloses the undercarriage. Acceptable materials include masonry or stone and may include metal or other materials compatible with the siding of the particular mobile home unit. The mayor and council may specify the skirting material required for any particular permit application or for any skirting replacement at an existing home location. 
(g)  Permits required for accessory structures. Cabanas and other accessory structures shall require a building permit. 
(h)  Nonconforming mobile home. If a mobile home is removed from a nonconforming location or if it is destroyed beyond 50 percent of its fair market value, it shall not be replaced by another mobile home. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-2; Code 1996, § 58-2)  
Sec. 32-3. - Use of trailer for permanent occupancy. 
Camping trailers shall not be used as a permanent place of abode or as a permanent dwelling or for indefinite periods of time; provided, however, that any camping trailer may be occupied and permitted in established mobile home parks for periods not exceeding 30 days. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-3; Code 1996, § 58-3)  
Sec. 32-4. - Parking and location of trailers regulated. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful, within the limits of the city, for any person to park any trailer on any street, alley or highway, or other public place, or on any tract of land owned by any person, occupied or unoccupied, within the city except as provided in this chapter. 
(b)  One recreational vehicle may be parked or stored in an approved enclosed garage or in the rear yard of any lot on which an occupied dwelling is located, provided that no living quarters shall be maintained or business practiced in such recreational vehicle while it is so parked or stored. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-4; Code 1996, § 58-4)  
Sec. 32-5. - Emergency and temporary stopping or parking. 
Emergency or temporary stopping or parking of trailers is permitted on any street, alley or highway for not longer than one hour, subject to any other and further prohibitions, regulations or limitations imposed by the traffic and parking regulations or ordinances for that street, alley or highway. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-5; Code 1996, § 58-5)  
Sec. 32-6. - Location of mobile homes outside mobile home parks prohibited; exceptions. 
As specified in section 32-2, no person shall park or occupy any mobile home on the premises of any occupied dwelling or on any lot, except in compliance with the city's zoning ordinance or as provided by a permit approved by the mayor and council; provided, however, that mobile homes currently occupied as dwellings in the city outside established mobile home parks on the effective date of the ordinance from which this section was derived may continue to be occupied, but no such mobile home may be replaced by another mobile home without making application for a permit for the location of the new or replacement mobile home. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-6; Code 1996, § 58-6)  
Sec. 32-7. - Location of accessory buildings or uses on residential lots. 
(a)  Accessory buildings may be erected in any required yard except a front yard. In no instance shall such a building be nearer than the required side yard for the principal building for the district in which it is located. 
(b)  In the case of double frontage lots, accessory buildings shall observe front yard requirements on both street frontages wherever there are any principal buildings fronting on such streets in the same block or adjacent blocks. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-7; Code 1996, § 58-7)  
Sec. 32-8. - Accessory buildings or uses on nonresidential lots. 
Accessory buildings or uses on nonresidential lots shall comply with front, side and rear yard requirements established for the zoning district in which such accessory buildings or uses are located. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-8; Code 1996, § 58-8)  
Sec. 32-9. - Mobile office. 
A mobile home may be converted and used as an office upon permission therefor duly issued by the building official, provided that no portion is used as a residential dwelling. Such permission shall contain such terms and conditions as deemed necessary by the building official. 
(Code 1984, § 8-3-9; Code 1996, § 58-9)  
Chapter 34 - NUISANCES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Nuisances, O.C.G.A. § 41-1-1 et seq.; jurisdiction of municipal court or magistrate court to abate nuisance, O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 34-1. - Purpose. 
In order to eliminate unsightly, unhealthy or dangerous situations, and in order to protect property values and/or public health, and to enhance the beauty of the city, it shall be unlawful for any person to own, rent, lease or be in the possession of any premises, dwelling unit or other structure, place or vacant lot wherein the property is permitted to deteriorate in appearance or condition so as to be degrading to the surrounding premises, or be a threat to the public health. 
(Code 1984, § 11-2-6; Code 1996, § 42-31; Ord. of 5-7-1996(2), § 11-1-9(a))  
Sec. 34-2. - Conditions declared as nuisances. 
The following conditions may be declared to be nuisances: 
(1)  Stagnant water on a premises; 
(2)  Any dead or decaying matter, weeds, vegetation or any fruit, vegetable, animal or rodent, upon a premises, which is odorous or capable of causing disease or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(3)  The growth or maintenance of tall grass, weeds and bushes, and other undergrowth on the premises; 
(4)  The accumulation or maintenance of trash and debris of any type, dilapidated furniture, appliances, machinery, equipment, nonmotorized vehicles or old or discarded tires on the premises; 
(5)  The generation of smoke or fumes in sufficient amount to cause odor or annoyance to the inhabitants of the city; 
(6)  The pollution of public water or the injection of matter into the sewage system which would be damaging thereto; 
(7)  Maintaining a dangerous or diseased animal or fowl; 
(8)  Obstruction of a public street, highway or sidewalk without a permit; 
(9)  Loud or unusual noises which are detrimental or annoying to the public, including, without limitation, unusual loud disturbances in or around churches or multiple-family complexes, such as loud music and other activities in swimming pool and clubhouse areas; 
(10)  All walls, trees and buildings that may endanger persons or property; 
(11)  Any business or building where illegal activities are habitually and commonly conducted in such a manner as to reasonably suggest that the owner or operator of the business or building was aware of the illegal activities and failed to reasonably attempt to prevent those activities; 
(12)  Unused iceboxes, refrigerators and the like unless the doors, latches or locks are removed; 
(13)  Any trees, shrubbery or other plants or parts thereof, which obstruct clear, safe vision on roadways and intersections of the city; and 
(14)  Any other condition constituting a nuisance under state law. 
(Code 1984, § 11-2-1; Code 1996, § 42-32; Ord. of 5-7-1996(2), § 11-1-9(b))  
Sec. 34-3. - Jurisdiction of municipal court to try and punish. 
The municipal court shall have full jurisdiction to try and dispose of all questions of nuisance affecting the public health or welfare, and shall also have jurisdiction to try and, upon conviction, to punish persons failing to abate nuisances, as prescribed in section 1-11. 
(Code 1984, § 11-2-2; Code 1996, § 42-33)  
Sec. 34-4. - Notice to offenders; service; failure to comply; bringing of charges. 
Should the city manager, or his designee, determine that any person is violating the terms of this chapter, the city manager, or his designee, shall give the offending party 15 days' notice within which to eliminate the unsightly, unhealthy or dangerous situation. This notice shall be in writing and shall be served upon the owner and occupant of the premises. If the occupant is not the owner, then the owner shall also be notified. The service or notice may be made either in person or by mail. Should the person to whom the notice is directed fail to comply with the request made therein within the 15-day period, the city manager, in cooperation with the city attorney, shall be authorized to proceed with the bringing of charges for the violation, pursuant to O.C.G.A. §§ 41-2-2 and 41-2-5. Each day the conditions continue shall be deemed a separate offense. 
(Code 1984, § 11-2-3; Code 1996, § 42-34; Ord. of 5-7-1996(2), § 11-1-9(c))  
Sec. 34-5. - Abatement following conviction; liability for costs; lien; enforcement. 
Pursuant to the judgment of the municipal court, the city may, at its option, proceed to remedy the unsightly, unhealthy or dangerous situation, and accomplish the necessary work. The owner or occupant, or both, shall be liable for the actual cost of such work, and the actual cost of such work shall be assessed against the property owner upon whose premises the work is done, and if the bill for such charges remains unpaid for 30 days after it has been rendered, such cost shall become a lien upon the premises, enforceable in the same manner as provided for the collection of unpaid taxes. 
(Code 1984, § 11-2-4; Code 1996, § 42-35; Ord. of 5-7-1996(2), § 11-1-9(d))  
Sec. 34-6. - Nuisance per se; exception; summary abatement. 
Nothing contained in this chapter shall prevent the mayor from summarily and, without a notice, ordering the abatement of any nuisance that is a nuisance per se in the law, or where the case is an urgent one and the health and safety of the public or a portion thereof is in imminent danger. 
(Code 1984, § 11-2-5; Code 1996, § 42-37)  
Secs. 34-7—34-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ABANDONED AND JUNKED MOTOR VEHICLES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to provide by ordinance for removal and disposal of junked vehicles, O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4. 
 
Sec. 34-31. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Abandoned vehicle means a machine designed to be propelled by an internal combustion engine, or by an electric motor, manufactured for the transporting of persons or property, including, without limitation, automobiles, trucks, truck trailers, motorized carts, motorcycles, mopeds, scooters and tractors, which is in an inoperative state because of being wrecked, junked, dismantled, unused or discarded. In instances where a machine is subject to this article, and is required to have a valid license issued by the state, or any other state, for operation on the public streets of this state, the absence of the required evidence of a valid and current license displayed on the machine shall constitute, for the purposes of this article, a prima facie showing that the machine is in an inoperative state. 
Enclosure means a structure constructed or manufactured in a manner so as to preclude any view of any portion of the interior thereof from any public street or sidewalk. For the purposes of this article, a custom vehicle cover, specifically designed, manufactured, created or constructed to provide, for the life of the product, permanent protection for a motorized vehicle from the adverse effects of the weather, shall be deemed to be an enclosure; provided, however, that such definition shall not be deemed to include tarpaulins and other similar products which are not specifically designed, manufactured, created or constructed to provide protection solely for a motor vehicle from the adverse effects of the weather, and are ordinarily and customarily used only to provide temporary protection from such adverse effects. 
Residential property means any real property located within the city designated under the zoning ordinances and maps as residential zoning districts, or any real properties located within the city which are primarily utilized to provide living quarters for one or more individuals. 
Storage means the parking or leaving of an abandoned vehicle for a period of time in excess of five consecutive days. 
(Code 1996, § 42-56)  
Sec. 34-32. - Storage on residential property. 
(a)  No person in charge or control of any residential property located within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall cause or allow any abandoned vehicle to be or remain in storage in or on the front yard area of such residential property unless the abandoned vehicle is wholly contained in an enclosure. The front yard shall be determined as the portion of any lot designated as being within the required front yard setback or building line as determined by the city's zoning regulations. 
(b)  No person in charge or control of any residential property located within the city, whether as owner, tenant, occupant, lessee, or otherwise, shall cause or allow any abandoned vehicle to be or remain in storage in or on the side yard area or rear yard area of such residential property unless the abandoned vehicle is wholly contained in an enclosure. The side and rear yard shall be determined as the portion of any lot designated as being within the required side or rear setback or building line as determined by the city's zoning regulations. 
(Code 1996, § 42-58)  
Sec. 34-33. - Declaration of nuisance. 
(a)  Pursuant to the authority granted to the city under the provisions of O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4, the mayor and council of the city has concluded that any abandoned vehicle kept or maintained in violation of the provisions of section 34-32 constitutes a health hazard or unsightly nuisance, and any person responsible for creating or permitting the continuance of such a nuisance shall have ten days from the date of written notice of such nuisance to either remove the abandoned vehicle from the residential property or to provide such storage or maintenance thereon as will effectuate compliance with the directives thereof. If the person either fails or refuses to remove the abandoned vehicle from the residential property, or to bring the abandoned vehicle in compliance with the directives of section 34-32, within the ten-day period, then the continued presence of the abandoned vehicle on the property shall constitute misdemeanor. Any violation of section 34-32 not cured within the notice period may be abated pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 40-2-5 and section 34-34. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-60-4, any abandoned vehicle kept or maintained in storage on private property within the city, whether the property be used for residential, commercial, agricultural or industrial purposes, and excepting only a junkyard complying with the laws of this state, where the storage of the abandoned vehicle constitutes a health hazard or unsightly nuisance shall be subject to the abatement proceedings provided in section 34-34, after the notice and ten-day cure period have been provided as set forth in subsection (a) of this section. 
(Code 1996, § 42-59)  
Sec. 34-34. - Proceeding for nuisance abatement. 
(a)  As provided in O.C.G.A. § 41-2-5, the jurisdiction for the abatement of any nuisance arising out of the existence of an abandoned vehicle located on private property within the city shall be vested in the municipal court. The grant of jurisdiction made in this section is not intended, and shall not be construed to be, a grant to exclude or limit the jurisdiction of any other court of this state vested by the law of this state with jurisdiction over such proceedings. 
(b)  Any proceeding to abate a nuisance existing or resulting from an abandoned vehicle in storage on private property within the city shall be commenced by the chief of police of the city in the name and on the behalf of the city, or by a private citizen thereof, by the filing of a petition with the municipal court seeking the abatement thereof. The petition shall identify the property upon which the abandoned vehicle is being maintained, state the name of the person in control or possession of the real property, together with a description of the abandoned vehicle alleged to constitute such nuisance, and shall provide sufficient facts so as to inform the court as to the nature of such nuisance. If, upon the filing of such petition, the judge of the court concludes that sufficient facts are alleged to require further inquiry and proceedings as to the existence of a nuisance, an order shall be entered by the court setting a hearing date for the adjudication of the issues raised in the petition. 
(c)  The petition to abate the nuisance, together with a copy of the order of the court for hearing thereon, shall be served on the person in possession or control of the real property upon which the nuisance is alleged to exist at least ten days prior to the scheduled hearing date, either personally or by certified or registered mail with return receipt requested. If either the identity or location of such person is unknown, or for whatever reason such person cannot be located for such service, a copy of the petition and the order shall be conspicuously affixed to the abandoned vehicle in a manner so as to provide anyone in its vicinity with notice of the presence of such petition and order. 
(d)  At the scheduled hearing, the court shall hear the pertinent evidence as to the facts and circumstances surrounding the maintenance of the abandoned vehicle and shall allow the person in possession or control of the real property to present any relevant and pertinent evidence as to why same does not constitute a nuisance. 
(e)  If after hearing the evidence presented at the hearing the court concludes that a nuisance, within the meaning of section 34-33, exists, the court shall enter an order requiring and directing that the abandoned vehicle be removed from the corporate limits of the city within ten days of the date of the order. A copy of the order requiring the abatement of the nuisance shall be served on the person in possession or control of the real property upon which the nuisance is alleged to exist, either personally or by certified or registered mail with return receipt requested. If either the identity or location of such person is unknown, or for whatever reason the person cannot be located for the purposes of such service, a copy of the order shall be conspicuously affixed to the abandoned vehicle in a manner so as to provide anyone in its vicinity with notice of the presence of the order. 
(f)  If the person in control or possession of the property upon which the abandoned vehicle exists fails to remove the abandoned vehicle within the ten-day period specified by the court for the abatement of the nuisance, then and in such event the city shall remove, or cause to be removed, the abandoned vehicle from the municipal limits of the city for disposal in such a manner as will terminate the characteristics thereof which resulted in same being found to be a nuisance. The city, in the pursuit of its duties to dispose of the abandoned vehicle, shall be authorized to sell the abandoned vehicle for junk or metal salvage, and any consideration received for such sale shall be retained by the city to offset the costs and expenses incurred in the abatement of the nuisance. 
(Code 1996, § 42-60)  
Secs. 34-35—34-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - NOISE CONTROL[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Limits on sound volume produced by a radio, tape player or other mechanical sound-making device or instrument from within a motor vehicle, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-14; sale of muffler which causes excessive noise prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 40-8-71(c). 
 
Sec. 34-57. - Loud and unnecessary noises. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make, continue or cause to be made or continued any loud, unnecessary or unusual noise or any noise which unreasonably or unnecessarily annoys, disturbs, injures or endangers the comfort, repose, health, peace or safety of others in the city. The chief of police, or his designee, may issue a citation for any violation of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 11-1-4(a); Code 1996, § 42-121)  
Sec. 34-58. - Exemptions. 
The provisions of this article shall not apply to or be enforced against: 
(1)  Any vehicle of the city while engaged in necessary public business; 
(2)  Excavations or repairs of streets by or on behalf of the city, county or state at night when public welfare and convenience renders it impossible to perform such work during the day; or 
(3)  The reasonable use of amplifiers or loudspeakers in the course of public addresses which are noncommercial in character, if permission has been obtained from the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 11-1-4(b); Code 1996, § 42-122)  
Sec. 34-59. - Certain acts deemed prohibited noises. 
The following acts, among others, shall constitute a violation of section 34-57, but such enumeration shall not be deemed to be exclusive: 
(1)  Horns and signaling devices. The sounding of any horn or signaling device on any automobile, motorcycle or other vehicle on any street or public place in the city, except as a danger warning; the creation of any unreasonably loud or harsh sound by means of any such signaling device and the sounding of any such device for an unreasonable period of time; the use of any signaling device, except a police whistle or one operated by hand or electricity; the use of any horn, whistle or other device operated by engine exhaust and the use of any such signaling device when traffic is held up for any reason. 
(2)  Radios, phonographs and other machines which produce or reproduce sound. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, tape recorder, cassette player, CD player, or other machine or device for the production or reproducing of sound in such manner as to disturb the peace, quiet and comfort of the neighboring inhabitants or pedestrians within any area of the city, or at any time with louder volume than is necessary for convenient hearing for the person who is in the room, vehicle, place or chamber in which such machine or device is operated, and who is a voluntary listener thereto. The operation of any such set, instrument, phonograph, tape recorder, cassette player, CD player, machine or device in such manner as to be plainly audible at a distance of 50 feet from the building, structure, place or vehicle in which it is located shall be prima facie evidence of a violation of this section. 
(3)  Loudspeakers and amplifiers for advertising. The playing, using or operating, or permitting to be played, used or operated, of any radio receiving set, musical instrument, phonograph, loudspeaker, sound amplifier or other machine or device for the producing or reproducing of sound which is cast upon the public streets for the purpose of commercial advertising or attracting the attention of the public to any building or structure without a special permit from the city clerk or governing authority. Announcements over loudspeakers can only be made by the announcer in person and without the aid of any mechanical device. 
(4)  Yelling and shouting. Yelling, shouting, hooting, whistling or singing on the public streets, particularly between the hours of 11:00 p.m. and 7:00 a.m., or at any time or place so as to annoy or disturb the quiet, comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity. 
(5)  Animals and birds. The keeping of any animal or bird which will disturb the comfort or repose of any persons in the vicinity by making loud, continual or frequent noise. 
(6)  Steam whistle. The blowing of any train whistle or steam whistle attached to any stationary boiler, except to give notice of the time to begin or stop work or as a warning of fire or danger or upon request of proper city authorities. 
(7)  Exhausts. The discharge into the open air of the exhaust of any steam engine, stationary internal combustion engine, motorboat or motor vehicle, except through a muffler or other device which will effectively prevent loud or explosive noises therefrom. 
(8)  Defect in vehicle or load. The use of any automobile, motorcycle or vehicle so out of repair, so loaded or in such manner as to create loud and unnecessary grating, grinding, rattling or other noise. 
(9)  Loading, unloading and opening boxes. The creation of a loud and excessive noise in connection with loading or unloading any vehicle or the opening and destruction of bales, boxes, crates and containers. 
(10)  Construction or repairing of buildings. The erection (including excavating), demolition, alteration or repair of any building other than between the hours of 7:00 a.m. and 6:00 p.m. on weekdays, except on urgent necessity in the interest of public health and safety, and then only with a permit from the city building official, which permit may be granted for a period not to exceed three days or less while the emergency continues and which permit may be renewed by the mayor and council for periods of three days or less while the emergency continues. If the council determines that the public health and safety will not be impaired by the erection, demolition, alteration or repair of any building or the excavation of streets and highways from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., and further determines that loss or inconvenience would result to any party in interest, the council may grant permission for such work to be done from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m., upon application made at the time the permit for the work is applied for or during the progress of the work. 
(11)  Noise causing disturbance to schools, courts, churches and hospitals. The creation of any excessive noise on any street adjacent to any school, institution of learning, church or court while such institutions are in session or adjacent to any hospital, and which unreasonably interferes with the work of such institution, or which disturbs or unduly annoys patients in the hospital; provided, however, that conspicuous signs are displayed about such institutions indicating the presence of such institutions. 
(12)  Hawkers, peddlers and vendors. The shouting and crying of peddlers, hawkers and vendors which disturb the peace and quiet of the neighborhood. 
(13)  Noises to attract attention; use of drums and other instruments. The use of any drum or other instrument or device for the purpose of attracting attention to any performance, show or sale by creation of noise. 
(14)  Transportation of metal rails. The transportation of rails, pillars or columns of iron, steel or other material over and along streets and other public places upon carts, drays, cars, trucks or in any other manner so loaded as to cause loud noises or as to disturb the peace and quiet of such streets or other public places. 
(15)  Piledrivers, hammers or other loud appliances. The operation from 6:00 p.m. to 7:00 a.m. of any piledriver, steam shovel, pneumatic hammer, derrick, steam or electric hoist or other appliance, the use of which is attended by loud or unusual noise without a special permit from the mayor and council. 
(16)  Blowers. The operation of any noise-creating blower or power fan or any internal combustion engine, the operation of which causes noise due to the explosion of operating gases or fluids, unless the noise from such blower or fan is muffled and such engine is equipped with a muffler device sufficient to deaden such noise. 
(17)  Sound trucks. The use of mechanical loudspeakers or amplifiers on trucks or other moving or standing vehicles for advertising or other commercial purposes, and the use of sound trucks for noncommercial purposes during such hours or in such places or with such volume as would constitute such use a public nuisance. 
(Code 1984, § 11-1-5; Code 1996, § 42-123; Ord. of 4-2-1991)  
Chapter 36 - OFFENSES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on home rule powers of municipal corporations with respect to duplication of state criminal offenses, O.C.G.A. § 36-35-6(a)(2). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 36-1. - Public drunkenness. 
It shall be unlawful for any person within the city to be and appear in an intoxicated condition upon any street or sidewalk of the city or in any other public place or private business premises patronized by the public, when such condition results in boisterous, disruptive or annoying behavior which interferes with the lawful pursuits of others. 
(Code 1984, § 11-1-7; Code 1996, § 62-1)  
Sec. 36-2. - Drinking in public. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to consume any spirituous malt or alcoholic beverage while a pedestrian in or upon any street, alley, sidewalk or other public way or place within the city, or within any public building. 
(Code 1996, § 62-2)  
Sec. 36-3. - Loitering or prowling. 
The offense of loitering or prowling, as defined in this section, within the city is hereby declared unlawful. A person commits the offense of loitering or prowling when he is in a place at a time or in a manner not usual for law-abiding individuals under circumstances that warrant a justifiable and reasonable alarm or immediate concern for the safety of persons or property in the vicinity. Among the circumstances which may be considered in determining whether alarm is warranted is the fact that the person takes flight upon the appearance of a law enforcement officer, refuses to identify himself, or manifestly endeavors to conceal himself or any object. Unless flight by the person or other circumstances make it impracticable, a law enforcement officer shall, prior to any arrest for the offense, afford the person an opportunity to dispel any alarm or immediate concern which would otherwise be warranted by requesting the person to identify himself and explain his presence and conduct. No person shall be convicted of this offense if the law enforcement officer failed to comply with such procedure or if it appears at trial that the explanation given by the person was true and would have dispelled the alarm or immediate concern. 
(Code 1996, § 62-3) 
State Law reference— Loitering or prowling, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-36; ordinances proscribing loitering or related activities not preempted, O.C.G.A. § 16-6-24.  
Sec. 36-4. - On-premises sales of personal property. 
(a)  For the purposes of this section, the term "on-premises sale" shall be construed to mean any public sale or public offering for sale of any personal property by any person on premises located in a geographical area of the city zoned other than commercial, or grandfathered for commercial use, at which sale such property is publicly displayed for sale to the public at large. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful to hold any on-premises sale at a location other than at premises owned or occupied by the holder thereof. 
(c)  It shall be unlawful for any person to hold more than two on-premises sales at any one location during any 12-month period. 
(d)  Any on-premises sale shall not be operated in such a manner as to cause a nuisance to neighboring residences or in such a manner as will create a fire hazard or traffic hazard or pose any other significant risk to public safety. 
(Code 1996, § 62-4)  
Sec. 36-5. - Public indecency prohibited. 
(a)  A person commits the offense of public indecency when he performs any of the following acts in a place where a person should reasonably expect to be in view of the public: 
(1)  An actual or simulated act of sexual intercourse or masturbation; 
(2)  Exposure of the genitals; 
(3)  A lewd appearance in a state of partial or complete nudity; 
(4)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the body of another person; 
(5)  A lewd caress or indecent fondling of the sexual organs of any person, including oneself; 
(6)  Urination or defecation; or 
(7)  Appears wearing pants or shirts more than three inches below the top of the hips (crest of the ilium), exposing the skin or undergarments. 
(b)  Fines and penalties. A citation shall be issued to the offender and the person shall be subject to penalty according to section 1-11. The person shall be subject to a penalty of not less than $50.00 on the first offense and an increasing penalty for each subsequent offense at the discretion of the court or from a chart of fines that is approved by the judge of the municipal court of the city. The person may also be subject to community service activities for violation at the discretion of the court, or to both monetary fine and community service. 
(Ord. of 6-7-2011, § 1(62-5))  
Secs. 36-6—36-28. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PEACE 
 
Sec. 36-29. - Disorderly conduct. 
Any person who shall do or engage in any of the following in the city shall be guilty of disorderly conduct: 
(1)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby any person is placed in danger of safety of his life, limb or health. 
(2)  Act in a violent or tumultuous manner toward another, whereby public property or the property of any other person is placed in danger of being destroyed or damaged. 
(3)  Endanger lawful pursuits of another by acts of violence or threats of bodily harm. 
(4)  Cause, provoke or engage in any fight, brawl or riotous conduct so as to endanger the life, limb, health or property of another or public property. 
(5)  Assemble or congregate with another and cause, provoke or engage in any fight or brawl. 
(6)  Collect in bodies or in crowds and engage in unlawful activities. 
(7)  Assemble or congregate with another and engage or attempt to engage in gaming. 
(8)  Frequent any public place and obtain money from another by an illegal and fraudulent scheme, trick, artifice or device, or attempt to do so. 
(9)  Use fighting words directed towards any person who becomes outraged and thus creates turmoil. 
(Code 1996, § 62-31)  
Sec. 36-30. - Obstructing city officer in discharge of duties. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to hinder, delay or obstruct or prevent any officer employed by the city, or any person acting for or under the direction of such officer, from performing any act which by reason of his office or position may devolve upon such officer or person. 
(Code 1984, § 11-1-6; Code 1996, § 62-32)  
Secs. 36-31—36-48. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC SAFETY 
 
Sec. 36-49. - Weapons. 
It shall be unlawful to have, possess or carry upon the streets, alleys or sidewalks of the city any of the following implements, unless the implements are securely wrapped so as not to be readily available for harmful use: 
(1)  Any knife which has a blade which opens automatically by hand pressure applied to a button, spring or other device in the handle, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle two inches or more. 
(2)  Any knife which has any obstruction or other device of any kind which holds the blade partly open, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle two inches or more. 
(3)  Any knife of any kind, the blade of which, when open, projects from the handle more than three inches. This is intended to include all knives such as butcher knives or other knives which do not close. 
(4)  Any straight razor. 
(5)  Any icepick or similar device having a sharp point, except this shall not apply to any person delivering ice. 
(Code 1984, § 11-1-8; Code 1996, § 62-61)  
Sec. 36-50. - Airguns or slingshots; use upon city streets, sidewalks or lots. 
No person shall use a sling or slingshot or airgun upon the streets, sidewalks or lots of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 62-62)  
Sec. 36-51. - Firearms; discharge. 
No person shall fire any gun, pistol or any firearm within the city limits, except law enforcement officers when acting in the performance of their official duties. 
(Code 1996, § 62-63) 
State Law reference— Discharge of firearm near public highway or street, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-103; discharge of firearm on property of another, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-104; discharge of firearm on Sunday, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-105; Georgia Firearms and Weapons Act, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-120 et seq.  
Secs. 36-52—36-75. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - OFFENSES AGAINST PUBLIC PROPERTY[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Damaging, injuring or interfering with utilities, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-25. 
 
Sec. 36-76. - Damaging or defacing property. 
It shall be unlawful to deface, mar or damage, or, without proper authority, to write, carve, paste or print any marks, letters or pictures on any public or private property in the city. 
(Code 1984, § 11-1-2; Code 1996, § 62-91)  
Sec. 36-77. - Digging ditches; pushing up and removing trees on city property. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to dig or cause to be dug any ditch or to remove or push up trees located or standing on city property unless permission has been obtained from the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 11-1-3; Code 1996, § 62-92)  
Sec. 36-78. - Blocking public passages and ways. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or stand on any street, sidewalk or curb in such a manner as to render the same unsafe or unsuitable for the passage of persons and the transportation of commodities or in such a manner as to limit the peaceful and tranquil use of such streets, sidewalks or curbs by the public at large. Any such person shall move on or separate when required to do so by any member of law enforcement and shall cease to occupy such position on the street, sidewalk or curb of the city. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to loiter or stand in or on any public place in the city, including its public places, such as alleys, parks, playgrounds, recreational areas, public lawns and walkways and public buildings, in such a manner as to render the same unsafe or unsuitable for the use of the same for their proper purposes by members of the general public or in such a manner as to limit the peaceful and tranquil use of such public places by the public at large. Any such person shall move on or separate when required to do so by any member of law enforcement and shall cease to occupy such position in such public place of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 62-93)  
Sec. 36-79. - Utilities apparatus; public or private. 
It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to injure or destroy any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp, or other apparatus belonging to a company, municipality or political subdivision engaged in the manufacture or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone or other public services; intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied; in any way to interfere with the proper action of such company, municipality or political subdivision; intentionally to divert any services of such company, municipality or political subdivision; or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the company, municipality or political subdivision, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the company, municipality or political subdivision. 
(Code 1996, § 62-94)  
Sec. 36-80. - Responsibility for acts of tampering or diversion. 
Where there is no evidence to the contrary, the person performing any of the illegal acts set forth in section 36-79, and the person who, with knowledge of such violation, receives the benefit of such service without proper charge as a result of the improper action, shall be presumed to be responsible for the act of tampering or diversion. 
(Code 1996, § 62-95)  
Sec. 36-81. - Outdoor advertising on city property. 
(a)  No person shall place any outdoor advertising on any property owned by the city, except as provided in subsection (c) of this section. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "outdoor advertising" shall include, but not be limited to, signs, posters, handbills, banners, paintings or any visual means of representing words or ideas, as well as the use of amplifiers, musical devices or loudspeakers on public property to promote a particular business or product. 
(c)  Advertisements concerning nonprofit events open to the public may be placed on public property following approval by the mayor and council. Such advertisements shall be subject to all conditions imposed by the council concerning the number, size, location and duration. 
(Code 1984, § 9-1-1; Code 1996, § 62-97)  
Secs. 36-82—36-105. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CURFEW FOR MINORS 
 
Sec. 36-106. - Imposed. 
It shall be unlawful for any minor under the age of 18 years to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places or public buildings, places of amusement or entertainment, eating places, vacant lots or any other places normally accessible to the general public for public use, whether on foot or in a motor vehicle or by any other means, during the following periods of time: 
(1)  For minors age 15 years and under, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)  For minors age 16 and 17 years, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1996, § 62-121)  
Sec. 36-107. - Exceptions. 
The provisions of section 36-106 shall not apply in the following instances when a minor is: 
(1)  Accompanied by his parent, guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of the minor; 
(2)  Upon an emergency errand directed by his parent or guardian or other adult person having the lawful care and custody of a minor; 
(3)  Returning directly home, by the most direct and efficient route, from a school activity, entertainment, recreational activity or dance; 
(4)  Returning directly home, by the most direct and efficient route, from lawful employment that makes it necessary to be in the places described in section 36-106 during the prescribed period of time; 
(5)  On the sidewalk abutting a minor's residence or abutting the residence of a next door neighbor if the neighbor did not complain to the police officer about such minor's presence; 
(6)  Attending or traveling directly to or from an activity involving the exercise of First Amendment rights of free speech, freedom of assembly or free exercise of religion; and 
(7)  In interstate travel through the city. 
(Code 1996, § 62-122)  
Sec. 36-108. - Parental responsibility. 
Except in circumstances set out in section 36-107, it shall be unlawful for the parent, guardian or other adult person having the care and custody of a minor under the age of 18 years to permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, such minor to loiter, idle, wander, stroll or play in or upon the public streets, highways, roads, alleys, parks, playgrounds or other public grounds, public places or public buildings, places of amusement or entertainment, eating places, vacant lots or any other places normally accessible to the general public for public use, whether on foot or in a motor vehicle or by any other means, during the following periods of time: 
(1)  For minors age 15 years and under, between the hours of 10:30 p.m. on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day; and 
(2)  For minors age 16 and 17 years, between the hours of 12:00 midnight on any day and 6:00 a.m. of the following day. 
(Code 1996, § 62-123)  
Sec. 36-109. - Notice of violation. 
Any minor violating the provisions of this article shall be dealt with in accordance with juvenile court law and procedure. Any police officer finding a minor under the age of 18 years violating the provisions of this article shall warn the minor to desist from such violation and to immediately return home and shall cause a written notice to be served upon the parent, guardian or person in charge of a minor, setting forth the manner in which the provisions of this article have been violated. For the purposes of this article, notice shall be deemed properly served upon the parent, guardian or person in charge of a minor if a copy of the notice is served upon him personally or if a copy is sent by certified mail with return receipt requested, to his last known address. 
(Code 1996, § 62-124)  
Sec. 36-110. - Penalty for violation of article. 
Any parent, guardian, or person having the care and custody of a minor who shall permit, whether knowingly or through ineffective control or supervision, a minor to violate the provisions of this article, after receiving written notice that such minor has previously violated this article, shall be subject to a mandatory fine of not less than $50.00 nor more than $500.00, plus costs, for the first such offense, and for each and every subsequent conviction for a violation of this article involving the same minor, the mandatory minimum fine shall be in an amount $100.00 greater than the previous fine imposed. 
(Code 1996, § 62-125)  
Chapter 38 - PLANNING  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 38-1—38-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - DOWNTOWN DEVELOPMENT AUTHORITY[1] 

Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 
 
Sec. 38-19. - Declaration of need. 
There is hereby determined and declared a pressing, existing and future need for a downtown development authority to function in the city for the purpose of developing and promoting for the public good and general welfare, trade, commerce, industry and employment opportunities in that geographic area shown on a map thereof on file in the office of the city clerk, called the downtown development area, as that term is defined in the Downtown Development Authorities Law. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-1; Code 1996, § 66-31)  
Sec. 38-20. - Activation. 
There is hereby activated in the city the public body corporate and politic known as the downtown development authority, which authority shall be comprised, authorized and shall act pursuant to the Downtown Development Authorities Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-42-1 et seq. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-2; Code 1996, § 66-32)  
Sec. 38-21. - Directors. 
Each of the persons named as initial directors of the downtown development authority shall serve in such capacity for the number of years designated by the mayor and council, and if at the end of any term of office of any director, a successor therein shall not have been elected, then the director whose term of office shall have expired shall continue to hold office until his successor shall be so elected. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-3; Code 1996, § 66-33)  
Sec. 38-22. - Powers and duties; organization. 
The board of directors shall organize itself, carry out its duties and responsibilities and exercise its powers and prerogatives in accordance with the terms and provisions of the Downtown Development Authorities Law as it now exists and as it might hereafter be amended or modified. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-4; Code 1996, § 66-34)  
Secs. 38-23—38-47. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - PLANNING COMMISSION 
 
Sec. 38-48. - Created. 
In order to guide and accomplish a coordinated and harmonious development of the city which will, in accordance with existing and future needs, best promote the public health, safety, morals, order, convenience, prosperity, and the general welfare, as well as efficiency and economy in the process of development, the city planning commission, referred to in this article as the planning commission, is hereby created and established, and the commission shall be organized and empowered as set forth in this article. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-11; Code 1996, § 66-61)  
Sec. 38-49. - Composition; appointment and term of members. 
The planning commission shall consist of five members, who shall be residents of the city and who shall be appointed by the mayor and council. The terms of the members shall be for four years. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-12; Code 1996, § 66-62)  
Sec. 38-50. - Filling of vacancies; removal of members. 
Any vacancy in membership on the planning commission shall be filled for the unexpired term by the mayor and council, who shall also have the authority to remove any member for cause, on written charges, after a public hearing. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-13; Code 1996, § 66-63)  
Sec. 38-51. - Compensation of members; reimbursement for expenses. 
All members of the planning commission shall serve without compensation but may be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred in connection with their official duties. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-14; Code 1996, § 66-64)  
Sec. 38-52. - Election and term of chairperson. 
The planning commission shall elect its chairperson from among its members. The term of the chairperson shall be one year with eligibility for re-election. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-15; Code 1996, § 66-65)  
Sec. 38-53. - Appointment of secretary. 
The planning commission shall appoint a secretary, who may be an officer or employee of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-16; Code 1996, § 66-66)  
Sec. 38-54. - Rules of procedure; times of meetings. 
The planning commission shall make its own rules of procedure and determine its times of meeting. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-17; Code 1996, § 66-67)  
Sec. 38-55. - Powers and duties. 
(a)  It shall be the function and duty of the planning commission to make such careful and comprehensive surveys and studies of existing conditions and probable future developments and to prepare such plans for physical, social and economic growth as will best promote the public health, safety, morals, convenience, prosperity or the general welfare as well as efficiency and economy in the development of its political jurisdiction. In particular, the planning commission shall have the power and duty to: 
(1)  Prepare a master plan or parts of such plan for the development of the city. 
(2)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council a zoning ordinance or resolution and map for the city. 
(3)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council regulations for the subdivision of land within the city, and to administer the subdivision regulations that may be adopted. 
(4)  Prepare and recommend for adoption to the mayor and council, plats or an official map showing the exact location of the boundary lines of existing, proposed, extended, widened or narrowed streets, and public open spaces or public building sites, together with regulations to control the erection of buildings or other structures within such lines, within its political jurisdiction or a specified portion thereof. 
(b)  The planning commission may make, publish and distribute maps, plans and reports and recommendations relating to the plan and development of the city to public officials and agencies, public utility companies, civic, educational, professional and other organizations and citizens. It may recommend to the executive or legislative officials of the city programs for public improvements and the financing thereof. All public officials shall, upon request, furnish to the planning commission, within a reasonable time, such available information as it may require for its work. The planning commission, its members and employees, in the performance of its functions, may enter upon any land, make examinations and surveys, and place and maintain necessary monuments and marks; provided, however, that the planning commission shall be liable for any injury or damage to property resulting therefrom. In general, the planning commission shall have such powers as may be necessary to enable it to perform its functions and promote the planning of its political jurisdiction. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-18; Code 1996, § 66-68)  
Sec. 38-56. - Expenditures. 
The expenditures of the planning commission, exclusive of gifts, shall be within amounts appropriated for the purpose by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-19; Code 1996, § 66-69)  
Sec. 38-57. - Employees and staff; contracts for services. 
The planning commission may appoint such employees and staff as it may deem necessary for its work and may contract with the state planning agency and city planners and other consultants for such services as it may require. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-20; Code 1996, § 66-70)  
Sec. 38-58. - Meetings at which official action taken open to public. 
All meetings of the planning commission at which official action is taken shall be open to the public. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-21; Code 1996, § 66-71)  
Sec. 38-59. - Records to be public. 
The records of the planning commission shall be a public record. 
(Code 1984, § 8-1-22; Code 1996, § 66-72)  
Chapter 40 - SOLID WASTE[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Georgia Comprehensive Solid Waste Management Act, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-20 et seq. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 40-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Construction and demolition waste (C&D waste) means waste building material and rubble resulting from construction, remodeling, repair, and demolition operations on pavements, houses, commercial buildings, and other structures. Such wastes include, but are not limited to, wood, brick, metal, concrete, wall board, paper, cardboard, inert waste, landfill material, and other nonputrescible wastes which have a low potential for groundwater contamination. 
Household garbage (HHG) or garbage means all waste accumulations of animal, fruit or vegetable matter that result from the preparation, use, cooking of or dealing in the storage of meat, fish, fowl, fruits, vegetables or other foods and shall include the containers and wrappings used for the storage of all such substances. The term "household garbage" or "garbage" may also include such other items as are normally used and disposed of by a residence or business, in accordance with the state rules of solid waste management, Ga. Comp. Rules and Regs. ch. 391-3-4. 
Residence or residential unit means any premises occupied and used by a person as a separate household or living quarters. 
Rubbish means all disposable matter other than that included within the terms "construction and demolition waste," "household garbage," "garbage," "tires," and "yard waste" or "organic yard waste." 
Tires or old tires means rubber or synthetic rubber pneumatic tires which have been removed from passenger and commercial vehicles, motorized bikes, trailers, tractors and farm implements, and other utility conveyances which have been worn or damaged to a point where they are of no continued use for the purpose for which they were originally intended. 
Yard waste or organic yard waste means leaves, brush, grass, clippings, shrub and tree prunings, discarded Christmas trees, nursery and greenhouse vegetative residuals and vegetative matter resulting from landscape maintenance other than commercial, agricultural, mining or silvicultural operations. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-1; Code 1996, § 70-1)  
Secs. 40-2—40-20. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - COLLECTION AND DISPOSAL 
 
Sec. 40-21. - Applicability of article. 
The provisions of this article shall apply separately to each residential or commercial unit of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 70-31)  
Sec. 40-22. - Penalty for violation of article. 
In addition to other penalties provided by this Code, the sanitation department of the city or the city's duly approved and licensed independent contractors shall decline to render sanitation services to the residential unit of such person until the residential unit is in complete compliance with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1996, § 70-32)  
Sec. 40-23. - Containers. 
The occupants of each residential, commercial, or other unit shall utilize the garbage container furnished by the city or the city's duly approved and licensed independent garbage collection contractor. Each user shall be responsible for the safekeeping of the container, and upon its disappearance, shall be required to replace the same at the expense of the residential, commercial, or other user. It shall be unlawful for any person to set fire to the contents of, indiscriminately scatter, disperse the contents of, or otherwise vandalize any container provided either by the city or by a property owner for the dumping of household garbage or other waste materials. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-3; Code 1996, § 70-33)  
Sec. 40-24. - Prerequisite for collection. 
The sanitation department of the city, or the city's duly approved and licensed independent contractor, shall not collect any household garbage unless the garbage is stored in a proper container as described in this article and shall not collect any rubbish or yard waste unless the rubbish or yard waste is deposited as described in this article. 
(Code 1996, § 70-34)  
Sec. 40-25. - Garbage, trash and refuse; accumulation. 
No person who shall own or occupy premises within the city shall permit trash, garbage to accumulate, collect or remain on such premises, except during periods between city sanitation department pickups. No person who shall own or occupy premises where collection is required shall refuse collection or otherwise fail to comply with the requirements of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-7; Code 1996, § 70-35)  
Sec. 40-26. - Garbage, trash and refuse; scattering. 
No person who shall own or occupy premises in the city shall permit garbage, trash or refuse to be scattered from such premises into the public streets or alleys of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-8; Code 1996, § 70-36)  
Sec. 40-27. - Placement of containers for collection. 
All household garbage roll-out containers shall be placed at curbside by 8:00 a.m. on the day of the week selected as pickup day for a particular address, and removed from the curb after collection on that same day. No garbage, debris, garbage containers, or other material shall be placed so that it creates an obstruction of the streets and/or sidewalks within the city. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-4; Code 1996, § 70-37)  
Sec. 40-28. - Classification of premises. 
Each business and commercial premises within the city shall be assigned a commercial classification by the city based on the average number of cubic yards of garbage, trash and refuse collected from such premises within the three preceding months. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-11; Code 1996, § 70-38)  
Sec. 40-29. - Collection schedule. 
Garbage, trash, and refuse shall be collected from the various premises in the city by the proper department of the city as follows: 
(1)  Collections from residential units shall be made not less than once weekly. 
(2)  Collections from businesses or commercial premises shall be made not less than once weekly or in conformity with such schedule as established from time to time by the mayor and council for specific businesses. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-12; Code 1996, § 70-39)  
Sec. 40-30. - Sanitary charge assessed. 
A monthly sanitary charge, as established by the mayor and council, is hereby assessed against the owner or occupant of every improved premises within the city for which the occupant shall be liable for payment. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-13; Code 1996, § 70-40)  
Sec. 40-31. - Sanitary charge billing. 
(a)  The monthly sanitary charge for each premises to which the city supplies water service shall be billed and collected in the same manner and at the same time as water or sewer service is billed and collected. 
(b)  The monthly sanitary charge for each premises to which the city does not supply water or sewer service shall be billed and collected monthly in advance by the tenth day of each month and shall be payable by the occupant or owner at the city clerk's office at the city hall. 
(c)  In all instances when a residential unit is occupied by more than one single-family unit and is served by a single water meter, the sanitary charges applicable to the residential premises at such location shall all be billed to the person in whose name the water meter is registered at the office of the city clerk, the sanitary charge to be included thereon for each family unit on the premises. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-14; Code 1996, § 70-41)  
Sec. 40-32. - Sanitary charge; effect of failure to pay. 
(a)  Execution, levy and sale authorized. Should any person liable for payment of the sanitary charges hereby imposed fail to pay the same within ten days after having been billed therefor, the city clerk is authorized to issue an execution therefor against such person and shall deliver such execution to the city marshal for a levy and sale as provided by law. 
(b)  Discontinuance of city services. Any person failing for any reason or refusing to pay the monthly sanitary charge provided for in this article after having been duly billed for such charge by the city shall be deemed guilty of a violation of this article, and all sanitary services and water services provided by the city to the premises for which the monthly charges are past due shall be terminated by the city in accordance with the provisions for termination of water service. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-15; Code 1996, § 70-42)  
Sec. 40-33. - Recycling newspapers; other paper waste. 
Residents are encouraged to recycle newspapers and all other acceptable paper waste by placing same in the drop-off facilities designated within the city. More than seven days' accumulation of newspapers, or more than five volumes of magazines or other printed matter, shall not be collected unless securely fastened in bundles weighing not more than 50 pounds and deposited at curbside. 
(Code 1996, § 70-43)  
Sec. 40-34. - Recycling cardboard; commercial establishments. 
All commercial business establishments and other producers of significant numbers, or amounts of cardboard boxes or other cardboard or corrugated materials, shall separate and collect all clean unwaxed cardboard wastes and deposit such material in a designated bin or container so that the material can be picked up by the city's sanitation department, or duly authorized and approved independent contractor, for recycling and reuse. 
(Code 1996, § 70-44)  
Sec. 40-35. - Recycling cardboard; residential households. 
Residential households are encouraged to recycle cardboard and other corrugated materials by depositing same into a commercial business's bin, or by depositing the material in the cardboard recycling bin at the city utility department's maintenance complex. 
(Code 1996, § 70-45)  
Sec. 40-36. - Rubbish. 
Rubbish shall be collected by the city sanitation department, provided the accumulation thereof is not in violation of any other section of this article, and provided the rubbish is separated in piles according to type and category as may be established by rules promulgated by the city sanitation department from time to time, or by the mayor and council of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-6; Code 1996, § 70-46)  
Sec. 40-37. - Construction and demolition waste. 
Construction and demolition waste, such as lumber, plaster, roofing, concrete, bricks, blocks, or similar materials resulting from construction, repair, demolition, or improvement of buildings, is the responsibility of the property owner or contractor and will not be removed by the city sanitation department. It shall be unlawful for the owner of such waste materials, or any other person, to place such materials on the streets, sidewalks, or rights-of-way of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 5-2-6; Code 1996, § 70-47)  
Sec. 40-38. - Dirt, rocks and stumps. 
Dirt, rocks and stumps will not be removed by the city, and it shall be unlawful for the owner of such materials, or any other person, to place such materials on the streets or sidewalks of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 70-48)  
Sec. 40-39. - Appliances and furniture. 
Appliances and furniture, such as refrigerators, water heaters, stoves, sinks, televisions, chairs, couches and the like, exceeding 75 pounds in weight, shall not be collected by the city sanitation department. It shall be unlawful for the owner or any other person to cause such items to be placed upon the streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 70-49)  
Sec. 40-40. - Trees and parts of trees; shrubbery clippings; other matter. 
(a)  Trees, parts of trees, shrubbery clippings or any like matter exceeding six inches in diameter or six feet in length shall not be collected by the city sanitation department. It shall be unlawful for the owner, or any other person, to cause such materials to be placed upon the streets, sidewalks or rights-of-way of the city. 
(b)  Trees, parts of trees, shrubbery clippings or any like matter not exceeding six inches in diameter and not exceeding six feet in length, lawn clippings and other organic yard waste generated by normal yard maintenance by the resident or property owner will be collected, provided the same is placed at curbside in a separate pile not containing any other class of waste, and provided the amount put out at any one time does not exceed one-half of a truckload. Any amount deposited at curbside in excess of one-half of a truckload will be removed by the sanitation department upon the special request of the property owner, for a fee, as established by the mayor and council, for each load or partial truckload. 
(c)  Whenever the organic waste mentioned in subsection (b) of this section is generated by a commercial contractor or any individual who is providing his services for pay or gain in any fashion, it shall be the responsibility of the property owner or contractor or person providing his services for pay or gain to collect and properly dispose of any organic waste produced in the accomplishment of the task for which his services have been engaged. 
(Code 1996, § 70-50) 
State Law reference— Yard trimmings disposal restrictions, O.C.G.A. § 12-8-40.2.  
Sec. 40-41. - Materials not to be deposited. 
It shall be unlawful to place in any garbage or rubbish container any acid, or other dangerous liquids, or other nonhazardous liquids in containers of more than one gallon, or any substance which is prohibited or which could cause injury to the persons engaged in removing such containers. 
(Code 1996, § 70-51)  
Sec. 40-42. - Tires. 
(a)  Tires are the responsibility of the owner; the city sanitation department will not collect and dispose of them. It shall be unlawful for the owner thereof, or any other person, to cause the same to be placed upon the streets, sidewalks, or rights-of-way of the city, or upon the property of another person. Tires shall not be allowed to collect or accumulate out from under permanent cover upon the property of any owner in such manner that, in the judgment of the chief of police, the accumulation thereof may be a menace to public health, either by creating a refuge for vermin, rodents, snakes or other varmints, or as a breeding place for mosquitoes or other similar insects. 
(b)  Unless otherwise provided by law, the violation of this section shall be punished by a fine in the amount of $50.00 for the first improperly disposed of tire, and $100.00 each for each additional improperly disposed of tire up to a maximum penalty provided by law. 
(Code 1996, § 70-52; Ord. of 3-2-2009, § 70-52)  
Secs. 40-43—40-72. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LITTER CONTROL[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Litter Control Law, O.C.G.A. § 16-7-40 et seq.; littering highways, O.C.G.A. § 40-6-249. 
 
Sec. 40-73. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Litter means all discarded sand, gravel, slag, brickbats, rubbish, waste material, tin or aluminum cans, refuse, garbage, trash, debris, dead animals, or other discarded materials of every kind and description. 
Public or private property means the right-of-way of any road or highway; any body of water or watercourse or the shores thereof; any park, playground, building, refuge, or conservation or recreation area; and any vacant areas, commercial, industrial, residential or farm properties, timberlands, or forests. 
(Code 1996, § 70-76)  
Sec. 40-74. - Dumping or depositing of litter. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw, leave or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any public or private property in this city, or any waters in this city, unless the litter is discarded in accordance with the requirements of this article, or otherwise placed into a litter receptacle or container installed or placed on such property and specifically designated for the use of the general public. The provisions of this subsection shall not be read or construed to prohibit the owner or renter of any private property, nor any person acting with the consent of such owner or renter, from dumping, depositing, placing, throwing, or leaving of litter in any private receptacle or container maintained by the owner or renter of such private property for the sole and exclusive use of the household or business of such owner or renter. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person to dump, deposit, throw or leave, or to cause or permit the dumping, depositing, placing, throwing or leaving of litter on any private property in this city, in any litter receptacle thereon, or any waters in this city, unless the person is the owner or tenant in lawful possession of such property or such person has first obtained the consent of the owner or tenant in such lawful possession. 
(Code 1996, § 70-78)  
Sec. 40-75. - Prima facie evidence; rebuttable presumption. 
(a)  Whenever litter is thrown, deposited, dropped or dumped from any motor vehicle, boat, airplane or other conveyance in violation of section 40-74, it shall be prima facie evidence that the operator of the conveyance has violated this article. 
(b)  Except as provided in subsection (a) of this section, whenever any litter which is dumped, deposited, thrown, or left on public or private property in violation of section 40-74 is discovered to contain any articles, including, but not limited to, letters, bills, publications, or other writings, which display the name of a person thereon in such a manner as to indicate that the articles belong or belonged to such person, it shall be a rebuttable presumption that such person has violated section 40-74. 
(Code 1996, § 70-79)  
Chapter 42 - STREETS, SIDEWALKS AND OTHER PUBLIC PLACES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Obstructing sidewalks or other public passages, O.C.G.A. § 16-11-43; regulation of maintenance and use of public roads generally, O.C.G.A. § 32-6-1 et seq.; grant by municipal corporation of right to obstruct public street prohibited, O.C.G.A. § 36-30-10; power to construct and maintain roads, including curbs, sidewalks, streetlights and devices to control the flow of traffic, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ III(a)(4). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 42-1. - Moving buildings. 
(a)  Permit required. It shall be unlawful for any person to move a building or structure on, over, across or through the public streets and places of the city without first obtaining a permit from the mayor and council. 
(b)  Permit fee. The fee for a permit required by subsection (a) of this section shall be as fixed from time to time by the mayor and council. 
(c)  Bond required. Any person desiring to move a building or structure on, over, across or through the public streets and places of the city shall post a bond with the city clerk in the amount of $5,000.00, payable to the city. 
(d)  Insurance required. Any person desiring to move a building or structure on, over, across or through the public streets and places of the city shall provide proof that he is currently insured for general liability coverage applicable to any damages he might cause in moving the building or structure in an amount of not less than $100,000.00. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-1; Code 1996, § 74-1)  
Sec. 42-2. - Goods, wares and merchandise obstructing sidewalks. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to keep any goods, wares or merchandise of any kind or description, including stoves, refrigerators and furniture, on the sidewalk of the city so as to hinder or obstruct the use of such sidewalks. In no event shall such merchandise extend more than two feet from the building. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-2; Code 1996, § 74-2)  
Sec. 42-3. - Parking for sale of wares and merchandise from vehicles. 
There shall not be conducted from any truck, motor vehicle, wagon, trailer or other similar type of conveyance, any merchandise business on the streets of the city within a business district, except with special permission in writing from the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-3; Code 1996, § 74-3)  
Sec. 42-4. - Using streets and sidewalks to repair or store vehicles. 
It shall be unlawful for any person operating and maintaining a garage in the city for the purpose of repairing or storing motor vehicles to use any of the streets, alleys or sidewalks for the purpose of parking those motor vehicles or for the purpose of washing, painting or repairing them. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-4; Code 1996, § 74-4)  
Sec. 42-5. - Glass and other dangerous or unsightly material on streets. 
(a)  No person shall throw or deposit upon any street any glass bottle, glass, nails, tacks, wire, cans, rubbish, garbage, trash or other dangerous or unsightly material which is likely to injure any person, animal or vehicle upon such street. 
(b)  Any person who drops, or permits to be dropped or thrown, upon any street any destructive or injurious material shall immediately remove the material or cause it to be removed. 
(c)  Any person removing a wrecked or damaged vehicle from a street shall remove any glass or other injurious substance dropped upon the street from such vehicle. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-5; Code 1996, § 74-5)  
Sec. 42-6. - Installations and alterations to right-of-way; permit and deposit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to make any alterations, including, but not limited to, damage or removal or pavement or installations of any kind, within the right-of-way or on the streets and sidewalks of the city for any purpose whatever without applying to and obtaining written permission from the city manager. The city manager may require that such person make a deposit of such sum of money as may be determined from time to time by the mayor and council in order to ensure that such street or sidewalk shall be restored. Such sum of money shall be returned to such person only upon proper restoration of the street or sidewalk. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-6; Code 1996, § 74-6)  
Secs. 42-7—42-30. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PARADES 
 
Sec. 42-31. - Permit required. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to participate in, conduct or accompany any organized parade or procession, other than a funeral procession, on the public streets, sidewalks or other public property in the city unless an application has been filed at least 30 days prior to the proposed date of such parade or procession and a permit granted to conduct such parade, picket or procession within the city. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-21; Code 1996, § 74-31)  
Sec. 42-32. - Application for parade permit. 
(a)  An application for permit to conduct or sponsor a parade or procession shall be filed with the city clerk in writing and shall contain the following information furnished by the person in official charge of the proposed parade, picket or procession: 
(1)  The name of all organizations or persons organizing or sponsoring the parade or procession. 
(2)  The purpose of the parade or procession. 
(3)  The date and hours of the parade or procession. 
(4)  The proposed route of the parade or procession, and its beginning and termination points. 
(5)  The number and types of vehicles, marching units and floats to be used in the parade or procession. 
(6)  The number of persons participating in the parade or procession. 
(b)  For all parades and processions, the route of which will move along or cross state roads, written clearance from the state department of transportation must accompany the permit application. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-22; Code 1996, § 74-32)  
Sec. 42-33. - Investigation of applicant. 
The chief of police shall investigate all applications for parade permits, and may then recommend the issuance or denial of permits to the mayor and council where the information specified in section 42-32 has been furnished, provided the proposed parade or procession is otherwise lawful and can be held without undue interference with vehicular and pedestrian traffic within the city, of which circumstances the chief of police shall exercise his discretion. The mayor and council shall make the final determination with regard to the application. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-23; Code 1996, § 74-33)  
Sec. 42-34. - Operation of vehicles. 
No vehicle shall be driven through a parade or procession, except with the permission of a police officer in attendance. 
(Code 1984, § 5-1-25; Code 1996, § 74-35)  
Secs. 42-35—42-56. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - YARD SALES 
 
Sec. 42-57. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Yard sales, garage sales, etc. 
(1)  The term "yard sales, garage sales, etc." means the sale or trading of clothing, furniture, household items, food, dishes, antiques or similar goods or merchandise, other than in the normal course of business, or the sale or trading of such goods, as is outlined in this definition by a person not regularly engaged in such business. 
(2)  The term "yard sale" shall include garage sales, carport sales, and similar types of sales or events. 
(3)  All goods sold at yard sales shall be deemed to be personal property. The term "personal property" means property which is owned, utilized and maintained by an individual or members of his residence or household and acquired in the normal course of living in or maintaining the residence or household where the yard sale is to be conducted. The term "personal property" does not include merchandise which was purchased for the purpose of resale or which is obtained on a consignment basis. 
(Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 74-60; Ord. of 10-2-2010, § 74-60; Ord. of 6-18-2015, § 74-60)  
Sec. 42-58. - Hours of operation. 
All yard sales or garage sales shall be operated or conducted during the daylight hours, from 7:30 a.m. to 6:00 p.m., for no longer than two consecutive days. 
(Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 74-61; Ord. of 10-2-2010, § 74-61; Ord. of 6-18-2015, § 74-61)  
Sec. 42-59. - Location and manner of yard sales or garage sales. 
(a)  Garage sales or yard sales may be held on a lot or parcel of land upon which is situated a house, apartment or other structure which is utilized primarily for residential purposes and which is owned or occupied by one of the individuals applying for a yard sale permit. Yard sales are prohibited upon vacant lots and upon lots upon which there is situated a structure that is utilized primarily for any use other than residential purposes unless: 
(1)  At the time of application for a yard sale permit, a signed letter of permission expressing written consent from the property owner stating the date of the yard sale is submitted; and 
(2)  Such letter contains the property owner's name, address and a valid telephone number where the owner may be contacted by the city. 
(b)  Yard sales held by more than one family must be on the premises of one of the families involved or in compliance with subsections (a)(1) and (2) of this section. 
(Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 74-62; Ord. of 10-2-2010, § 74-62; Ord. of 6-18-2015, § 74-62)  
Sec. 42-60. - Number and duration. 
Yard sales shall be allowed not more than three times in any calendar year for any premises. No sale may run more than two days. Individuals having more than three yard sales per year will be considered a business and must purchase a business license or occupation tax certificate. 
(Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 74-63; Ord. of 10-2-2010, § 74-63; Ord. of 6-18-2015, § 74-63)  
Sec. 42-61. - Religious and charitable organizations. 
Religious and charitable organizations either known to be exempt, or providing proof of exemption, from federal taxation pursuant to section 501(c)(3) of the Internal Revenue Code may conduct yard sales on the property of the organization or at other locations within the city with the expressed written consent of the owner of the premises where the yard sale is being conducted. 
(Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 74-64; Ord. of 10-2-2010, § 74-64; Ord. of 6-18-2015, § 74-64)  
Sec. 42-62. - Permit required. 
At least 48 hours prior to the time any yard sale is to be conducted, a permit for the yard sale shall be obtained from city hall and a refundable permit fee, in the amount as established by the mayor and council, shall be charged to ensure that any yard sale signs or other advertisements are removed within 24 hours after the conclusion of the yard sale. The clerk of the city shall not issue more than three permits per year to any individual or group of individuals. Permit fees will be waived by the city council for nonprofit organizations or groups. In the event yard sale signs are not removed within 24 hours, the permit fee shall be forfeited. No signs pertaining to a yard sale shall be placed on public property. Signs may be placed on private property only with the permission of the property owner. During the course of the yard or garage sale, the permit issued by the city hall shall be prominently displayed so that it can be readily seen from a passing vehicle. 
(Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 74-65; Ord. of 10-2-2010, § 74-65; Ord. of 6-18-2015, § 74-65)  
Sec. 42-63. - Penalties for violation of article. 
Any person who conducts a sale in violation of any provision of this article shall be punished by paying a fine for the first offense in the amount of $50.00, and for each and every subsequent offense, a fine of not less than $100.00 or more than $500.00. Each day a violation continues shall be considered to be a separate offense. 
(Ord. of 6-1-2010, § 74-66; Ord. of 10-2-2010, § 74-66; Ord. of 6-18-2015, § 74-66)  
Chapter 44 - SUBDIVISIONS[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Approval by planning commission or governing authority on plat of subdivision required for filing or recording in superior court clerk's office, O.C.G.A. § 15-6-67(d). 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 44-1. - Purpose and intent of chapter. 
It is with the intent of creating a climate conducive to the orderly and progressive growth of the city, a climate of mutual and reasonable understanding with prompt and just consideration to the various interests involved in subdivisional work, that the procedures and requirements set forth in this chapter have been established. Similarly, community interests require the regulation and control of development to ensure reasonable protection of property values and to promote a healthy environment for the citizens of the city. The regulations contained in this chapter have been formulated and adopted for the purpose of promoting the health, safety and morals and the general welfare of the people of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-1; Code 1996, § 78-1)  
Sec. 44-2. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Block means a piece or parcel of land entirely surrounded by public highways or streets, other than alleys. In cases where the platting is incomplete or disconnected, the subdivider may determine the outline of the block. 
Crosswalk means a right-of-way within a block dedicated to public use, ten feet or more in width, intended primarily for pedestrians and from which motor-propelled vehicles are excluded, and which is designed to improve or provide access to adjacent roads or lots. 
Lot means a portion of a subdivision intended as a unit for transfer of ownership or for development, or both. In determining the area and dimensions of a lot, no part of the right-of-way of a road or crosswalk may be included. 
Lot width means the width of the lot at the building line measured parallel to the street right-of-way line. 
Master plan means a comprehensive plan, which may consist of several maps, data and other descriptive matter, for the physical development of the city, or any portion thereof, including any amendments, extensions or additions thereto recommended by the planning commission, indicating the general location for major roads, parks or other public open spaces, public building sites, routes for public utilities, zoning districts or other similar information. 
Planning commission means the planning commission of the city. 
Setback line or building line means the minimum horizontal distance between the street right-of-way line, or the street centerline where appropriate, and the building or any projection thereof except: 
(1)  Steps, terraces and open fire escapes; 
(2)  Balconies, canopies or cornices projecting not more than three feet beyond the main building wall; or 
(3)  Offset or overlapping portions of the second floor of the building that do not extend more than three feet beyond the main wall of the building. 
Streets and alleys means ways for vehicular traffic, whether designated as a street, highway, thoroughfare, parkway, throughway, road, avenue, boulevard, lane, place or however otherwise designated. 
(1)  Alleys means minor ways which are used primarily for vehicular service access to the back or the side of properties otherwise abutting on a street. 
(2)  Collector streets means those which carry traffic from minor or neighborhood streets to the major system of streets and highways, including the principal entrance streets of a residential development and streets for circulation within such a development. 
(3)  Major streets and highways means those which are used primarily for fast or heavy traffic. 
(4)  Marginal access streets means minor streets which are parallel to and adjacent to major streets and highways, and which provide access to abutting properties and protection from through traffic. 
(5)  Minor streets means those which are used primarily for access to the abutting properties. 
Subdivider means any person, corporation or duly authorized agent who undertakes the subdivision of land. 
Subdivision. 
(1)  The term "subdivision" means the division, development or redivision of a lot, tract or parcel of land regardless of how it is to be used into two or more lots either by plat or by metes and bounds description, or the division or redivision of land involving the dedication of a new park, playground, street or other public right-of-way or facility; or the vacation, realignment or any other change in existing streets, alleys, easements, recreational areas, water areas or other public improvements or facilities, and, when appropriate to the context, shall relate to the act or process of subdividing or to the land subdivided. 
(2)  For the purposes of this chapter, the following are excepted from the term "subdivision": 
a.  Any subdivision of land for agricultural purposes, provided no lot thereby produced has an area of less than ten acres and an average width of from 400 feet and where no new streets, roads or other rights-of-way are involved. 
b.  The sale or exchange of parcels of land between owners of adjoining properties, provided that additional lots are not thereby created and that the lots created are not reduced below the minimum sizes required by this chapter or the zoning regulations of the city. 
c.  The transfer of unsubdivided land or a lot or parcel of land established by deed or plat recorded among the land records of the city prior to the effective date of the regulations from which this chapter was derived. 
d.  The division or sale of land by judicial decree. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-2; Code 1996, § 78-2)  
Sec. 44-3. - Variances. 
(a)  Conditions. The planning commission shall have authority to vary and modify the provisions of this chapter; provided, however, that in granting variances and modifications, the planning commission may require such conditions as will, in its judgment, secure substantially the objectives of the standards or requirements so varied or modified. 
(b)  Hardship. Where the planning commission finds that extraordinary hardship may result from strict compliance with the regulations established in this chapter, it may vary the regulations so that substantial justice may be done and the public interest secured; provided, however, that such variation will not have the effect of nullifying the intent and purpose of the master plan or this chapter. 
(c)  Large-scale development. The standards and requirements of the regulations established in this chapter may be modified in the case of a plan and program for a complete community or a neighborhood unit, which, in the judgment of the planning commission, provides adequate public spaces and improvements for the circulation, recreation, light, air and service needs of the tract when fully developed and populated, and which also provides such covenants or other legal provisions as will ensure conformity to and achievement of the plan. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-3; Code 1996, § 78-3)  
Secs. 44-4—44-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - PLATS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-25. - Preapplication plats and data. 
(a)  Sketch plan. Two copies of the sketch plan shall be required. The sketch plan shall show in sketch form the proposed layout of streets, lots and other features in relation to existing conditions. The sketch plan may be a freehand sketch made directly on a print of the topographic survey, if available. The sketch plan shall include the existing topographic data listed in section 44-26(b) or such data as is necessary for consideration of the proposed sketch plan. 
(b)  General subdivision information. Two copies of this information shall be required. Such information shall describe or outline the existing conditions of the site and the proposed development as necessary to supplement the sketch plan. This information may include data on existing covenants, land characteristics, and available community facilities and utilities and information describing the subdivision proposal such as number of residential lots, typical lot width and depth, price range, minimum floor area in structures, business areas, playgrounds, park areas and other public areas, proposed protective covenants and proposed utilities and street improvements. 
(c)  Letter of application. A written letter of application, as specified in section 44-26(d), may be used by the subdivider to comply with the requirements enumerated in this section. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-11; Code 1996, § 78-31)  
Sec. 44-26. - Preliminary plats and data for conditional approval. 
(a)  Preliminary plat. Seven copies of blue-line prints shall be required. The preliminary plat shall be drawn at a scale of not less than 100 feet to one inch. It shall show all existing conditions required in subsection (b) of this section, and shall show all proposals, including the following: 
(1)  Street names, right-of-way widths, central angles of street intersections, dimensions or radii or chords, approximate grades, and similar data for alleys, if any; 
(2)  Lot lines, lot numbers and block numbers; 
(3)  Sites, if any, to be dedicated or reserved for parks, playgrounds or other public uses, together with the purpose and the conditions or limitations of such dedications, if any; 
(4)  Sites, if any, for multifamily dwellings, shopping centers, churches, industry, or other nonpublic uses exclusive of single-family dwellings; and 
(5)  Minimum building setback lines. 
(b)  Existing conditions data. Data required as a basis for the preliminary plat shall include the following information and other pertinent data as required to support the preliminary design of the proposed development: 
(1)  Boundary lines: Bearings, if available, and distances. 
(2)  Easements: Location, width and purpose. 
(3)  Streets on and adjacent to the tract: Name, right-of-way width and location. 
(4)  Significant contour data at such an interval (maximum of ten feet) as required to determine preliminary design of the proposed improvements and other dependent features. 
(5)  Other conditions on the tract: Watercourse, existing structures and other significant features. 
(6)  Title and certificates: Title under which the proposed subdivision is to be recorded, with names of owners and certification of a registered professional civil engineer or registered land surveyor. 
(7)  Scale, datum, north arrow, date of survey, date of plat and land lot and district numbers. 
(c)  Draft of protective covenants. One copy of the draft of protective covenants, whereby the subdivider proposes to regulate land use in the subdivision and otherwise protect the proposed development, shall be required. 
(d)  Written application. Two copies of the written application containing essentially the same descriptive information specified in section 44-25(b) shall be submitted with the preliminary plat. The application may be used to fulfill the requirements of section 44-25(b), and, if completed properly and accurately under section 44-25(b), need not be resubmitted. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-12; Code 1996, § 78-32)  
Sec. 44-27. - Proposed subdivision names and proposed street names not to duplicate other subdivisions and streets. 
The proposed names of the subdivision and proposed street names shall not duplicate or too closely approximate, phonetically, the name of any other subdivision or street in the city. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-13; Code 1996, § 78-33)  
Sec. 44-28. - Plats and data for final approval. 
(a)  Scale; data required. Four blue-line prints of the final plat shall be submitted. The scale of the final plat shall be not less than 100 feet to one inch. The final plat shall show the following: 
(1)  Sufficient data to determine readily and reproduce on the ground the location, bearing and length of every street line, lot line, boundary line and building line, whether curved or straight. This shall include, but not be limited to, the radius, length of arc, internal angles and tangent distance for the centerline of curved streets and curved property lines that are not the boundary of curved streets. 
(2)  Tract boundary lines, right-of-way lines of streets, easements and other rights-of-way, and property lines of residential lots and other sites. 
(3)  All dimensions shall be accurate to the nearest one-tenth of a foot and all angles accurate to the nearest minute. 
(4)  Name and right-of-way width of each street or other right-of-way. 
(5)  House numbers. 
(6)  Title, name and location of the subdivision, north arrow, date, scale and land lot and district numbers. 
(7)  Locations, dimensions and purposes of any easements and any areas to be dedicated to public use or sites for other than residential use with notes stating their purposes and limitations. 
(8)  Lots or sites numbered in numerical order and blocks lettered alphabetically. 
(9)  Accurate locations, materials and descriptions of monuments and markers. 
(10)  Certification showing that applicant is the landowner and dedicates streets, rights-of-way and any sites for public use. 
(11)  Certification by the building official and the county health department that the subdivider has complied with one of the following alternatives: 
a.  All improvements have been installed in accordance with the requirements. 
b.  A performance bond has been posted in sufficient amount to ensure completion of all required improvements. 
c.  Any other guarantee of satisfactory completion of required improvements acceptable to the city. 
(12)  Certification of the building official of acceptance of street design and improvements. Performance bonds or other guarantees should be posted with the city prior to the filing of the final plat with the planning commission for approval. 
(13)  Engineer's or surveyor's acknowledgment in the form prescribed by the building official. 
(14)  Owner's acknowledgment in the form prescribed by the building official. 
(15)  Approval of the planning commission. 
(16)  Approval of the building official. 
(b)  Protective covenants. Protective covenants, if any, shall be shown on the final plat. 
(c)  Other data. Final engineering design report on proposed improvements and such other certificates, affidavits, endorsements, or deductions as may be required by the planning commission in the enforcement of this chapter. 
(d)  Acceptance of dedicated streets and public lands. Acceptance of the dedicated streets and other public lands will be certified by the building official after completion of work by the subdivider or developer and after all work has been approved by the building official. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-14; Code 1996, § 78-34)  
Secs. 44-29—44-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - PROCEDURE FOR APPROVAL 
 
Sec. 44-60. - Preapplication. 
(a)  Consultation with building official. Prior to the preparation of the subdivision plat, the subdivider shall confer with the building official, who shall review the sketch plan of the proposed subdivision to determine whether the subdivision meets the requirements of this chapter. This step does not require formal application or filing of the plat with the planning commission. 
(b)  Favorable consideration by building official. Upon receiving favorable consideration of the building official, the subdivider may then proceed to prepare the preliminary plat for submission to the planning commission. 
(c)  Favorable consideration by building official not to constitute approval. Favorable consideration by the building official, under no circumstances, shall be construed as preliminary or tentative approval of the subdivision. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-21; Code 1996, § 78-51)  
Sec. 44-61. - Conditional approval of preliminary plat. 
(a)  Preparation. On reaching conclusions informally, as described in section 44-60, regarding his general program and objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat, together with other supplementary material as deemed necessary by the building official and specified in section 44-28. 
(b)  Submission to planning commission. Four copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified, together with two copies of a written letter of application for conditional approval of the preliminary plat, shall be submitted to the planning commission at least seven days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. 
(c)  Conditional approval or disapproval. Within 30 days after the submission of the preliminary plat and other material submitted for consideration, the planning commission shall express its approval as conditional approval and state the conditions of such approval, if any, or if disapproval, shall express its disapproval and its reasons therefor. 
(d)  Noting of action of planning commission. The action of the planning commission shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the planning commission. 
(e)  Conditional approval not to constitute final approval. Conditional approval of a preliminary plat shall not constitute approval of the final plat. Rather, such conditional approval shall be deemed an expression of approval of the layout submitted on the preliminary plat as a guide to the preparation of the final plat which will be submitted for approval of the planning commission upon fulfillment of the requirements of this chapter and the conditions of the conditional approval, if any. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-22; Code 1996, § 78-52)  
Sec. 44-62. - Short-form procedure for conditional approval of preliminary plat. 
A subdivision having five lots or less, with lots fronting a previously dedicated street, and abutting all adjacent properties which have been previously subdivided, and if the platting of the subdivision does not affect any major alterations of utility installation, may be subdivided under the short-form subdivision procedure prescribed as follows: 
(1)  Preapplication. The preapplication procedure as described in section 44-60 shall be performed. 
(2)  Design standard and data. The design standard and data of the filing plat of the short-form subdivision shall be identical, when applicable, to those of the long-form subdivision plats. 
(3)  Preparation of preliminary plat. On reaching conclusions informally, as described in section 44-60, regarding his general program and objectives, the subdivider shall cause to be prepared a preliminary plat together with other supplementary material as deemed necessary by the building official, and specified in section 44-28. 
(4)  Submission of preliminary plat to building official. Four copies of the preliminary plat and supplementary material specified, together with two copies of a written letter of application for conditional approval, shall be submitted to the building official. 
(5)  Conditional approval. Conditional approval shall be given to the subdivider by the building official within five days after the submission of the written letter of application, preliminary plat and supplementary material when the proposed subdivision meets the design standards of the subdivision regulations established in this chapter. The action of the building official shall be noted on two copies of the preliminary plat, referenced and attached to any conditions determined. One copy shall be returned to the subdivider and the other retained by the building official. 
(6)  Preparation of final plat. After obtaining conditional approval from the building official, the subdivider may then proceed to prepare the final plat. 
(7)  Omission of preliminary submission procedure. The preliminary submission procedure as prescribed in section 44-26 shall be omitted in the short-form subdivision procedure. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-23; Code 1996, § 78-53)  
Sec. 44-63. - Approval of final plat. 
(a)  Preparation. The final plat shall be prepared as specified in section 44-28 and shall conform substantially to the preliminary plat, as approved, and if desired by the subdivider, it may constitute only that portion of the approved preliminary plat which he proposes to record and develop at the time; provided, however, that such portion conforms to all requirements of the regulations established in this chapter. 
(b)  Submission of performance bonds. All performance bonds must be submitted to the city prior to approval of final plat by the planning commission. 
(c)  Submission of final plat to planning commission. The final plat, and other supplementary material required for approval, shall be submitted to the planning commission at least seven days prior to the meeting at which it is to be considered. It shall also be required that such material shall be submitted to the planning commission within six months after approval of the preliminary plat; otherwise, such approval shall become null and void unless an extension of time is applied for and granted by the planning commission. 
(d)  Action by planning commission. Within 30 days after the submission of the final plat and supplementary material required for approval, the planning commission shall express its final action. 
(e)  Recording upon approval; costs. All final plats upon approval shall be recorded with the county clerk's office. The subdivider shall bear all costs of recording. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-24; Code 1996, § 78-54)  
Secs. 44-64—44-84. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - DESIGN STANDARDS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 44-85. - Suitability of land for development purposes. 
The planning commission shall not approve the subdivision if, from adequate investigation conducted by any public agency concerned, it has been determined that in the best interest of the public the site is not suitable for development purposes of the kind proposed. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-31; Code 1996, § 78-71)  
Sec. 44-86. - Land subject to flooding or deemed topographically unsuitable. 
Land subject to flooding and land deemed to be topographically unsuitable shall not be platted for residential occupancy, nor for such other uses as may increase danger to health, life or property or aggravate erosion or flood hazard. Such land within the plot shall be set aside for such uses as shall not be endangered by periodic or occasional inundation or shall not produce unsatisfactory living conditions. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-32; Code 1996, § 78-72)  
Sec. 44-87. - Preservation of trees. 
When feasible, all trees of major growth shall be preserved. Any oak tree having a diameter greater than 14 inches shall be preserved in the development of a subdivision. When necessary to accomplish use of the land, the mayor and council may allow a variance from this rule, upon petition. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-33; Code 1996, § 78-73)  
Secs. 44-88—44-117. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BLOCKS 
 
Sec. 44-118. - Factors considered in determination of length, width and shape. 
The lengths, widths, and shapes of blocks shall be determined with due regard to: 
(1)  Provision of adequate building sites suitable to the special needs of the type of use contemplated; 
(2)  Zoning requirements as to lot sizes and dimensions; 
(3)  Needs for convenient access, circulation, control, and safety of street traffic; and 
(4)  Limitations and opportunities of topography. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-41; Code 1996, § 78-96)  
Sec. 44-119. - Desirable maximum length. 
The desirable maximum block length is 1,200 feet. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-42; Code 1996, § 78-97)  
Sec. 44-120. - Desirable minimum length. 
The desirable minimum block length is 500 feet. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-43; Code 1996, § 78-98)  
Secs. 44-121—44-138. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - LOTS 
 
Sec. 44-139. - General size, dimension and setback of lots. 
The lot size, width, depth, shape and orientation, and the minimum building setback lines shall be appropriate for the location of the subdivision and for the type of development and use contemplated. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-51; Code 1996, § 78-116)  
Sec. 44-140. - Dimension requirements. 
Lot dimensions shall conform to the requirements of the zoning regulations if such requirements are more stringent, otherwise minimum lot dimensions shall be as follows: 
Minimum Lot Dimensions 
Minimum frontage 	75 feet 
Minimum depth 	150 feet 
Minimum area 	11,250 square feet 
Building setback (from centerline of street) 	75 feet 
 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-52; Code 1996, § 78-117)  
Sec. 44-141. - Width of corner lots for residential use. 
Corner lots for residential use shall have an extra width when the normal width is less than 75 feet, to permit appropriate building setback from and orientation to both streets. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-53; Code 1996, § 78-118)  
Sec. 44-142. - Lots to front upon public street. 
Each lot shall front upon a public street. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-54; Code 1996, § 78-119)  
Sec. 44-143. - Double frontage and reverse frontage lots to be avoided; planting screen. 
Double frontage and reverse frontage lots shall be avoided except where essential to provide separation of residential development from traffic arteries or to overcome specific disadvantages of topography and orientation. A planting screen reservation of at least ten feet, and across which there shall be no right of access, shall be provided along the line of lots abutting such a traffic artery or other disadvantageous use. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-55; Code 1996, § 78-120)  
Sec. 44-144. - Requirements for side lot lines. 
Side lot lines shall be substantially at right angles or radial to street lines. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-56; Code 1996, § 78-121)  
Secs. 44-145—44-171. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 4. - STREETS 
 
Sec. 44-172. - Conformity to master plan. 
(a)  The arrangement, character, extent, width, grade and location of all streets shall conform to the master plan and shall be considered in their relation to existing and planned streets, to topographical conditions, to public convenience and safety, and in their appropriate relation to the proposed uses of the land to be served by such streets. 
(b)  Where such is not shown in the master plan, the arrangement of streets in a subdivision shall either: 
(1)  Provide for the continuation or appropriate projection of existing principal streets in surrounding areas; or 
(2)  Conform to a plan for the neighborhood approved or adopted by the planning commission to meet a particular situation where topographical or other conditions make continuance or conformance to existing streets impracticable. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-61; Code 1996, § 78-141)  
Sec. 44-173. - Minor streets to be laid out so as to discourage through traffic. 
Minor streets shall be so laid out that their use by through traffic will be discouraged. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-62; Code 1996, § 78-142)  
Sec. 44-174. - Subdivision abutting on proposed major street; marginal access streets, planting and other treatments. 
Where a subdivision abuts or contains an existing or proposed major street, the planning commission may require marginal access streets, reverse frontage with screen planting contained in a non-access reservation along the rear property line, deep lots with rear service alleys, or such other treatment as may be necessary for adequate protection of residential properties and to afford separation of through and local traffic. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-63; Code 1996, § 78-143)  
Sec. 44-175. - Requirements where subdivision borders on railroads and limited access highway rights-of-way. 
Where a subdivision borders on or contains a railroad right-of-way or limited access highway right-of-way, the planning commission may require a street approximately parallel to and on each side of such right-of-way, at a distance suitable for the appropriate use of the intervening land, as for park purposes in residential districts, or for commercial or industrial purposes in appropriate districts. Such distances shall also be determined with due regard for the requirements of approach grades and future grade separations. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-64; Code 1996, § 78-144)  
Sec. 44-176. - Reserve strips. 
Reserve strips controlling access to streets shall be prohibited except where their control is definitely placed in the city. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-65; Code 1996, § 78-145)  
Sec. 44-177. - Street jogs. 
Street jogs with centerline offsets of less than 125 feet shall be avoided. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-66; Code 1996, § 78-146)  
Sec. 44-178. - Intersections to be at right angles. 
Street intersections shall be as nearly at right angles as practicable. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-67; Code 1996, § 78-147)  
Sec. 44-179. - Radius at intersections. 
At each street intersection, the property line at each block corner shall be rounded with a curve of radius "R" varying with the interior angle as specified in the following table, unless sufficient data is presented to show that strict adherence to this requirement is impractical due to topographical or engineering considerations: 
Table of Intersection Returns 
Interior Angle 
(in Degrees) 	Intersection of 
Two Minor Streets R 
(in Feet) 	Any Intersection on 
Major Streets R 
(in Feet) 
150—145 	12 	15 
145—140 	12 	18 
140—135 	12 	20 
135—85 	12 	25 
85—75 	20 	40 
75—65 	30 	70 
65—55 	40 	80 
55—45 	50 	100 
45—0 	75 	140 
 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-68; Code 1996, § 78-148)  
Sec. 44-180. - Right-of-way widths. 
Street right-of-way widths shall be as shown in the master plan, and where not shown therein, shall be no less than as follows: 
Minimum Right-of-Way Widths 
Street Type 	Right-of-Way in Feet 
(Minimum) 
Major 	80 
Collector-commercial and residential 	70 
Minor 	60 
 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-69; Code 1996, § 78-149)  
Sec. 44-181. - Half streets. 
Half streets shall be prohibited, except where essential to the reasonable development of the subdivision and where it is determined to be practicable to require the dedication of the other half when the adjoining property is subdivided, the other half of the street shall be platted within such tract. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-70; Code 1996, § 78-150)  
Sec. 44-182. - Platting of dead-end streets. 
Dead-end streets may be platted where the planning commission deems desirable and where the land adjoins property not subdivided, in which case the streets shall be carried to the boundaries of the land. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-71; Code 1996, § 78-151)  
Sec. 44-183. - Permanent dead-end streets; length and turnaround requirements. 
Dead-end streets designed to be so permanently shall not be longer than 600 feet and shall be provided at the closed end with a turnaround having an outside roadway diameter of at least 80 feet, and a street right-of-way diameter of at least 100 feet. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-72; Code 1996, § 78-152)  
Sec. 44-184. - Street names. 
No street names shall be used which will duplicate or be confused with the names of existing streets. Street names shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-73; Code 1996, § 78-153)  
Sec. 44-185. - Street grades. 
(a)  Street grades, wherever feasible, shall not exceed the following, with due allowance for reasonable vertical curves: 
Maximum Street Grades 
Street Type 	Percent Grade 
Major 	7 
Collector 	10 
Minor 	12 
 
(b)  No street grade shall be less than one percent. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-74; Code 1996, § 78-154)  
Secs. 44-186—44-208. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 5. - EASEMENTS 
 
Sec. 44-209. - Provided where subdivision traversed by watercourse, drainageway, natural channel or stream. 
Where a subdivision is traversed by a watercourse, drainageway, natural channel or stream, there shall be provided an easement conforming substantially to the limits of such watercourse, plus additional width as necessary to accommodate future construction as recommended by the building official. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-81; Code 1996, § 78-171)  
Sec. 44-210. - Utility easements to be avoided where possible. 
Utility easements shall be avoided except in unusual cases where no other satisfactory arrangements can be provided for the installation of utilities. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-82; Code 1996, § 78-172)  
Sec. 44-211. - Permission required for dedication of utility easements. 
Permission must be obtained from the building official for the dedication of utility easements prior to the submission of such dedication. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-83; Code 1996, § 78-173)  
Sec. 44-212. - Pedestrian easements. 
Pedestrian easements, not less than ten feet wide, may be required where deemed essential to provide circulation or access to schools, playgrounds, shopping centers, transportation and other community facilities. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-84; Code 1996, § 78-174)  
Secs. 44-213—44-232. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 6. - PUBLIC SITES AND OPEN SPACES 
 
Sec. 44-233. - Required; percentage of gross area; factors considered by planning commission. 
Proposed subdivisions shall provide appropriate open spaces, suitably located and of reasonable size for parks, playgrounds, play lots, playfields or other recreational areas as may be necessary. Such area should consist of approximately five percent of the gross area of the proposed subdivision. In determining this requirement, the planning commission shall give due consideration to the adequacy of existing parks and recreational facilities in the vicinity, size and characteristics of the subdivision and whether or not such requirement will result in exceptional hardship to the subdivider. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-91; Code 1996, § 78-191)  
Sec. 44-234. - Dedication to city; reservation for public use under private ownership. 
Parks and playgrounds may be dedicated to the city or reserved for public use under private ownership. If so dedicated, the land shall be used exclusively by the city for recreational purposes, and the subdivider may stipulate a reasonable limit of time within which the city is required to make physical improvements to the site, otherwise the title of the site will revert to the subdivider. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-92; Code 1996, § 78-192)  
Sec. 44-235. - Size and location subject to approval. 
The size and location of parks and playgrounds shall be subject to the approval of the planning commission. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-93; Code 1996, § 78-193)  
Sec. 44-236. - Combining of areas where subdivision too small to provide suitable open space. 
Where the proposed subdivision is too small to provide space of suitable size for the public open space use intended, the open space provided may be combined with that provided or to be provided in an adjoining area. Thus, in the aggregate, there will be provided an open space of suitable size for the purpose intended. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-94; Code 1996, § 78-194)  
Sec. 44-237. - Sites for public schools. 
Where a site for a public school building is deemed suitable by the planning commission and the proper school authority in a subdivision, such site shall be reserved for public usage. The subdivider shall allow a period of 45 days from the date of submittal of the preliminary plat, during which time the proper school authority is required to make known the intention of acquiring the site. If such notification is affirmative, the planning commission shall then set the period of time upon consulting the subdivider and the school authority for such acquisition. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-95; Code 1996, § 78-195)  
Secs. 44-238—44-267. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - REQUIRED IMPROVEMENTS 
 
Sec. 44-268. - Posting of performance bond. 
The subdivider is required to file with the city a performance bond which is available to the city and in sufficient amount to ensure completion of all street and sewer improvements, or, in lieu of such bond, the subdivider may submit performance bonds by contractors for street improvements and sewer construction of the proposed subdivision to ensure such completion of all street and sewer improvements. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-101; Code 1996, § 78-221)  
Sec. 44-269. - Approval of plans; inspection of work. 
The building official must approve plans for and inspect and approve construction of all subdivision work. The county health department must approve plans for the use of sewerage, septic tanks or other sanitary facilities. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-102; Code 1996, § 78-222)  
Sec. 44-270. - Posting of surety bond for maintenance of pavement and drainage system. 
The subdivider is responsible for maintenance of pavement and the drainage system in the subdivision for a period of one year and is required to post with the city a surety bond in the amount of ten percent of the performance bond required pursuant to section 44-268 to ensure the completion of streets and roads. Such bond shall be valid for a period of one year beginning on the date of final acceptance of the streets by the city. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-103; Code 1996, § 78-223)  
Sec. 44-271. - Effect of failure of subdivider to correct defect upon notification. 
If, upon being notified of the failure of the pavement or drainage system, the subdivider does not correct the deficiency or commence work within ten days of the notice, such failure shall be deemed to be a failure on the bond and the city shall have the right to make the necessary repairs, either by public work or by private contract, and the bond shall be liable for the full amount of the cost of the repairs. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-104; Code 1996, § 78-224)  
Sec. 44-272. - Underground work to be completed prior to laying of pavement. 
All underground work consisting of sewers, water lines, gas mains and telephone conduits shall be installed and the earth backfill compacted before pavement is laid. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-105; Code 1996, § 78-225)  
Sec. 44-273. - Approval of plans and profiles for street improvements. 
Two copies of the complete plans and profiles for street improvements shall be submitted for approval of the building official prior to approval of the final plat by the planning commission. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-106; Code 1996, § 78-226)  
Sec. 44-274. - Required street improvements. 
Street improvements shall be provided in each subdivision as prescribed in the following: 
(1)  Grading. Grading shall be done by the developer. Streets shall be graded to a width of not less than 42 feet in the center of the right-of-way to provide for a 26-foot pavement and two eight-foot shoulders. 
(2)  Curbing. Granite or concrete curb shall be furnished by the developer. Any curb damaged after being set and before pavement is completed shall be reset by the developer. 
(3)  Paving. Pavement shall be furnished and paid for by the developer. Pavement shall consist of four inches of stone, penetrated with two gallons of AC 8 asphalt choked with 35 pounds of Choke Stone No. 89, and topped with 100 pounds of hot plant asphalt per square yard. 
(4)  Sidewalks. In heavily congested areas, developers will be required to lay a concrete sidewalk of a minimum width of four feet four inches in thickness and a 28-day compressive strength of 2,500 psi. 
(5)  Driveways. Driveways from the edge of the pavement to the property line shall be constructed of concrete of six-inch minimum thickness and a 28-day compressive strength of 3,000 psi. 
(6)  Markers. Street markers similar to the city's markers shall be furnished and set at all street intersections by the developer. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-107; Code 1996, § 78-227)  
Sec. 44-275. - Sanitary sewers. 
(a)  Required. Sewers shall be laid in all streets, service connections installed to property lines, and connections made to trunk line sewers or a master septic tank. 
(b)  Septic tanks. Individual septic tanks will be permitted only by special permission of the county health department. 
(c)  Costs. The developer shall bear all costs of sanitary facilities. 
(d)  Approval of plans and profiles. Two copies of the complete plans and profiles for sanitary sewers shall be submitted for approval of the building official prior to approval of the final plat by the planning commission. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-108; Code 1996, § 78-228)  
Sec. 44-276. - Storm drainage. 
Adequate storm drain pipes and catchbasins shall be installed by developers. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-109; Code 1996, § 78-229)  
Sec. 44-277. - Water mains. 
Water mains shall be laid in all streets and service connections installed to property lines by developers. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-110; Code 1996, § 78-230)  
Sec. 44-278. - Monuments. 
Iron pins of no less than 24 inches long nor less than one-half inch in diameter shall be set flush with the ground at every lot corner. 
(Code 1984, § 8-5-111; Code 1996, § 78-231)  
Chapter 46 - TAXATION[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Limitation on taxing power of municipalities and counties, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ VIII; taxation power of municipal and county governments, Ga. Const. art. IX, § IV, ¶ I. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 46-1—46-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - AD VALOREM TAXES[2] 

Footnotes: 
--- (2) --- 
State Law reference— Ad valorem taxation of property, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-1 et seq.; municipal ad valorem taxation, O.C.G.A. § 48-5-350 et seq. 
 
Sec. 46-19. - Administration. 
(a)  Except as otherwise provided in this article, the city clerk (ex officio treasurer, tax receiver, tax collector) shall be charged with the duty to administer the imposition, collection and enforcement of all taxes and special assessments levied or imposed by the city in accordance with the administrative procedures set forth in this section. To the extent this article fails to provide a designated procedure, such officer shall act in the manner established, if any, for county tax collectors under applicable state law. 
(b)  Pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 48-5-359.1, the city has contracted with the county tax commissioner to prepare the city's tax digest and to assess municipal taxes. 
(c)  Following adoption of its current fiscal year budget, the mayor and council shall adopt a millage rate upon which property subject to ad valorem tax will be billed. Prior to the adoption of the millage rate, the mayor and council shall publish the notice of proposed ad valorem tax rate, as required by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-32. Millage rates shall be calculated using 100 percent of the assessed fair market value of the property upon which the tax is levied. 
(d)  The city clerk shall cause a bill to be sent to all taxpayers at the address last shown on the county tax digest by regular United States mail, with adequate postage thereon; provided, however, that failure by the taxpayer to receive a bill shall not constitute grounds for nonpayment or late payment of the tax. The bill shall state the location or description of the property taxed, the fair market value of the property (100 percent) and its taxable value (100 percent of fair market value), and the amount of tax due thereon. The bill shall also state the due date after which taxes shall be in default. The bill may also contain such additional information as allowed by law or authorized by the mayor and council. 
(e)  Collection of taxes will conform to county collection practices as established by state law. 
(Code 1984, § 3-3-1; Code 1996, § 82-31)  
Secs. 46-20—46-59. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - LODGING EXCISE TAX[3] 

Footnotes: 
--- (3) --- 
State Law reference— Municipalities authorized to levy and collect tax on the furnishing for value to the public of rooms, lodgings or accommodations, O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
 
Sec. 46-60. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Due date means the 20th day after the close of the monthly period for which the tax is to be computed. 
Estimated tax liability means the lodging provider's prospective tax liability based upon the average monthly tax remittance in the prior fiscal year, as adjusted for change in tax rate or substantial change in circumstances due to damage to the hotel. 
Folio means primary documentation produced by a hotel that demonstrates interaction between the lodging provider and the occupant, and which, at a minimum, reflects the name and address given by the occupant, the dates of occupancy, the amount of rent charged for each date together with the amounts of applicable excise tax, and the methods of payment. 
Guest room means accommodations occupied, or intended, arranged, or designed for transient occupancy, by one or more occupants for the purpose of living quarters or residential use. 
Hotel means any facility or any portion of a facility, including any lodginghouse, roominghouse, dormitory, Turkish bath, bachelor hotel, studio hotel, motel, motor hotel, auto or trailer court, truckstop, tourist cabin, campground, lodge, inn, timeshare or other condominium, apartment community, public club, or private club, containing guest rooms and which is occupied, or is intended or designed for occupancy, by paying guests, whether rent is paid in money, goods, labor, or otherwise. The term "hotel" does not include any hospital, asylum, sanitarium, orphanage, jail, prison, or other facility in which human beings are housed and detained under legal restraint. 
Lodging provider means any person operating a hotel in the city including, but not limited to, the owner or proprietor of such premises, lessee, sub-lessee, lender in possession, licensee or any other person operating such hotel; and who is subject to the taxation imposed for furnishing for value to the public any rooms, lodgings, or accommodations. 
Monthly period means the calendar months of any year. 
Occupancy means the use or possession, or the right to the use or possession, of any guest room in a hotel or the right to the use or possession of the furnishings or to the services and accommodations accompanying the use and possession of the guest room. 
Occupant means any person who, for a consideration, uses, possesses, or has the right to use or possess, any guest room in a hotel under any lease, concession, permit, right of access, license to use or other agreement, or otherwise. 
Permanent resident means any occupant who, as of a given date, has or shall have occupied or has or shall have the right of occupancy of any guest room in a hotel for not less than 30 continuous days next preceding such date. 
Rent means the consideration received for occupancy valued in money, whether received in money or otherwise, including all receipts, cash, credits, and property or services of any kind or nature, and also the amount for which credit is allowed by the lodging provider to the occupant, without any deduction therefrom whatsoever. 
Tax means the tax on occupants imposed by this article, as provided for by O.C.G.A. § 48-13-50 et seq., specifically O.C.G.A. § 48-13-51. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 1, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-61. - Tax rate. 
There shall be paid for every occupancy of a guest room in a hotel in the city a tax at the rate of five percent of the amount of rent unless an exemption is provided under section 46-63. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 2, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-62. - Collection of tax by lodging provider. 
Every lodging provider furnishing guest rooms in a hotel in the city shall collect a tax of five percent on the amount of rent from the occupant unless an exception is provided under section 46-63. The lodging provider shall provide a receipt to each occupant, which receipt shall reflect both the amount of rent and the amounts of this and other tax applicable. This tax shall be due from the occupant, and shall be collected by the lodging provider at the same time that the rent is collected. The lodging provider shall be liable to the city for the full amount received or collected as tax, whether collected appropriately or inappropriately; and for any amount of tax that should have been collected, but was not. 
(1)  Any person who receives or collects the tax or any consideration represented to be the tax from another person holds the amount so collected in trust for the benefit of the city and is liable to the city for the full amount collected, plus penalty and interest. 
(2)  An individual who controls or supervises the collection of the tax from another person, or an individual who controls the accounting for or remittance of the tax, and who willfully fails to remit or cause to be remitted the tax, is liable as a responsible individual for an amount equal to the tax not remitted or caused to be remitted, plus penalty and interest. The dissolution of a corporation, partnership or other business or fraternal association does not affect a responsible individual's liability under this subsection. Furthermore, the liability imposed by this subsection shall be in addition to any other penalty provided by law. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 3, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-63. - Exceptions. 
No tax shall be collected from an occupant after becoming a permanent resident; or from an occupant who certifies in writing that he is staying in such accommodations as a result of his residence having been destroyed by fire or other casualty; or from the United States and the state or any instrumentality of either thereof; or from any official or employee of the state, its units of local government or any other instrumentality of the state, when traveling on official business and presenting written substantiation thereof or paying by state or local government credit or debit card; or from a foreign sovereign enjoying exemption by treaty or consular convention, when presenting substantiation issued by the United States Department of State. Occupancy provided without charge in money or otherwise is not subject to this tax. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 4, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-64. - Registration of lodging provider; form and contents; execution; certificate of authority. 
Every person engaging or about to engage in business as a lodging provider in the city shall immediately register with the city clerk on a form provided by said official. Persons engaged in such business must so register not later than 30 days after the effective date of the ordinance from which this article is derived. Such registration shall set forth the name under which such person transacts business or intends to transact business, the location of his place of business and such other information which would facilitate the administration of the tax as prescribed by the city clerk. The registration shall be signed by the owner, if a natural person; in case of ownership by an association or partnership, by a member or partner; in case of ownership by a corporation, by an officer. The city clerk shall, after such registration, issue without charge a certificate of authority to each lodging provider to collect the tax from the occupant. A separate registration shall be required for each place of business of a lodging provider. Each certificate shall state the name and location of the business to which it is applicable. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 5, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-65. - Determination generally; returns; payments. 
(a)  Due date of taxes. All amounts of such tax shall be due and payable to the city clerk monthly on or before the 20th day of the month next succeeding the respective monthly period. The tax shall become delinquent for any monthly period after the 20th day of each succeeding month during which it remains unpaid. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax by due date. A lodging provider who fails to make any return, or to pay the amount of tax as prescribed, shall be assessed a specific penalty to be added to the tax in the amount of five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, if the failure is for one month or less; and an additional five percent or $5.00, whichever is greater, for each additional month or fraction thereof in which such failure shall continue; provided, however, that the aggregate penalty for any single violation shall not exceed 25 percent or $25.00, whichever is greater. Delinquent amounts shall bear interest at the rate of one percent per month, or fraction thereof, until paid. 
(c)  Acceptance of delinquent return and remittance without imposing penalty and interest; authority; requirements. If the failure to make any return or to pay the amount of tax by the due date results from providential cause shown to the satisfaction of the governing authority of the city by affidavit attached to the return, and remittance is made within ten days of the due date, such return may be accepted exclusive of penalty and interest. 
(d)  Waiving of penalty and interest; authority. O.C.G.A. § 48-2-41, relating to the authority to waive interest, and O.C.G.A. § 48-2-43, relating to the authority to waive penalty, shall apply; provided, however, that the governing authority shall stand in lieu of the state commissioner of revenue, and the city shall stand in lieu of the state. 
(e)  Penalty for fraud. In the case of a false or fraudulent return, or of failure to file a return where willful intent exists to defraud the city of any tax due, a penalty of 50 percent shall be assessed. 
(f)  Return; remittance; time of filing; lodging providers required to file; contents. On or before the 20th day of the month succeeding each monthly period, a return for the preceding monthly period together with appropriate remittance shall be filed with the city clerk. The return shall report the gross rent, taxable rent, exempt rent, amount of tax collected or otherwise due for the period, and such other information as may be required by the city clerk. However, if the estimated tax liability for any monthly period shall exceed $2,500.00 for a lodging provider who, in the prior fiscal year remitted tax greater than $2,500.00 in any three consecutive months, such lodging provider shall file an estimated return and remit not less than 50 percent of the estimated tax liability for the monthly period by the 20th day of that same monthly period. The amount of tax so remitted shall be credited against the amount to be due with the regular return for the monthly period to be filed on the 20th day of the succeeding month. 
(g)  Extension of time of filing; authority; requirements; remittance; penalty and interest. The mayor and council of the city may, for good cause, extend the time for making returns for not longer than 30 days. No extension shall be valid unless granted in writing upon written application of the lodging provider. Such grant may not be applicable for longer period than 12 consecutive months. A lodging provider granted an extension shall remit tax equaling not less than 100 percent of the tax paid for the corresponding period of the prior fiscal year; such remittance to be made on or before the date the tax would otherwise come due without the grant of extension. No penalty or interest shall be charged during the first ten days of the extension period. Thereafter, interest shall be collected on the unpaid balance at the rate of one percent per month. 
(h)  Collection fee allowed lodging providers. Lodging providers collecting the tax shall be allowed a percentage of the tax due and accounted for and shall be reimbursed in the form of a deduction in submitting, reporting and paying the amount due, if the amount is not delinquent at the time of payment. The rate of the deduction shall be three percent of the amount due, but only if the amount due was not delinquent at the time of payment. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 6, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-66. - Deficiency determinations. 
(a)  Recomputation of tax; authority to make; basis of recomputation. If the city clerk is not satisfied with the return of the tax or the amount of the tax required to be paid to the city by any lodging provider, he may compute and determine the amount required to be paid upon the basis of any information within his possession or that may come into his possession. One or more deficiency determinations may be made of the amount due for one or more monthly periods. 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 46-65. 
(c)  Notice of determination; service of. The city clerk shall give to the lodging provider written notice of his determination. The notice may be served personally or by mail; if by mail, such service shall be addressed to the lodging provider at his address as it appears in the records of the city. Service by mail is complete when delivered by certified mail with a receipt signed by the addressee, or when made by statutory overnight delivery. 
(d)  Time within which notice of deficiency determination to be mailed. Except in cases of failure to make a return or of fraud, every notice of deficiency determination shall be mailed within three years after the 20th day of the calendar month following the monthly period for which the amount is proposed to be determined, or within three years after the return is filed, whichever period should last expire. 
(e)  Appeal or protest of deficiency determination. The procedure for contesting a deficiency determination shall be as provided by O.C.G.A. § 48-5-380. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 7, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-67. - Determination if no return made. 
(a)  Estimate of gross receipts. If any lodging provider fails to make a return, the city clerk shall make an estimate of the amount of the gross receipts of the lodging provider, or as the case may be, of the amount of total rentals in the city which are subject to the tax. The estimate shall be made for the period in respect to which the lodging provider failed to make the return and shall be based upon any information which is or may come into the possession of the city clerk. Written notice shall be given in the manner prescribed in section 46-66(c). 
(b)  Penalty and interest for failure to pay tax. Penalty and interest shall be assessed upon the amount of any determination, as provided by section 46-65. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 8, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-68. - Collection of tax by city. 
(a)  Action for delinquent tax; time for. At any time within three years after any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected becomes due and payable, and at any time within three years after the delinquency of any tax or any amount of tax required to be collected, the city clerk may bring an action in a court of competent jurisdiction in the name of the city to collect the amount delinquent together with penalty, interest, court fees, filing fees, attorney's fees and other legal fees incident thereto. 
(b)  Lodging provider selling or quitting business. If any lodging provider liable for any amount under this article sells out his business or quits his business, he shall make a final return and remittance within 15 days after the date of selling or quitting the business. 
(c)  Duty of successors or assignees of lodging provider to withhold tax from purchase money. If any lodging provider liable for any amount of tax, interest or penalty under this article sells out his business or quits the business, his successors or assigns shall withhold sufficiently from the purchase price to cover such amount until the former owner produces from the city clerk either a receipt reflecting full payment or a certificate stating that no amount is due. 
(d)  Liability for failure to withhold. If the purchaser of a business fails to withhold from the purchase price as required, he shall be personally liable for the payment of the amount required to be withheld by him to the extent of the purchase price. 
(e)  Credit for tax, penalty or interest paid more than once or erroneously or illegally collected. Whenever the amount of any tax, penalty or interest has been paid more than once, or has been erroneously or illegally collected or received by the city, it may be refunded by the mayor and council. If the lodging provider or person determines that he has overpaid or paid more than once, which fact has not been determined by the city clerk, such person shall have three years from the date of payment to file a claim in writing stating the specific ground upon which the claim is founded. The claimant may request a hearing before the mayor and council at which the claim and any other information available will be considered. The mayor and council shall approve or disapprove the claim, and notify the claimant of its action. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 9, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-69. - Administration of article; recordkeeping. 
(a)  Authority of city clerk. The city clerk shall administer and enforce the provisions of this article for the collection of the tax. 
(b)  Records required from lodging providers, etc.; form. Every lodging provider renting guest rooms in the city shall preserve, for a minimum of three years, all folios, receipts, certificates of exemption and such other documents as the city clerk may prescribe, and in such form as he may require. Said records shall at all times be available for examination within the city. 
(c)  Examination of records; audits. The city clerk, or any person authorized in writing by him, may examine the books, papers, records, financial reports, equipment and other facilities of any lodging provider renting guest rooms and any lodging provider liable for the tax in order to verify the accuracy of any return made, or, if no return is made by the lodging provider, to ascertain and determine the amount required to be paid. Such examination shall be conducted at the place of lodging provision unless the city clerk shall stipulate another place within the city. 
(d)  Authority to require reports; contents. In administration of the provisions of this article, the city clerk may require the filing of reports by any person or class of persons having in their possession or custody information relating to the rental of guest rooms which are subject to the tax. The reports shall be filed with the city clerk when required by said official, and shall set forth the rental charged for each occupancy, the dates of occupancy, the basis for exemption, or such other information as the city clerk may prescribe. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 10, 1-3-2011)  
Sec. 46-70. - Violations. 
(a)  Any lodging provider who fails, neglects or refuses to collect the tax as provided by section 46-62 shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. 
(b)  Any lodging provider who fails or refuses to make any return as provided by section 46-65, to keep adequate records or to open them for inspection by the city, or to furnish other data reasonably requested by the mayor and council, shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not more than $500.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. 
(c)  Any lodging provider who makes a false or fraudulent return with intent to evade the tax shall be deemed guilty of a misdemeanor and, upon conviction thereof, shall be punished by a fine of not less than $500.00, nor more than $1,000.00, or confinement for a term not to exceed three months, or both. 
(d)  Each and every day during any portion of which any violation is committed, continued or permitted shall constitute a separate offense and shall be punished accordingly. 
(Ord. No. 12-1, § 11, 1-3-2011)  
Chapter 48 - TRAFFIC AND VEHICLES  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 48-1. - Uniform rules of the road adopted. 
The provisions of O.C.G.A. §§ 40-6-1 through 40-6-395, known as the Uniform Rules of the Road, are hereby adopted as and for the traffic regulations of this city with like effect as if recited in this section. 
(Code 1984, § 10-1-1; Code 1996, § 86-1)  
Sec. 48-2. - Temporary regulations authorized. 
In cases where the traffic upon the streets of the city may become congested, or upon occasions of parades, or at theaters, churches or schools, or any public gathering or assemblage at any park, building or public place, the police may make temporary rules regulating the traffic. Any person who violates such regulations, after having been warned of such temporary traffic regulations, shall be guilty of a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 10-1-2; Code 1996, § 86-3)  
Sec. 48-3. - Traffic, speed, truck parking and other zones; designation by signs and traffic control devices; schedule; specifications of devices; violations. 
(a)  Designation and maintenance of traffic control signs, markings and devices. The chief of police, or his designee, upon approval by ordinance of the mayor and council, is authorized to designate and maintain, with appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices, after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Speed zones; 
(2)  Truck routes and streets to be designated specifically to prohibit various classes of trucks; 
(3)  One-way streets and other directional control devices; 
(4)  Freight loading zones and regulations; 
(5)  Parking and no parking zones and regulations thereon; 
(6)  Stop, yield and other right-of-way signs; and 
(7)  Stop signals and other traffic signals. 
(b)  Issuance of orders designating certain areas. The chief of police, or his designee, is authorized to issue written orders designating by appropriate traffic control signs, markings and devices, after engineering and traffic investigations: 
(1)  Pedestrian crosswalks; 
(2)  Other safety zones for pedestrians; 
(3)  Traffic lanes; and 
(4)  Any other sign, marking or zone necessary for orderly and safe conditions on the streets of the city. 
(c)  Schedule. The chief of police shall maintain or cause to be recorded a current schedule of all traffic rules, regulations and orders under this chapter, which record shall be available for inspection by the public. For items listed in subsection (a) of this section, this schedule, and any amendments thereto, shall become effective only upon approval thereof by ordinance of the mayor and council. This schedule is hereby incorporated in this section, and copies shall be available for public inspection in the office of the city clerk. 
(d)  Specifications of devices. All traffic control signs, signals, devices and markings shall conform to specifications in the "Manual on Uniform Traffic Control Devices" adopted by the state transportation board. All signs and signals required under this section for a particular purpose shall, so far as practicable, be uniform as to type and location throughout the city. All traffic control devices so erected and not inconsistent with the provisions of state law or this section shall be official traffic control devices of the city. 
(e)  Violations. Any violation of any traffic zone, marking, sign or other traffic control device established under this section shall be a violation of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 10-1-3; Code 1996, § 86-4)  
Sec. 48-4. - Authority to close streets and divert traffic. 
The police shall have the authority, in the interest of public safety or convenience, to close any street, alley or portion of the same temporarily to vehicular or foot traffic or divert such traffic therefrom. 
(Code 1984, § 10-1-4; Code 1996, § 86-5)  
Sec. 48-5. - Use of closed streets. 
Whenever any street, alley or sidewalk, or any portion thereof, is closed by order of the mayor or police department, or any other designated authority, whether the closing is for repairs, improvements, protection against danger or for any other purpose, it shall be unlawful for any person to enter, cross or travel upon the portion so closed except by permission of the authorities closing the same. 
(Code 1984, § 10-1-5; Code 1996, § 86-6)  
Sec. 48-6. - Duty to secure load. 
It shall be unlawful for the operator of a vehicle to haul trash, refuse, ashes, dirt, sand, concrete mix, gravel, stone, coal, brick, steel shavings or any other material in such a manner as to cause such material to be scattered over any street of the city. 
(Code 1984, § 10-1-6; Code 1996, § 86-7)  
Sec. 48-7. - Hitching to vehicles. 
No person shall hitch or climb onto any moving vehicle, either with or without the consent of its operator, provided that this section shall not apply to the coupling of trailers or proper towing of other vehicles. 
(Code 1984, § 10-1-7; Code 1996, § 86-8)  
Sec. 48-8. - Speed of trains within city. 
Railroad trains traveling within the city shall not be operated at a speed in excess of 40 miles per hour. At no time shall railroad trains be operated at a speed in excess of what is reasonably safe with due regard to attendant circumstances. 
(Code 1984, § 10-1-8; Code 1996, § 86-9)  
Secs. 48-9—48-34. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - VEHICLE OPERATION 
 
Sec. 48-35. - Free flow of traffic; obstruction. 
All persons are prohibited from engaging in driving procedures, or any other activities, which obstruct the free flow of traffic in, around, over and through the streets, alleyways and other public ways of the city. Any person is prohibited from stopping his vehicle (except at a stop signal or stop sign, or to honor another driver's right-of-way, or in an emergency situation) in a manner as to obstruct the free and orderly flow of traffic by the maneuver, or to engage in unduly slow driving procedures so as to obstruct the free flow of traffic or to needlessly circle and block or dawdle or make unnecessarily rapid accelerations and decelerations or to in any other manner constitute a traffic nuisance or hazard. 
(Code 1984, § 10-2-1; Code 1996, § 86-36)  
Sec. 48-36. - Speed limits established. 
(a)  No person shall operate any motor vehicle or tractor upon any of the streets and highways of the city at a greater speed than is reasonable and proper, having regard to the width, traffic and use of the streets and highways, or so as to endanger the property or life or limb of any person. 
(b)  Thirty miles per hour shall be the maximum speed on all streets or portions of streets within the city, unless otherwise indicated by officially posted signs designating the maximum vehicular speed upon those streets, as approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 10-2-2; Code 1996, § 86-37)  
Sec. 48-37. - Slow-moving, heavily laden vehicles to keep to right. 
Slow-moving or heavily laden vehicles shall not be driven abreast upon any highway, but one must follow behind the other and keep as near to the right-hand curb as practicable. 
(Code 1984, § 10-2-3; Code 1996, § 86-38)  
Sec. 48-38. - U-turns. 
It shall be unlawful to turn a vehicle on a street so as to proceed in the opposite direction, commonly known as making a U-turn, at any intersection at which a traffic control signal is in place or at any other intersection or place where signs have been erected by the police department prohibiting such turns. 
(Code 1984, § 10-2-4; Code 1996, § 86-39)  
Secs. 48-39—48-64. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - STOPPING, STANDING AND PARKING 
 
Sec. 48-65. - Vehicle to stop at curb; exceptions. 
A vehicle shall not stop elsewhere than at the curb except in an emergency or to allow another vehicle or pedestrian to cross in front of it, or pursuant to the directions of a traffic control signal or the signal of a traffic officer. 
(Code 1984, § 10-3-1; Code 1996, § 86-66)  
Sec. 48-66. - Parking in alleys. 
Vehicles shall not park in public alleys; provided, however, that vehicles may park in public alleys not longer than necessary to load and unload, and when so parked, such vehicles shall stand as close as possible to one side of such alley in order to permit other vehicles to traverse such alley. 
(Code 1984, § 10-3-2; Code 1996, § 86-67)  
Sec. 48-67. - Duty to remove disabled or stalled vehicle. 
Whenever a vehicle becomes stalled upon a street or when, because of damage or other reason, it cannot be moved by its own power and consequently blocks the street or interferes with the use of the street by other vehicles, it shall be the duty of its owner or operator to remove the vehicle by towing or otherwise within a reasonable time. 
(Code 1984, § 10-3-3; Code 1996, § 86-68)  
Sec. 48-68. - Regulations at specific locations. 
The mayor and council may from time to time regulate, restrict or prohibit the standing or parking of vehicles on specified streets or parts of streets or in specified areas. Signs or markings shall be installed and maintained giving notice of such regulations, restrictions and prohibitions, and it shall be unlawful to violate or fail to comply with the directions of any such sign or marking. 
(Code 1984, § 10-3-4; Code 1996, § 86-69)  
Sec. 48-69. - Vehicles to be parked within marked spaces. 
Whenever a space is marked off on any street for the parking of an individual vehicle, every vehicle there parked shall be parked within the lines bounding that space. 
(Code 1984, § 10-3-5; Code 1996, § 86-70)  
Sec. 48-70. - Manner of loading and unloading freight and merchandise. 
When practicable, merchandise and freight shall be discharged and loaded from the side of the vehicle nearest the curb. When such handling is impracticable because of the size or weight of the merchandise or freight, the vehicle may back to the curb, but it shall not stand at any angle which will interfere with the operation of other vehicles. 
(Code 1984, § 10-3-6; Code 1996, § 86-71)  
Secs. 48-71—48-98. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - TRUCK ROUTES 
 
Sec. 48-99. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Truck means all utility motor vehicles, which together with load, weigh in excess of 8,000 pounds and which are designed for the purpose of transporting materials, goods, freight, liquids, farm products, machinery, or other items upon the streets or roads of the city. 
(Code 1996, § 86-96)  
Sec. 48-100. - Designation of streets and parts of streets on which truck traffic is prohibited; signs required. 
When appropriate signs are erected giving notice, all trucks are hereby prohibited upon the streets or parts of streets so designated; however, such restriction shall not apply to trucks making local deliveries within the areas so posted when proper documentation is provided to verify such delivery. 
(Code 1996, § 86-97)  
Sec. 48-101. - Truck routes designated; use regulated. 
(a)  Truck routes within the city are hereby designated as follows: 
(1)  All state department of transportation (DOT) routes or federal highway system routes. 
(2)  Broome Avenue, from W. Third Street (GA 38 - US 84) to W. Crawford Street (GA 39 North). 
(3)  Crawford Street, from N. Tennille Ave. (GA 91) to Eastgate Avenue. 
(4)  Friendship Avenue, from E. Third Street (GA 38 - US 84) to Crawford Street. 
(b)  All trucks other than trucks making local deliveries within the city shall use the streets designated in this section and no others. 
(Code 1996, § 86-98)  
Sec. 48-102. - Vehicles weighing more than 8,000 pounds; authorized routes through city designated. 
All motor vehicles which, together with load, weigh in excess of 8,000 pounds, passing through, entering or leaving the city shall be restricted to such streets and parts of streets designated for such traffic by the mayor and council from time to time, subject to the exceptions set out in section 48-104. 
(Code 1996, § 86-99)  
Sec. 48-103. - Parking trucks in residential areas. 
(a)  All other provisions of this Code notwithstanding, it shall be unlawful for any person to stop or park a tractor, trailer or semitrailer upon any public street in the city in a residential area. 
(b)  For the purpose of this section, the term "residential area" shall mean any area within the city which is zoned R-A or R-B. 
(c)  For the purpose of this section, the term "trailer" or "semitrailer" shall mean a vehicle with or without motive power, other than a pole trailer, designed for carrying persons or property, and for being drawn by a motor vehicle and so constructed that some of the weight and that of its load rests upon or is carried by another vehicle. 
(d)  For the purpose of this section, the term "tractor" shall mean a motor vehicle designed for and principally used for the pulling and movement of trailers and semitrailers. 
(Ord. of 3-6-2007, § 86-99(a))  
Sec. 48-104. - Vehicles weighing more than 8,000 pounds; duties of operator; exceptions. 
Each motor vehicle, falling within the provisions of section 48-101, entering the city by any other road or street than those set out in section 48-101 shall proceed by the shortest route to the nearest street or part of a street set out in section 48-101 and shall proceed thence along the streets or parts of streets named through the city, subject to the following exceptions: 
(1)  Vehicles based within city. Motor vehicles having a base within the corporate limits may proceed to such base by the shortest route from the streets and parts of streets set out in section 48-101 and shall likewise return to such streets or parts of streets by the shortest route. 
(2)  Servicing vehicle. Motor vehicles may leave the streets and parts of streets set out in section 48-101 for the purpose of purchasing fuel and oil or securing repairs, but in such case they shall be permitted only upon such streets and parts of streets as are upon the most direct and shortest route from the streets and parts of streets set out in section 48-101. 
(3)  Loading and unloading. Motor vehicles may leave the streets and parts of streets set out in section 48-101 for the purpose of making deliveries consigned to points upon other streets, roads and alleys in the city and for the further purpose of receiving goods or other property for transportation from points upon other roads, streets and alleys within the corporate limits, but shall proceed to such points by the shortest direct route from the streets and parts of streets set out in section 48-101 and shall return by the same route. 
(Code 1996, § 86-100)  
Chapter 50 - UTILITIES[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Authority to acquire, construct, extend, operate, maintain and collect fees for water and sewerage systems, O.C.G.A. § 36-34-5. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 50-1. - Destruction or damage to utility apparatus; diversion of services. 
(a)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to destroy, damage or tamper with any meter, pipe, conduit, wire, line, post, lamp or other apparatus owned by the city or by any company engaged in the manufacture, distribution, or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service. 
(b)  It shall be unlawful for any person intentionally and without authority to prevent a meter from properly registering the quantity of such service supplied, or in any way to interfere with the proper action of the city, or of a company engaged in the manufacture, distribution, or sale of electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service, or intentionally to divert any of the services of the city, or such company, or otherwise intentionally and without authority to use or cause to be used, without the consent of the city or such company, any service manufactured, sold or distributed by the city or such company. 
(c)  No person shall knowingly receive the benefit of acts of diversion of, or tampering with, electricity, gas, water, telephone, cable television or other public service without the proper charge. 
(d)  Proof that any of the acts specified in this section was done on premises in possession of an accused, or that the accused received the benefit of any such act, shall be prima facie evidence that the accused committed such act or aided and abetted in the commission of such act. 
(Code 1984, § 6-1-1; Code 1996, § 90-1)  
Sec. 50-2. - Mandatory use of city's water system. 
No water service, aside from that provided through the city, may be constructed, reconstructed, maintained or otherwise established within the city so long as connection to the city water system is available. 
(Ord. No. 05-07-19, 6-4-2019)  
Sec. 50-3. - Water and sewer rates and charges. 
Water and sewer rates and charges shall be as established by the mayor and council. Failure to pay such rates and charges shall constitute a lien upon the property to which water and sewer service is rendered by the city. 
(Code 1984, § 6-1-2; Code 1996, § 90-2)  
Sec. 50-4. - Resale of water. 
The resale of water purchased from the city is expressly prohibited. 
(Code 1984, § 6-1-3; Code 1996, § 90-3)  
Secs. 50-5—50-24. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - WATER CONSERVATION 
 
Sec. 50-25. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Commercial means any type of building other than residential. 
Construction means the erection of a new building or the alteration of an existing building in connection with its repair or renovation or in connection with making an addition to an existing building and shall include the replacement of a malfunctioning, unserviceable, or obsolete faucet, showerhead, toilet or urinal in an existing building. 
Residential means any building or unit of a building intended for occupancy as a dwelling, but shall not include a hotel or motel. 
(Code 1996, § 90-31; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 1)  
Sec. 50-26. - Enforcement of article. 
This article shall be enforced by the office of the city building official. Citations for violations may be issued by the city building official. 
(Code 1996, § 90-32; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 6(a))  
Sec. 50-27. - Prohibited plumbing fixtures. 
No construction may be initiated within the city for any residential building of any type which employs a: 
(1)  Gravity tank-type, flushometer valve, or flushometer tank toilet that uses more than an average of 1? gallons of water per flush; 
(2)  Showerhead that allows a flow of more than an average of 2½ gallons of water per minute at 60 pounds per square inch of pressure; 
(3)  Urinal that uses more than an average of one gallon of water per flush; 
(4)  Lavatory faucet or lavatory replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than two gallons of water per minute; or 
(5)  Kitchen faucet or kitchen replacement aerator that allows a flow of more than 2½ gallons of water per minute. 
(Code 1996, § 90-34; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 1)  
Sec. 50-28. - Application of section 50-27 to residential and commercial construction. 
The requirements of section 50-27 shall apply to any residential construction and to any commercial construction which involves the repair or renovation of or addition to any existing building when such repair or renovation of or addition to such existing building includes replacement of toilets or showers, or both. 
(Code 1996, § 90-36; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 4)  
Sec. 50-29. - Exemptions. 
(a)  New construction and the repair or renovation of an existing building shall be exempt from the requirements of this article when: 
(1)  The repair or renovation of the existing building does not include the replacement of the plumbing or sewage system servicing toilets, faucets or showerheads within such existing buildings; 
(2)  Such plumbing or sewage system within such existing building, because of its capacity, design or installation, would not function properly if the toilets, faucets or showerheads required by this article were installed; 
(3)  Such system is a well or gravity flow from a spring and is owned privately by an individual for use in such individual's personal residence; or 
(4)  Units to be installed are: 
a.  Specifically designed for use by the handicapped; 
b.  Specifically designed to withstand unusual abuse or installation in a penal institution; or 
c.  Toilets for juveniles. 
(b)  The owner or his agent of a building undergoing new construction, repair or renovation who is entitled to an exemption as specified in subsection (a)(2), (a)(3) or (a)(4) of this section shall obtain the exemption by applying at the office of the city building official. A fee, as established by the mayor and council, shall be charged for the inspection and issuance of such exemption. 
(Code 1996, § 90-37; Ord. of 1-8-1991, § 5)  
Sec. 50-30. - Restriction on outdoor watering of landscape. 
Outdoor watering for purposes of planting, growing, managing, or maintaining ground cover, trees, shrubs, or other plants may occur only between the hours of 4:00 p.m. and 10:00 a.m.; provided, however, that this limitation shall not create any limitation upon the following outdoor water uses: 
(1)  Commercial raising, harvesting, or storing of crops; feeding, breeding, or managing livestock or poultry; commercial production or storing of feed for use in the production of livestock, including, but not limited to, cattle, calves, swine, hogs, goats, sheep, and rabbits, or for use in the production of poultry, including, but not limited to, chickens, hens, ratites, and turkeys; producing plants, trees, fowl, or animals; or commercial production of aquacultural, horticultural, dairy, livestock, poultry, eggs, and apiarian products or as otherwise defined in O.C.G.A. § 1-3-3; 
(2)  Capture and reuse of cooling system condensate or stormwater in compliance with applicable city ordinances and state guidelines; 
(3)  Reuse of gray water in compliance with O.C.G.A. § 31-3-5.2 and applicable local board of health regulations; 
(4)  Use of reclaimed waste water by a designated user from a system permitted by the environmental protection division of the state department of natural resources to provide reclaimed waste water; 
(5)  Watering personal food gardens; 
(6)  Watering new and replanted plant, seed, or turf in landscapes, golf courses, or sports turf fields during installation and for a period of 30 days immediately following the date of installation; 
(7)  Drip irrigation or irrigation using soaker hoses; 
(8)  Hand watering with a hose with automatic cutoff or handheld container; 
(9)  Use of water withdrawn from private water wells or surface water by an owner or operator of property if such well or surface water is on said property; 
(10)  Watering horticultural crops held for sale, resale, or installation; 
(11)  Watering athletic fields, golf courses, or public turf grass recreational areas; 
(12)  Installation, maintenance, or calibration of irrigation systems; or 
(13)  Hydroseeding. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § 90-38)  
Sec. 50-31. - Enforcement. 
The chief of police shall be the enforcement authority for this article. The county/city manager may also authorize other departments as may be deemed necessary to support enforcement. 
(Ord. of 11-2-2010, § 90-39)  
Secs. 50-32—50-50. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - SEWER USE  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 50-51. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Biochemical oxygen demand (BOD) means the calculated pounds of oxygen required to satisfy the five-day oxygen demand of 1,000,000 pounds of waste when tested in accordance with the procedure given in the latest edition of Standard Methods, published by the American Public Health Association. 
Building sewer means that part of the horizontal piping of a building drainage system extending from the outside of the building or end of the inside plumbing system to, and including, the connection with the city sewer system. 
City sewer system means such system composed of sanitary sewers, storm sewers, combined sewers, and sewage treatment works owned by a city. 
Combined sewer means a sewer intended to receive domestic sewage, treated or weak industrial wastes, surface water and stormwater. 
Domestic sewage means liquid from residences, business buildings or institutions which has a daily average of not more than 400 parts per million of BOD and a like amount of suspended solids. 
Industrial wastes means the liquid wastes resulting from processes employed in industrial establishments. An industrial waste will be considered weak when it contains less than 600 parts per million of BOD and suspended solids with no biologically toxic substances in it. 
pH means a measure of acidity or alkalinity which has a range of zero to 14. 
Sanitary sewer means a sewer intended to receive domestic sewage and treated or weak industrial waste without the admixture of surface water, stormwater, or unpolluted industrial process water. 
Storm sewer means a sewer intended to receive stormwater and surface water, street wash, or drainage and sewage and industrial wastes that have been completely purified. 
Suspended solids means the amount of material in suspension expressed in parts per million as determined by the Gooch crucible method given in the latest edition of Standard Methods, published by the American Public Health Association. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-1; Code 1996, § 90-66)  
Sec. 50-52. - Notice of violation. 
Whenever it is found that any person is violating any of the provisions or requirements set out in this article, a written notice, stating the offense and setting a time limit for the correction, shall be served upon the offender by the chief of police. The offender shall, within the time limit stated in the notice served upon him, forever cease all violations. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-9(a); Code 1996, § 90-67)  
Sec. 50-53. - Unsanitary deposits. 
It shall be unlawful for any owner or lessee to place, deposit, or permit to be deposited, any human excrement, garbage or any other organic waste upon the premises in an unsanitary manner. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-2; Code 1996, § 90-69)  
Sec. 50-54. - Discharge of polluted waters to streams, ditches or other underground water source. 
It shall be unlawful to discharge any untreated domestic sewage, industrial wastes or other polluted waters into any streams or ditches or any abandoned water well, or in any way to discharge sewage or industrial waste directly into underground waters within the area controlled by the city. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-3; Code 1996, § 90-70)  
Sec. 50-55. - Connection required where property within 200 feet of city sewer system. 
It shall be unlawful to construct or maintain any privy, privy vault, cesspool or septic tank intended for, or subject to, receiving organic wastes wherever a connection can be made to the city sewer system within 200 feet of any property. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-4; Code 1996, § 90-71)  
Sec. 50-56. - Connection to be at owner's expense; time within which to connect. 
The owner of all houses, buildings or properties situated within the city, abutting on any streets, alleys or parkways, in which there is now located or may hereafter be located any sewer pipeline of the sanitary sewer system of the city, is hereby required, at his own cost and expense, to install suitable toilet facilities and to connect those houses or buildings erected upon the property directly with the sanitary sewer system within three months after notice to do so. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-5; Code 1996, § 90-72)  
Sec. 50-57. - Connection of properties beyond city limits. 
Any person owning or controlling premises located beyond the corporate limits of the city and desiring to install a plumbing system on the premises and connect the system with the sanitary sewers of the city may do so by complying with the requirements of this article and by paying a monthly sewer rental charge. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-6; Code 1996, § 90-73)  
Sec. 50-58. - Method of disposal where sewer unavailable or connection cannot be made. 
Where city sewers are not available, or where a connection, as determined by the mayor and council, cannot be made, a septic tank or another method of private sewage disposal must be constructed according to the requirements of the state department of natural resources. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-7; Code 1996, § 90-74)  
Sec. 50-59. - City's right of entry. 
Authority is hereby granted to the duly authorized city employees to enter upon all properties to make all necessary inspections, tests, and measurements to ensure complete compliance with all of the regulations of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-8; Code 1996, § 90-75)  
Secs. 50-60—50-76. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - BUILDING SEWERS 
 
Sec. 50-77. - Separate sewers required; exception. 
A separate building sewer is required for each individual building or house, whether constructed as a detached unit or as one or a pair or row, but a single building sewer will be permitted to serve an apartment house or other multiple unit structure or industrial plant whose individual apartments or units are not subject to separate ownership. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-21; Code 1996, § 90-91)  
Sec. 50-78. - Connection to be at owner's expense; permit to connect required. 
Building sewers from the point of entry of the city sewer to the building shall be laid by the owner at his expense, but only after such connections have been authorized by a permit issued by the superintendent of utilities upon the submission of evidence by the owner that the discharge from the building sewer will comply with all of the regulations of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-22; Code 1996, § 90-92)  
Sec. 50-79. - Use of old building sewers and drains. 
Old building sewers and drains may be used in connection with new buildings or new plumbing only when they are approved through issue of a permit as for new construction of building sewers. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-23; Code 1996, § 90-93)  
Sec. 50-80. - Diameter and fall. 
All building sewers shall be not less than six inches in diameter and shall have a fall of not less than one-half inch per foot for six-inch pipe and not less than one-quarter inch per foot for pipe eight inches or over in diameter. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-24; Code 1996, § 90-94)  
Sec. 50-81. - Laying of pipes. 
All pipe shall be laid on a uniform grade and, where possible, on a straight line. Where the building sewer cannot be laid on a straight line, curved pipe shall be used for every deflection from a straight line of more than three inches per foot. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-25; Code 1996, § 90-95)  
Sec. 50-82. - Recommendation where sewer near large tree trunks. 
Where building sewers are within 20 feet of large tree trunks, it is recommended that cast iron pipe with leaded joints be used. All joints must be filled, made smooth and absolutely watertight. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-26; Code 1996, § 90-96)  
Sec. 50-83. - Manner of connecting building sewer to city sewer. 
The connection between the building sewer and the city sewer shall be made at the Y branch provided. If no Y branch was left in the city sewer for the building sewer and the city sewer is not over 12 inches in diameter, a Y branch shall be installed in the city sewer at the desired location by the owner of the building sewer. Where the city sewer is over 12 inches in diameter and where no Y branch was left for the building sewer, a hole may be cut in the city sewer large enough to receive the end of the building sewer and the connection made so that the building sewer enters the city sewer at an angle of 45 degrees. A 45-degree ell can be used to make this connection if the spigot end is cut to fit so that it does not extend past the inside surface of the city sewer. City sewers shall not be tapped below the centerline of the city sewer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-27; Code 1996, § 90-97)  
Sec. 50-84. - Backfilling. 
In backfilling, the material shall be carefully placed and packed around the pipe to provide a uniform bearing and to keep the pipe in proper position. No stones, bricks or like material shall be used in the backfill until there has been a depth of at least 18 inches of fine earth or gravel placed over the pipe. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-28; Code 1996, § 90-98)  
Sec. 50-85. - Maintenance of barricades and lights. 
Proper barricades and lights must be maintained on the banks of the trenches to guard the public against accidents during construction or connection of the building sewer. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-29; Code 1996, § 90-99)  
Secs. 50-86—50-113. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - DISCHARGE OF DELETERIOUS WASTES 
 
Sec. 50-114. - Prohibited discharges to sanitary sewers. 
No stormwater from pavements, areaways, roofs or other sources shall be admitted to the sanitary sewers which are designed to be used exclusively as carriers of domestic sewage and suitable industrial wastes. The same shall apply to unpolluted process or cooling waters. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-41; Code 1996, § 90-116)  
Sec. 50-115. - Discharge of stormwater. 
Stormwater shall be admitted only to such sewers as are specifically designed as combined sewers or storm sewers. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-42; Code 1996, § 90-117)  
Sec. 50-116. - Discharge of liquids and gases above certain temperatures. 
No person shall discharge into any sewer any liquid or gas having a temperature greater than 100 degrees Fahrenheit. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-43; Code 1996, § 90-118)  
Sec. 50-117. - Prohibited discharges to public sewers. 
No person shall discharge or deposit any of the following described waste materials into any sanitary, storm or combined sewer: 
(1)  Liquid waste materials which contain more than 100 parts of oil or grease per million parts, determined by weight; 
(2)  Liquid waste material in which the suspended solids exceed 600 parts per million, determined by weight; 
(3)  Any petroleum product or other product which, by reason of its nature or quality, may cause a fire or explosion, or in any way be injurious to persons or to the sewer system; 
(4)  Any industrial waste with a pH of less than 5.5 or greater than 9.0; 
(5)  Any industrial waste with a five-day biochemical oxygen demand of more than 600 parts per million, by weight; 
(6)  Any industrial waste containing any toxic or poisonous substance in a sufficient quantity to interfere with the biologic processes used in the sewage treatment process or that will pass through the sewage treatment plant and harm persons or aquatic life in the receiving stream; 
(7)  Any unshredded garbage, scraps, or vegetables; or 
(8)  Any straw, ashes, cinders, shavings, butchers' offal, rags, feathers or any other material capable of causing obstructions, nuisance, or injury to or interference with the sewer system. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-44; Code 1996, § 90-119)  
Sec. 50-118. - Sampling manholes. 
(a)  Required in certain instances. Every building sewer discharging industrial wastes from any plant or establishment into the city sewer system may be required, at the discretion of the approving authorities, to have a sampling manhole for the purpose of ascertaining the quality and quantity of the waste flowing in the building sewer. 
(b)  Location; construction. The manhole shall be located at a suitable and satisfactory location and it shall be not less than three feet in inside diameter and built in a manner designated by the superintendent of utilities. 
(c)  Cost. The cost of the manhole shall be borne by the applicant, but the manhole shall become the property of the city government. 
(d)  Maintenance. The responsibility for maintaining the manhole in a safe condition shall be assumed and remain with the owner of the property at all times. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-45; Code 1996, § 90-120)  
Sec. 50-119. - Pretreatment of wastes. 
Whenever the industrial wastes do not meet the requirements of this article, or the quantity of biochemical oxygen demand is one-tenth of the total of the entire wastes of the city, the industry will be required to pretreat its waste or enter into a one-year agreement with the city to treat the waste as discharged. 
(Code 1984, § 6-2-46; Code 1996, § 90-121)  
Secs. 50-120—50-136. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - UNDERGROUND UTILITY INSTALLATIONS 
 
Sec. 50-137. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this article, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Damage means the substantial weakening of structural or lateral support of an underground utility, penetration or destruction of any protective coating, housing or other protective device of an underground utility, and the partial or complete severance of an underground utility. 
Demolish or demolition means any operation by which a structure or mass of material is wrecked, razed, rendered, moved or removed by means of any tool, equipment or discharge of explosives. 
Excavate or excavation means an operation for the purpose of the movement or removal of earth, rock or other materials in or on the ground by use of mechanized equipment or by discharge of explosives, and including augering, backfilling, digging, drilling, grading, plowing-in pulling-in, ripping, scraping, trenching and tunneling, but not including the tilling of soil for agricultural purposes. 
Mechanized equipment means equipment operated by means of mechanical power, including trenchers, bulldozers, power shovels, augers, backhoes, scrapers, drills, cable and pipe plows and other equipment used for plowing in or pulling in cable or pipe. 
Operator means any city or utility commission who owns or operates a utility. 
Utility means any line, system or facility used for producing, storing, conveying, transmitting or distributing communication, electricity, gas, petroleum, petroleum products, hazardous liquids, water, steam or sewage. 
Working day means every day, except Saturdays, Sundays and national and legal state holidays. 
(Code 1984, § 6-3-1; Code 1996, § 90-141)  
Sec. 50-138. - Excavation and demolition permits; effect. 
A permit issued pursuant to the law authorizing excavation or demolition operations shall not be deemed to relieve a person from the responsibility for complying with the provisions of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 6-3-2; Code 1996, § 90-143)  
Sec. 50-139. - Prohibited acts. 
Except as provided in section 50-142, no person may excavate in a street, highway, public space, or a private easement of an operator, or near the location of a utility installed on the premises of a customer served by such utility, or demolish a building, without having first ascertained, in the manner prescribed in sections 50-140 and 50-141, the location of all underground utilities in the area that would be affected by the proposed excavation or demolition. Each operator shall maintain a list of all underground utilities and plants or maps showing their location. 
(Code 1984, § 6-3-3; Code 1996, § 90-144)  
Sec. 50-140. - Notice of intent. 
(a)  Except as provided in section 50-142, before commencing any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 50-139, each person responsible for such excavation or demolition shall serve written or telephone notice of intent to excavate or demolish at least three but not more than ten full working days to the state utility protection center prior to any such excavation or demolition. 
(b)  The written or telephonic notice required by subsection (a) of this section must contain the name, address and telephone number of the person filing the notice of intent, and, if different, the person responsible for the excavation or demolition, the starting date, anticipated duration and type of excavation or demolition operation to be conducted, the location of the proposed excavation or demolition, and whether or not explosives are to be used. 
(c)  If notification required by this section is made by telephone, an adequate record of such notification shall be maintained by the superintendent at the city hall. 
(Code 1984, § 6-3-4; Code 1996, § 90-145)  
Sec. 50-141. - Response to notice of intent. 
Each operator or designated representative notified in accordance with section 50-140 shall, not less than two working days in advance of the proposed excavation or demolition, unless a shorter period is provided by agreement between the person responsible for the excavation or demolition and the operator or designated representative, supply, by use of maps when appropriate, the following information to the person responsible for the excavation or demolition: 
(1)  The approximate location and description of all of its underground utilities which may be damaged as a result of the excavation or demolition; 
(2)  The location and description of all utility markers indicating the approximate location of the underground utilities; and 
(3)  Any other information that would assist that person in locating and thereby avoiding damage to the underground utilities, including providing adequate temporary marking indicating the approximate location of the underground utility in locations where permanent utility markers do not exist. 
(Code 1984, § 6-3-5; Code 1996, § 90-146)  
Sec. 50-142. - Emergency. 
Compliance with the notice requirements of section 50-140 is not required of persons responsible for emergency excavation or demolition to ameliorate an imminent danger to life, health or property; provided, however, that such persons give, as soon as practicable, oral notice of the emergency excavation or demolition to each operator having underground utilities located in the area where such excavation or demolition is to be performed and requests emergency assistance from each operator so identified in locating and providing immediate protection to its underground utilities. An imminent danger to life, health, or property exists whenever there is a substantial likelihood that loss of life, health, or property will result before the procedures under sections 50-140 and 50-141 can be fully complied with. 
(Code 1984, § 6-3-6; Code 1996, § 90-147)  
Sec. 50-143. - Damage. 
(a)  Except as provided by subsection (b) of this section, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 50-139 that results in any damage to an underground utility shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator of such utility of the location and nature of the damage and shall allow the operator reasonable time to accomplish necessary repairs before completing the excavation or demolition in the immediate area of such utility. 
(b)  Each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 50-139 that results in damage to an underground utility permitting the escape of any flammable, toxic or corrosive gas or liquid shall, immediately upon discovery of such damage, notify the operator, police and fire departments, and take any other action as may be reasonably necessary to protect persons and property and to minimize the hazards until the arrival of the operator's personnel or police and fire departments. 
(Code 1984, § 6-3-8; Code 1996, § 90-148)  
Sec. 50-144. - Precautions to avoid damage. 
In addition to the notification requirements of section 50-140, each person responsible for any excavation or demolition operation designated in section 50-139 shall: 
(1)  Plan the excavation or demolition to avoid damage to or minimize interference with underground utilities in and near the construction area; 
(2)  Maintain a clearance between an underground utility and the cutting edge or point of any mechanized equipment, taking into account the known limit of control of such cutting edge or point, as may be reasonably necessary to avoid damage to such utility; and 
(3)  Provide such support for underground utilities in and near the construction area, including during backfill operations, as may be reasonably necessary for the protection of such utilities. 
(Code 1984, § 6-3-7; Code 1996, § 90-149)  
Secs. 50-145—50-171. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - CATV FRANCHISE 
 
Sec. 50-172. - Fee per Consumer Choice for Television Act. 
The city shall collect a fee of five percent of the operator's gross revenues as provided by law, for any cable or video state franchise issued in the corporate boundaries by the state pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 36-76-1 et seq., known as the "Consumer Choice for Television Act" of 2007. 
(Res. of 7-1-2008)  
Chapter 52 - VEHICLES FOR HIRE  
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Secs. 52-1—52-18. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - TAXICABS  
DIVISION 1. - GENERALLY 
 
Sec. 52-19. - Presumption of operation. 
Any automobile marked, labeled or identified by lettering or numbers as a taxicab and found upon the streets of the city, or regularly used for transportation of passengers, shall be presumed to be used as a taxicab and for transportation of passengers for hire, for the purpose of this article. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-47; Code 1996, § 94-31)  
Sec. 52-20. - Identification and marking of vehicles. 
(a)  All motor vehicles operated as taxicabs in the city shall be marked on the outside with the following information: 
(1)  The name of the owner; 
(2)  The word "taxicab" or "taxi"; 
(3)  If a fleet or more than one taxicab is operated by one company or owner, a number shall be assigned to each vehicle, which shall be individual and identifying; and 
(4)  Any other information which may be deemed necessary by the mayor and council. 
(b)  The markings described in subsection (a) of this section shall be stenciled or painted on each side of the taxicab in a permanent paint of contrasting color to the color of the vehicle or affixed by decal or some like manner. The letters of such markings shall not be less than three inches in height and must be printed so that the markings may be easily read at a distance of at least 50 feet. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-21; Code 1996, § 94-32)  
Sec. 52-21. - Certificate of vehicle inspection required. 
The owner and operator of each taxicab licensed to operate within the city shall, before having his license either granted or renewed, produce to the city manager a written inspection report from a qualified automobile mechanic engaged in business within the city. Such mechanic shall be approved by the mayor and council, showing that the brakes and lights on each unit operated by him are in safe, serviceable condition. The license shall in no case be granted until this section is complied with. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-22; Code 1996, § 94-33)  
Sec. 52-22. - Sale, trade or exchange of vehicle. 
(a)  Notice required. If any owner or operator of a taxicab in the city shall sell, trade or exchange any taxicab being operated in the city and substitute another car therefor, it shall be the duty of the seller to notify the city clerk within ten hours of the sale, trade or exchange of the vehicle, giving the number under which the car traded is identified in the policy of liability insurance on file with the mayor and council. 
(b)  Transfer of insurance required. It shall also be the duty of such owner or operator of the car substituted to furnish the clerk written endorsement of the insurance company issuing the public liability policy, the endorsement to be attached as an endorsement on the liability policy, showing that the car substituted is insured under the terms of the liability insurance. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-23; Code 1996, § 94-34)  
Sec. 52-23. - Drivers—Minimum age. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city who is less than 19 years of age. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-24; Code 1996, § 94-35)  
Sec. 52-24. - Drivers—Effect of felony conviction. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city who has been convicted of an offense constituting a felony or who has pleaded guilty upon a charge of having committed an offense constituting a felony. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-25; Code 1996, § 94-36)  
Sec. 52-25. - Drivers—Driving under influence of intoxicating liquor. 
It shall be unlawful for any person licensed to drive a taxicab under the provisions of this article to operate such taxicab while he is under the influence of intoxicating liquor. A violation of this section shall be grounds for license revocation. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-26; Code 1996, § 94-37)  
Sec. 52-26. - Transporting alcoholic beverages. 
(a)  Prohibited. It shall be unlawful for any person operating a licensed taxicab service in the city, or any driver operating a taxicab in the city under the license, to knowingly haul wine, liquor or beer in such taxicab, provided that this section shall not apply to a driver transporting a fare-paying passenger in possession of alcoholic beverages so long as such alcoholic beverages remain in the possession and control of the passenger and are not opened within the vehicle. 
(b)  Revocation of license. If the driver of any taxicab in the city knowingly allows or permits intoxicating liquor, wine or beer to be hauled in the taxicab operated by him in violation of this section, the license issued by the city shall automatically be revoked. If any license is forfeited and revoked because a driver is guilty of hauling intoxicating liquor, wine or beer, and desires to be heard, he shall have a right to appeal to the mayor and council for a hearing and be heard at such time and place as the mayor and council shall designate. Pending the hearing before the mayor and council, the licensee shall not operate the taxicab service under and by virtue of any such license. 
(c)  Forfeiture of driver's rights. It shall be unlawful for any driver guilty of knowingly hauling liquor, wine or beer in any taxicab driven by him to again drive a taxicab in the city. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-27; Code 1996, § 94-38)  
Sec. 52-27. - Number of passengers. 
No person shall drive a taxicab upon the streets of the city when such vehicle contains more persons than such vehicle is designed to carry. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-28; Code 1996, § 94-39)  
Sec. 52-28. - Receiving and discharging passengers. 
Drivers of taxicabs shall not receive or discharge passengers in the roadway but shall drive to the sidewalk or curb on the right-hand side of such roadway, and there receive or discharge passengers. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-29; Code 1996, § 94-40)  
Secs. 52-29—52-59. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 2. - OCCUPATIONAL LICENSE 
 
Sec. 52-60. - Required for drivers. 
It shall be unlawful to drive a taxicab or vehicle of any kind for the purpose of transporting passengers or property for hire without first applying for and obtaining an occupational license therefor. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-1; Code 1996, § 94-56)  
Sec. 52-61. - Required to engage in taxicab business. 
It shall be unlawful for any person to engage in the business of furnishing taxicab service in the city and maintaining a place of business in the city without first obtaining a license approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-9; Code 1996, § 94-57)  
Sec. 52-62. - Application; manner and form. 
Application for a taxicab driver's license shall be made in such manner and form as prescribed by the city manager. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-2; Code 1996, § 94-58)  
Sec. 52-63. - Statement to accompany application. 
Application for a license to drive a taxicab shall be supported by a sworn statement of the applicant setting forth the following: 
(1)  Name and address of the applicant; 
(2)  The applicant's age; 
(3)  The applicant's habits as to sobriety; and 
(4)  Whether or not the applicant has been convicted of any offense against the laws of the state or of any city, and particularly whether or not he has been convicted of violating any traffic regulation of any state or city. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-3; Code 1996, § 94-59)  
Sec. 52-64. - Approval of application. 
No license shall be issued to drive a taxicab until the application has been approved by the city manager. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-4; Code 1996, § 94-60)  
Sec. 52-65. - Personal appearance of applicant. 
The applicant shall submit himself personally before the city manager, if required, or if he so desires, at the time the application for a taxicab driver's license is considered. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-5; Code 1996, § 94-61)  
Sec. 52-66. - Action on application; issuance and denial; fees. 
If, upon a consideration of an application for a license to drive a taxicab, the city manager shall decide that the applicant is qualified and entitled to operate a taxicab and in all manners in full compliance with all local, state and federal laws, having due regard to the safety and morals of the public, the application shall be granted and a license issued by the city clerk, upon payment of the business or occupation tax legally demandable. If the city manager shall determine that the applicant is not a fit and proper person to be so licensed, having due regard for the safety and morals of the public, the mayor and council shall refuse such license. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-6; Code 1996, § 94-62)  
Sec. 52-67. - Suspension or revocation authorized for good cause. 
(a)  The city manager shall have authority to suspend or revoke any and all licenses issued under this article, for good cause shown, or in the event the licensee fails to maintain compliance with any local, state or federal law relevant to the operation of the licensed business, after five days' notice given the licensee, at either a regular or special meeting. It shall be unlawful for any licensee to operate during the period of suspension. 
(b)  The term "good cause" shall mean any violation of this Code or of any state statutes pertaining to the operation of motor vehicles. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-10; Code 1996, § 94-65)  
Sec. 52-68. - Revocation for failure to provide service. 
It is the declared policy of the mayor and council that, in licensing the operation of vehicles under this article, a reasonable service will be rendered to the general public and to the inhabitants of the city by the persons holding those licenses, and if such service cannot or will not be rendered by any person holding such license, the license should be revoked. Among the causes justifying such revocation shall be unreasonable failure or refusal to render such service. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-12; Code 1996, § 94-67)  
Secs. 52-69—52-94. - Reserved.  
DIVISION 3. - INSURANCE 
 
Sec. 52-95. - Compliance with division required. 
It shall be unlawful to operate upon the public roads, streets and highways within the corporate limits of the city any taxicab which is subject to the regulations and ordinances of the city unless such operation is done in conformity to this division with respect to insurance protection. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-41; Code 1996, § 94-86)  
Sec. 52-96. - Coverage required. 
Before using or operating any taxicab which is subject to the provisions of this division for transporting passengers, and before allowing any other person to do so within the city upon the roads, streets and highways, the owner shall provide for each vehicle to be so used, and for the benefit of any and all persons having claims against the owner for damage by way of loss of life, damage to property, and/or for injury to the person, minimum liability insurance coverage as follows: 
Type of Coverage 	Amount 
Minimum personal injury coverage for injuries 	$100,000.00 
Minimum property damage coverage 	  50,000.00 
 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-42; Code 1996, § 94-87)  
Sec. 52-97. - Approval. 
Insurance coverage required by this division shall be subject to approval by the city manager and shall be with a company satisfactory to the city manager and in a form satisfactory to the city manager. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-43; Code 1996, § 94-88)  
Sec. 52-98. - Deposit of policies with city manager. 
It shall be the duty of the owner to deposit such policies with the city manager, where they shall remain while in force. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-44; Code 1996, § 94-89)  
Sec. 52-99. - Notice of cancellation required. 
It shall be the duty of the insurer to give reasonable notice to the city before cancelling any coverage. Any company failing to do so will not be considered an acceptable company for the purpose of furnishing such coverage. 
(Code 1984, § 9-3-45; Code 1996, § 94-90)  
Chapter 54 - ZONING[1] 
Footnotes: 
--- (1) --- 
State Law reference— Zoning Procedures Law, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-1 et seq.; local government zoning powers, O.C.G.A. § 36-66-2; authority to adopt plans and exercise the power of zoning, Ga. Const. art. IX, § II, ¶ IV. 
 
ARTICLE I. - IN GENERAL 
 
Sec. 54-1. - Definitions. 
The following words, terms and phrases, when used in this chapter, shall have the meanings ascribed to them in this section, except where the context clearly indicates a different meaning: 
Accessory use means a use customarily incidental, and subordinate to, the principal use or building and located on the same lot with such principal use or building. 
Advertising sign, outdoor, means a structural poster panel or painted sign, either freestanding or attached to the outside of a building, for the purpose of conveying information, knowledge, or ideas to the public about a subject either related or unrelated to the premises upon which located. 
Alteration means any change in the supporting members of a building (such as bearing walls, beams, columns or girders) except such change as may be required for its safety; any addition to a building; any change in use from that of one district classification to another; or any change of a building from one location to another. 
Building means any structure having a roof supported by columns or by walls and intended for shelter, housing or enclosure of persons, animals or chattels. The term "building" includes the term "structure." 
Building, accessory, means a building subordinate, or supplemental to, the main building on a lot and used for purposes customarily incidental to that of a main or principal building and located on the same lot therewith. 
Building, principal, means a building in which is conducted the main use of the lot on which the building is located. 
Business sign means an attached or freestanding structure which directs attention to a business or profession conducted on the premises. 
Centerline of street means the line surveyed and monumented by the mayor and council as such or, if a centerline has not been surveyed and monumented, it shall be that line running midway between the outside curbs or ditches of the street. 
Customary home occupation means an occupation or profession customarily carried on by an occupant of a dwelling unit as a secondary use which is clearly incidental to the dwelling unit for residential purposes, and carried on wholly within the principal building, and provided that not more than 30 percent of the floor area of the principal building is used for such purposes. 
Dwelling means a building designed, arranged, or used for a permanent living quarters for one or more persons. 
Dwelling unit means a building, or portion of a building, providing complete living facilities for one family. 
Family means one or more persons occupying a dwelling and living as a single house-keeping unit. 
Lot means a portion or parcel of land devoted to a common use or occupied by a building or group of buildings devoted to a common use, together with the customary accessories and open spaces belonging to the same. The term "lot" includes the term "plot" or "parcel." 
Lot, depth of, means the mean horizontal distance between the front and rear lot lines, measured in the general direction of the side lot lines. 
Lot, width of, means the distance between side lot lines measured at the building line. 
Map means the zoning map of the city on file in the office of the building official. 
Nonconforming use means a building, structure or use of land existing at the time of enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, and which does not conform to the regulations of the district in which it is located. 
Sight distance means the length of roadway visible to the driver of a passenger vehicle at any given point on the roadway when the view is unobstructed by traffic. 
Street means a public or private way which affords the principal means of access to abutting properties. 
Structure means anything constructed or erected, the use of which requires location on the ground, or attachment to something having location on the ground. 
Used or occupied, as applied to any land or building, includes the words "intended, arranged or designed to be used or occupied." 
Yard means a space on the same lot with a principal building open, unoccupied and unobstructed by buildings or structures from ground to sky, except where encroachments and accessory buildings are expressly permitted. 
Yard, front, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot, and situated between the street and the front line of the building projected to side lines of the lot. 
Yard, rear, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, extending the full width of the lot and situated between the rear line of the lot and the rear line of the building projected to side lines of the lot. 
Yard, side, means an open, unoccupied space on the same lot with a principal building, situated between the building and the side lot line of the lot and extending from the front yard to the rear yard. Any lot line not a rear line or a front line shall be deemed a side line. 
(Code 1984, §§ 8-6-2, 8-6-3; Code 1996, § 98-1)  
Secs. 54-2—54-22. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE II. - ADMINISTRATION, ENFORCEMENT AND PENALTIES 
 
Sec. 54-23. - Zoning enforcement officer. 
The provisions of this chapter shall be administered and enforced by the building official. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-71; Code 1996, § 98-31)  
Sec. 54-24. - Invalidated without construction progress. 
Any building permit issued shall become invalid unless the work authorized by it shall have been commenced within six months of its date of issue or if the work authorized by it is suspended or abandoned for a period of one year. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-74; Code 1996, § 98-34)  
Sec. 54-25. - Certificate of occupancy required. 
(a)  A certificate of occupancy issued by the building official is required in advance of occupancy or use of: 
(1)  A building hereafter erected, altered or moved. 
(2)  A change of use of any building or land. 
(3)  Each nonconforming use created by the passage of and subsequent amendments to this chapter. Such nonconforming use shall obtain a certificate of occupancy within 30 days of the date of such passage or amendments. 
(b)  Upon payment of any required fees, the building official shall sign and issue a certificate of occupancy if the proposed use of land or building, as stated on the certificate of occupancy, is signed by the owner or his appointed agent, is found to conform to the applicable provisions of this chapter, and if the building, as finally constructed, complies with the plans submitted for the building permit. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-75; Code 1996, § 98-35)  
Sec. 54-26. - Denial of certificate of occupancy. 
A certificate of occupancy shall not be issued unless the proposed use of a building or land conforms to the applicable provisions of this chapter, or unless the building, as finally constructed, complies with the sketch or plan upon which the building permit was issued. The building official shall state in writing the reasons for denying such certificate of occupancy. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-76; Code 1996, § 98-36)  
Sec. 54-27. - Other remedies. 
In case any building is erected, constructed, reconstructed, altered, repaired, converted or maintained, or any building or land is used in violation of this chapter, the building official, or any other appropriate city authority, or any person who would be damaged by such violation, in addition to other remedies, may institute injunction, mandamus or other appropriate action in proceeding to prevent the violation in the case of each building or use of land. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-78; Code 1996, § 98-38)  
Secs. 54-28—54-57. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE III. - ESTABLISHMENT OF DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 54-58. - Division into districts. 
For the purpose of this chapter, the city is divided into five districts designated as follows: 
(1)  R-A Residence District; 
(2)  R-B General Residence District; 
(3)  C-1 Central Business District; 
(4)  C-2 General Business District; and 
(5)  M Industrial District. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-11; Code 1996, § 98-66)  
Sec. 54-59. - District boundaries. 
The boundaries of each district are shown on a map entitled "Zoning Map for Donalsonville, Georgia," adopted September 24, 1962, as may be amended from time to time, and certified by the city clerk. Such map and all explanatory matter thereon accompanies and is hereby made a part of this chapter. The map shall be retained in the office of the city clerk. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-12; Code 1996, § 98-67) 
Editor's note— The zoning map is not included in this Code, but is on file in the office of the city clerk and is available for inspection during regular office hours.  
Sec. 54-60. - Map amendment. 
If, in accordance with the provisions of this chapter, changes are made in district boundaries or other subject matter portrayed on the zoning map, such change shall be made on the official zoning map promptly after the amendment has been approved by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-13; Code 1996, § 98-68)  
Sec. 54-61. - Rules for determining boundaries. 
Where uncertainty exists with respect to the boundaries of any of the districts enumerated in section 54-58 and as shown on the zoning map, the following rules shall apply: 
(1)  Where district boundaries are indicated as approximately following the centerlines of streets or highways, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines, such centerlines, street lines, or highway right-of-way lines shall be construed to be the boundaries. 
(2)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they approximately follow the lot lines, such lot lines shall be construed to be the boundaries. 
(3)  Where district boundaries are so indicated that they are approximately parallel to the centerlines of streets, highways or railroads, or rights-of-way of same, such district boundaries shall be construed as being parallel thereto and at such distance therefrom as indicated on the zoning map. If no distance is given, such dimension shall be determined by the use of the scale shown on the zoning map. 
(4)  Where a district boundary line, as appearing on the zoning map, divides a lot in single ownership at the time of this enactment, the district requirements for the least restricted portion of such lot shall be deemed to apply to the whole thereof, provided that such extensions shall not include any part of such a lot more than 35 feet beyond the district boundary line. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-14; Code 1996, § 98-69)  
Secs. 54-62—54-80. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE IV. - APPLICATION OF REGULATIONS 
 
Sec. 54-81. - Use. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no building, structure or land shall hereafter be used or occupied, and no building or structure or part thereof shall hereafter be erected, constructed, reconstructed, moved or structurally altered unless in conformity with all of the regulations specified in this chapter for the district in which it is located. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-21; Code 1996, § 98-96)  
Sec. 54-82. - Height and density. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no building or other structure shall hereafter be erected or altered to: 
(1)  Exceed the height limits; 
(2)  Accommodate or house a greater number of families or occupy a smaller lot area per family; or 
(3)  Have narrower or smaller rear yards, front yards, side yards or other open spaces than are required or specified in this chapter; or in any other manner contrary to the provisions of this chapter. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-22; Code 1996, § 98-97)  
Sec. 54-83. - Yard service to one building. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no part of a yard, or other open space, or off-street parking or loading space required about, or in connection with, any building for the purpose of complying with this chapter, shall be included as part of a yard, open space, or off-street parking or loading space similarly required for any other building. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-23; Code 1996, § 98-98)  
Sec. 54-84. - One principal building per lot. 
Except as provided in this chapter, every building or structure hereafter erected shall be located on a lot or tract. There shall not be more than one principal building on one lot, plus its approved accessory buildings, except as provided in section 54-179. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-24; Code 1996, § 98-99)  
Sec. 54-85. - Reduction of lot area. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no lot, even though it may consist of one or more adjacent lots of record, shall be reduced in size so that the lot width or depth, front, side or rear yard, lot area per family or other requirements of this chapter are not maintained. This section shall not apply when a portion of a lot is acquired for public purposes. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-25; Code 1996, § 98-100)  
Sec. 54-86. - Street frontage. 
Except as provided in this chapter, no principal building shall be erected on any lot which does not have immediate frontage on at least one street for a distance of not less than 25 feet. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-26; Code 1996, § 98-101)  
Sec. 54-87. - Corner lots. 
Except as provided in this chapter, minimum side yard requirements for corner lots shall be not less than the minimum front yard requirements for such lots. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-27; Code 1996, § 98-102)  
Secs. 54-88—54-117. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE V. - PROVISIONS APPLICABLE TO ALL DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 54-118. - Classification of streets. 
For the purpose of this chapter, all streets in the city are hereby divided into three classes: 
(1)  Major streets; 
(2)  Collector streets; and 
(3)  Minor streets. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-41; Code 1996, § 98-131)  
Sec. 54-119. - Continuance of a nonconforming use. 
Any building, structure or use of land existing at the time of the enactment of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived, or subsequent amendment of this chapter, but not in conformity with its use regulations and provisions may be continued with the following limitations. Such building, structure or use shall not be: 
(1)  Changed to another nonconforming use; 
(2)  Extended or enlarged, except in conformity with this chapter; 
(3)  Re-established after discontinuance for one year; or 
(4)  Rebuilt, altered, or repaired after damage exceeding 75 percent of its assessed value for city tax purposes. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-42; Code 1996, § 98-132)  
Sec. 54-120. - Off-street automobile parking or storage. 
(a)  Off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be provided on every lot on which any of the following uses are hereafter established; or, provided no space is available on the lot, such space shall be provided within 500 feet of such uses. Off-street automobile parking or storage space shall be provided with vehicular access to a street or alley and shall be equal in area to at least the minimum requirements for the specific use as set forth in this section. 
Off-Street Automobile Parking or Storage Minimum Requirements 
Use Classification 	Minimum Requirements 
Any residential structure 	One space for each four seats in the main assembly room. 
Roominghouses and boardinghouses, hotels 	One space for each two rooms. 
Churches, fraternal organizations, and other places of public assembly 	One space for each four seats in the main assembly room. 
Tourist homes, tourist courts or motels 	One space for each accommodation. 
Hospitals, nursing homes or similar institutions 	One space for each two beds intended for patients, plus one space for each three employees. 
Retail businesses 	One space for each 250 square feet of total floor area. 
Offices, including banks 	One space for each 300 square feet of total floor space. 
Filling stations 	Two spaces for each gas pump, plus three spaces for each grease rack or similar facility. 
Wholesaling 	One space for each two employees. 
Industrial 	One space for each two employees at maximum employment on a single shift. 
 
(b)  For the purpose of this chapter, a parking or storage space shall not be less than 200 square feet of area with appropriate dimensions for the parking of an automobile, excluding all driveways and entrances and exits. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-43; Code 1996, § 98-133)  
Sec. 54-121. - Off-street loading and unloading space. 
Every building or structure used for business, trade or industry shall provide space, as indicated in this section, for the loading and unloading of vehicles off the street or public alley. Such space shall have access to an alley or if there is no alley, to a street. 
Off-Street Loading and Unloading Space Minimum Requirements 
Use Classification 	Minimum Requirements 
Retail businesses 	One space of 300 square feet for each 3,000 square feet of floor area. 
Wholesale and industry 	One space of 550 square feet for each 10,000 square feet of floor area. 
Bus and truck terminals 	Sufficient space to accommodate the maximum number of buses or trucks to be stored or to be loading or unloading at the terminal at any one time. 
 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-44; Code 1996, § 98-134)  
Secs. 54-122—54-140. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VI. - USE REQUIREMENTS BY DISTRICTS 
 
Sec. 54-141. - Residence District (R-A). 
Within an R-A Residence District, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Single-family residences, but not including residential trailers. 
(2)  Two-family residences. 
(3)  Churches and their customary related uses, provided that they: 
a.  Are located on a lot fronting a major or collector street; and 
b.  Are placed not less than 50 feet from any property line and are separated from such property line by a planted buffer strip at least ten feet wide. 
(4)  Public and private schools offering general education courses. 
(5)  Municipal, county, state, federal and other public uses, including parks and playgrounds. 
(6)  Accessory uses and customary home occupations, including professional offices of a doctor, dentist, lawyer, architect or similar use, provided that such uses and occupations shall be conducted within a principal building and that not more than 30 percent of the floor area of the principal building shall be used for such purpose. There shall be no external evidence of such use except a non-illuminated identification sign not exceeding two square feet in area. 
(7)  Accessory buildings, provided such shall be permitted only in a rear yard and shall not be less than five feet from any property line. 
(8)  Golf courses and private clubs of not less than 40 acres. 
(9)  Public utility stations, such as electrical substations, sewage pumping stations, etc., if such stations are essential for the service of the immediate area and subject to the following conditions: Such uses shall be enclosed within a woven wire fence not less than four feet high; and shall be suitably landscaped and the storage of vehicles and equipment on the premises shall be prohibited. 
(10)  Special home occupations. 
a.  Includes mail and online sales occupations and activities when conducted entirely within a dwelling and/or accessory building only by the residents thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling and/or accessory building for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof, as may be lawfully established under the terms of this zoning ordinance. 
b.  General provisions. In districts where permitted, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  The total gross floor area of a dwelling unit devoted to a special home occupation shall not exceed 750 square feet or 25 percent of the gross floor space of the dwelling, whichever is less. An accessory building used for a special home occupation shall be constructed entirely in accordance with and meet all applicable building codes and regulations. Portable buildings (non-stick-built buildings constructed off-site) cannot be used in conjunction with a special home occupation. 
2.  The exterior appearances of the dwelling or accessory building must remain that of a dwelling or accessory building to a dwelling. No internal or external alternations inconsistent with the residential use of the buildings may be permitted. 
3.  Vehicles kept on site in association with the special home occupation shall be used by residents only. Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the special home occupation. 
4.  No special home occupation shall generate traffic, sound, smell, vibration, light or dust that is offensive or that creates a nuisance. No equipment that interferes with radio, television or other wireless reception shall be allowed. Chemical, electrical or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment and which is used primarily for commercial purposes shall not be permitted. 
5.  No patrons or customers shall be allowed to visit the dwelling and/or accessory building where the special home occupation is conducted for the purpose of conducting either wholesale or retail business transactions. 
6.  There shall be no display, and no stock-in-trade, nor commodity sold or stored on the premises, in connection with a special home occupation. 
7.  There shall be no signs permitted on the premises in conjunction with a special home occupation. 
8.  Only occupants of the dwelling where the special home occupation is conducted shall be authorized to work on the premises in connection with a special home occupation. Any occupational licenses, including business registrations, required by state or city regulations must be obtained. Proof of state and/or federal registration, if required, for the special home occupation shall be submitted to the city prior to the issuance of a business registration. 
9.  In as much as the special home occupation permit is designed expressly for the purpose of allowing mail order or online sales in compliance with this section within residential districts, all other business of any type or kind are prohibited from applying for or receiving a special home occupation permit. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-51; Code 1996, § 98-161; Ord. of 11-3-2009(1), § 98-161)  
Sec. 54-142. - General Residence District (R-B). 
Within an R-B General Residence District, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in R-A Residence Districts. 
(2)  Multifamily residences. 
(3)  Roominghouses and boardinghouses. 
(4)  Tourist homes. 
(5)  Clubs and lodges. 
(6)  Nursery schools or kindergartens, provided that they shall have at least 100 square feet of outdoor play area and at least 35 square feet of indoor space provided for each child; the outdoor play area shall be enclosed by a fence having a height of at least three feet, six inches; and provided that the principal building of such use shall meet all the yard requirements of this R-B District. 
(7)  Trailer parks, provided the parks meet the requirements of the city code regulating such use. 
(8)  Special home occupations. 
a.  Includes mail and online sales occupations and activities when conducted entirely within a dwelling and/or accessory building only by the residents thereof, which is clearly incidental and secondary to the use of the dwelling and/or accessory building for residential purposes and does not change the character thereof, as may be lawfully established under the terms of this zoning ordinance. 
b.  General provisions. In districts where permitted, the following regulations shall apply: 
1.  The total gross floor area of a dwelling unit devoted to a special home occupation shall not exceed 750 square feet or 25 percent of the gross floor space of the dwelling, whichever is less. An accessory building used for a special home occupation shall be constructed entirely in accordance with and meet all applicable building codes and regulations. Portable buildings (non-stick-built buildings constructed off-site) cannot be used in conjunction with a special home occupation. 
2.  The exterior appearances of the dwelling or accessory building must remain that of a dwelling or accessory building to a dwelling. No internal or external alternations inconsistent with the residential use of the buildings may be permitted. 
3.  Vehicles kept on site in association with the special home occupation shall be used by residents only. Only vehicles used primarily as passenger vehicles shall be permitted in connection with the conduct of the special home occupation. 
4.  No special home occupation shall generate traffic, sound, smell, vibration, light or dust that is offensive or that creates a nuisance. No equipment that interferes with radio, television or other wireless reception shall be allowed. Chemical, electrical or mechanical equipment that is not normally a part of domestic or household equipment and which is used primarily for commercial purposes shall not be permitted. 
5.  No patrons or customers shall be allowed to visit the dwelling and/or accessory building where the special home occupation is conducted for the purpose of conducting either wholesale or retail business transactions. 
6.  There shall be no display, and no stock-in-trade, nor commodity sold or stored on the premises, in connection with a special home occupation. 
7.  There shall be no signs permitted on the premises in conjunction with a special home occupation. 
8.  Only occupants of the dwelling where the special home occupation is conducted shall be authorized to work on the premises in connection with a special home occupation. Any occupational licenses, including business registrations, required by state or city regulations must be obtained. Proof of state and/or federal registration, if required, for the special home occupation shall be submitted to the city prior to the issuance of a business registration. 
9.  In as much as the special home occupation permit is designed expressly for the purpose of allowing mail order or online sales in compliance with this section within residential districts, all other business of any type or kind are prohibited from applying for or receiving a special home occupation permit. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-52; Code 1996, § 98-162; Ord. of 11-3-2009(1), § 98-161)  
Sec. 54-143. - Central Business District (C-1). 
Within a C-1 Central Business District, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Any retail business or service establishment, including the making of articles sold at retail on the premises, provided such manufacturing is incidental to the retail business or service, occupies less than 40 percent of the floor area, and employs no more than five persons. 
(2)  Hotels, offices and banks. 
(3)  Railroad stations. 
(4)  Parking lots. 
(5)  Public utility stations. 
(6)  Newspaper offices and printing establishments. 
(7)  Attached outdoor advertising signs and business signs. 
(8)  City, county, state and federal uses and buildings. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-53; Code 1996, § 98-163)  
Sec. 54-144. - General Business District (C-2). 
Within a C-2 General Business District, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  All uses permitted in a C-1 Central Business District. 
(2)  Bus and truck terminals. 
(3)  Auto sales and repair services. 
(4)  Funeral parlors. 
(5)  Parking lots. 
(6)  Dry cleaning plants. 
(7)  Filling stations, provided that all structures and buildings, except principal use signs, and including storage tanks, shall be placed not less than 25 feet from any side or rear property line, except where such side or rear property lines abut a street, in which case the setback shall be that required for such streets measured from the centerline. All buildings or structures, including gas pumps and storage tanks, except principal use signs, shall comply with the setback requirements of any abutting street. If on a corner lot, the means of ingress and egress shall be provided not less than 15 feet from the intersection of street lines. Ingress and egress shall be arranged and designed so as to minimize the interference with the flow of traffic. 
(8)  Wholesaling. 
(9)  Soft drink bottling and distribution plants. 
(10)  Baking establishments. 
(11)  Tourist courts and motels. 
(12)  Incidental or accessory advertising signs. 
(13)  Drive-in theaters, provided that there shall be not less than 200 feet of sight distance at any exit onto a major or collector street, and provided that there shall be off-street storage space to accommodate waiting automobiles at the ratio of one space for each three theater accommodations. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-54; Code 1996, § 98-164)  
Sec. 54-145. - Industrial District (M). 
Within an M Industrial District, the following uses shall be permitted: 
(1)  Any retail or service establishment dependent or closely related to industry. 
(2)  Any industry which does not cause injurious or obnoxious noise, vibrations, smoke, gas, fumes, odor, dust, fire hazard or other objectionable conditions. 
(3)  Storage yards, including building materials and lumberyards, provided any such use is screened from view by a solid wall, planted screen or similar opaque partition at least six feet in height. Such partition shall comply with all setback requirements of the M District. 
(4)  Truck terminals. 
(5)  Wholesaling and warehousing. 
(6)  Junkyards, provided any such use is screened from view by a solid wall, planted screen or similar opaque partition at least six feet in height. Such partition shall comply with all setback requirements of the M District. 
(7)  Filling stations, provided that they meet all regulations as set forth in section 54-144(7). 
(8)  Signs, including outdoor advertising, incidental or accessory advertising, and business signs. 
(9)  Drive-in theaters, provided that they meet all regulations as set forth in section 54-144(13). 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-55; Code 1996, § 98-165)  
Sec. 54-146. - Area, yard and height regulations. 
Area, yard and height requirements for the various districts shall be as follows: 
Area, Yard and Height Regulations 
		Minimum Yard Requirements
(in Feet)
	Minimum Lot Size 	Front 
(Setback from centerline of street) 			
District 	Area in 
Square 
Feet 	Square 
Feet 
Per 
Family 	Lot 
Width 
in Feet 	Major 
Streets 
80 ft. 
R/W 	Collector 
Streets 
70 ft. R/W 	All 
Other 
Streets 
60 ft. 
R/W 	Side* 	Rear 	Maximum 
Height in 
Feet 
R-A 
 One-family 	10,000 	10,000 	75 	75 	70 	60 	8 	20 	30 
 Two-family 	12,000 	6,000 	80 						
R-B 
 One-family 	8,000 	8,000 	70 	75 	70 	60 	8 	20 	35 
 Two-family 	10,000 	5,000 	75 				8 		
 Multifamily 	— 	3,000 	100 				10 		
C-1 	— 	— 	— 	40 	35 	30 	** 	** 	35 
C-2 	— 	— 	— 	60 	55 	50 	** 	** 	35 
M 	— 	— 	— 	80 	75 	70 	20 	20 	35 
 
* Minimum side yard requirements for corner lots shall be not less than the minimum front yard requirements for such lots (section 54-87). 
** Neither side nor rear yards are required; however, when either are used they shall have a width or depth of not less than 12 feet. 
(Code 1996, § 98-166)  
Secs. 54-147—54-175. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VII. - EXCEPTIONS AND MODIFICATIONS 
 
Sec. 54-176. - Existing lots. 
Where the owner of a plot of land consisting of one or more adjacent lots at the time of the adoption of the ordinance from which this chapter was derived or his successor in title thereto does not own sufficient land to enable him to meet the minimum lot size requirements of this chapter, such plot may be used as a building site, provided that the yard and other space requirements in the area in which the plot is located are met or a variance is granted by the mayor and council. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-61; Code 1996, § 98-196)  
Sec. 54-177. - Front yard setback for dwellings. 
The setback requirements for this chapter for dwellings shall not apply to any lot where the average existing building setback line on lots located wholly or in part within 100 feet on each side of such lot, within the same block and zoning district, and fronting on the same side of the street as such lot, is less than the minimum setback required. In such cases, the setback on such lots may be less than the required setback, but not less than the average of the existing setbacks on such lots, or within ten feet of the street right-of-way, whichever is greater. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-62; Code 1996, § 98-197)  
Sec. 54-178. - Height limits. 
The height limitations of this chapter shall not apply to church spires, belfries, cupolas and domes not intended for human occupancy; and monuments, water towers, observation towers, transmission towers, chimneys, smokestacks, conveyors, flagpoles, radio towers, television towers, masts, aerials and similar structures, except as otherwise provided in the vicinity of an airport. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-63; Code 1996, § 98-198)  
Sec. 54-179. - Group projects. 
A group project (including residential, commercial, industrial, educational, medical, religious, and civic uses) of two or more buildings to be constructed on a plot of land of at least two acres not subdivided into customary streets and lots, and which will not be so subdivided, may be constructed, provided: 
(1)  Uses are limited to those permitted within the district in which the project is located. 
(2)  The overall intensity of land use is no higher, and the standard of open space is no lower than that permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(3)  The distance of every building from the nearest property line shall meet the front yard setback and side yard requirements of the district in which the project is located. 
(4)  Building heights do not exceed the height limits permitted in the district in which the project is located. 
(5)  If the property lies within or abuts upon a residential district, there shall be a ten-foot planted buffer strip along the rear or side lot lines abutting the residential properties. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-64; Code 1996, § 98-199)  
Secs. 54-180—54-229. - Reserved.  
ARTICLE VIII. - AMENDMENTS 
 
Sec. 54-230. - Authority. 
(a)  This chapter, including the city zoning map, may be amended from time to time, but no amendment shall become effective unless it shall have been proposed by, or shall first have been submitted to, the city planning commission for review and recommendation. The planning commission shall have 30 days within which to submit its report. If the planning commission fails to submit a report within the 30-day period, it shall be deemed to have approved the proposed amendment. 
(b)  Action shall not be initiated for a zoning amendment affecting the same parcel more often than once every 12 months. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-111; Code 1996, § 98-261)  
Sec. 54-231. - Public hearing. 
A public hearing shall be held by the mayor and council before adoption of any proposed amendment, and at least 15 days' notice of the time and place of the hearing shall be published in a newspaper of general circulation. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-112; Code 1996, § 98-262)  
Sec. 54-232. - Signs. 
Whenever a proposed amendment to this chapter involves changing the zoning classification of property from one type of district to another, the building official shall cause to have posted in a conspicuous place on the property one or more signs, each of which shall contain certain information as to the proposed change and the date and time of the public hearing before the city planning commission. No such public hearing shall take place until the signs have been posted for at least 15 days. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-113; Code 1996, § 98-263)  
Sec. 54-233. - Withdrawal of amendment petition. 
Any petition for an amendment to this chapter may be withdrawn at any time at the discretion of the person or agency initiating such a request upon written notice to the city clerk. 
(Code 1984, § 8-6-114; Code 1996, § 98-264)  
Appendix A - FEE SCHEDULE 
Code Section 	Description 	Fee 
Chapter 4—Alcoholic Beverages 
4-25(c) and 
4-26 	Off-premises retail package malt beverage license fee for the calendar year, due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year. 	$100.00 
	Off-premises retail package wine license fee for the calendar year, due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year. 	$200.00 
	Off-premises retail package malt beverage and wine license fee for the calendar year, due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year. 	$300.00 
	Off-premises retail package liquor/distilled spirits license fee for the calendar year, due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year. 	$1,000.00 
	On-premises consumption of liquor/distilled spirits license fee for the calendar year, due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year. 	$500.00 
	On-premises consumption malt beverages, and wine license fee for the calendar year, due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year. 	$500.00 
	On-premises consumption malt beverages, wine, and liquor/distilled spirits license fee for the calendar year, due and payable in advance by January 1 of each year. 	$750.00 
4-27(a)(9) and (e) 	Alcoholic beverage consumption license application fee 	Not specified 
Chapter 6—Amusements 
6-70 	Adult entertainment business license fee 	Not specified 
6-74 	Adult entertainment business license application fee 	Not specified 
6-78 	Adult entertainment employment license application fee 	Not specified 
6-79 	Adult entertainment business license renewal fee 	Not specified 
6-81 	Adult entertainment business license change of location fee 	Not specified 
Chapter 10—Buildings and Building Regulations 
10-3(a) 	Building permit fees 	Not specified 
10-3(d) 	Plan-checking fee 	One-half the building permit fee 
10-4 	Where work for which a permit is required is started prior to obtaining permit, the required fees shall be doubled. 	N/A 
Chapter 12—Business Regulations 
12-20 	Non-prorated, nonrefundable administrative fee required on all occupation tax accounts for the initial registration, annual renewal or reopening of such accounts. 	Not specified 
12-22(1) 	Annual nonrefundable regulatory fee for occupations or businesses listed in category A, including: 	Not specified 
	a. 	Auto and motorcycle racing; 	
	b. 	Boxing and wrestling promoters; 	
	c. 	Carnivals or circuses; 	
	d. 	Escort services; 	
	e. 	Fortunetellers; 	
	f. 	Handwriting analysts; 	
	g. 	Hypnotists; 	
	h. 	Massage parlors; 	
	i. 	Peddlers; and 	
	j. 	Tattoo artists. 	
12-22(2) 	Annual nonrefundable regulatory fee for occupations or businesses listed in category B, including: 	Not specified 
	a. 	Building and construction contractors, subcontractors and workers; 	
	b. 	Boardinghouses; 	
	c. 	Burglar and fire alarm installers; 	
	d. 	Businesses which provide appearance bonds; 	
	e. 	Dealers in precious metals; 	
	f. 	Electricians or electrical contractors; 	
	g. 	Heating, ventilation, and air conditioning contractors; 	
	h. 	Hotels and motels; 	
	i. 	Modeling agencies; 	
	j. 	Plumbers or plumbing contractors; 	
	k. 	Restaurants or food service businesses or establishments; 	
	l. 	Scrap metal processors; 	
	m. 	Shooting galleries and firearm ranges; 	
	n. 	Swimming pool contractors or service companies; 	
	o. 	Taxicab and limousine operators; and 	
	p. 	Any other business or practitioner not specifically covered by the occupational tax ordinance which may, in the judgement of city officials, require local government regulation. 	
12-22(3) 	Annual nonrefundable regulatory fee for occupations or businesses listed in category C, including: 	Not specified 
	a. 	Firearms dealers; 	
	b. 	Health clubs, gyms and spas; 	
	c. 	Pawnbrokers; 	
	d. 	Stone or monument companies; 	
	e. 	Welding services or companies; and 	
	f. 	Special home occupations, such as mail and online sales occupations and activities. 	
12-22(4) 	Annual nonrefundable regulatory fee for occupations or businesses listed in category D, including: 	Not specified 
	a. 	Nursing and personal care homes or services; 	
	b. 	Parking lots; 	
	c. 	Lawn care services or companies; 	
	d. 	Locksmiths; and 	
	e. 	Stump grinders. 	
12-22(5) 	Annual nonrefundable regulatory fee for occupations or businesses listed in category E, including: 	Not specified 
	a. 	Newspaper vending boxes. 	
12-23 	Occupation tax based upon number of employees in the state levied upon businesses and practitioners of professions and occupations with one or more locations or offices within the corporate limits of the city and upon out-of-state businesses with no location within the city but with employees or agents engaging in substantial efforts to solicit business or serve customers or clients in the state. 	Not specified 
12-25 	Practitioners of professions and occupations as set forth in O.C.G.A. § 48-13-9(c) shall pay the occupation tax as set forth in section 12-23 or shall pay an occupation tax of $250.00 per practitioner. The practitioner shall elect a method of taxation. 	$250.00 
12-53 	Annual license fee upon every insurance company engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits of the city. 	Not specified 
	Additional annual license fee upon every insurance company engaging in the business of insurance within the corporate limits of the city in such amount for each separate business location in excess of one operated and maintained by any such company within the corporate limits. 	Not specified 
12-54 	License fee upon each insurance company for each separate business location not otherwise subject to a license fee under section 12-53, which company is operated and maintained by a business organization which is engaged in the business of lending money or transacting sales involving term financing and which, in connection with the loans or sales involving term financing, offers, solicits, or takes applications for insurance through a licensed agent of the insurance company for insurance. 	Not specified 
12-55 	Annual license fee upon independent agencies and brokers for each separate business location from which a life insurance business is conducted, and which is not subject to the company license fee imposed by either section 12-53 or 12-54, for each such location within the city. 	Not specified 
Chapter 20—Emergency Services 
20-23 	User fee for any person or business which maintains a security or fire alarm system which has a direct connection to an alarm display panel located in the communications center of either the fire or police department. 	Not specified (per month) 
Chapter 22—Environment 
22-23(b)(3) 	Land disturbing activity permit fee. 	$25.00 per acre or fraction thereof in the project area. 
22-23(b)(4) 	In addition, fees will also be assessed pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-5-23(5)(a), provided that such fees shall not exceed $80.00 per acre of land disturbing activity, and these fees shall be calculated and paid by the primary permittee as defined in the state general permit for each acre of land disturbing activity included in the planned development or each phase of development. In a jurisdiction that is certified pursuant to O.C.G.A. § 12-7-8(a), half of such fees levied shall be submitted to the division; except that any and all fees due from an entity which is required to give notice pursuant to paragraph (9) or (10) of O.C.G.A. § 12-7-17 shall be submitted in full to the division, regardless of the existence of a local issuing authority in the jurisdiction. 	
Chapter 40—Solid Waste 
40-30 	Sanitary charge 	Not specified (per month) 
40-40 	Organic yard waste in excess of one-half of a truckload 	Not specified (per load or partial truckload) 
Chapter 42—Streets, Sidewalks and Other Public Places 
42-1(b) 	Permit fee for moving a building or structure on, over, across or through public streets and places. 	Not specified 
42-62 	Yard sale permit fee 	Not specified 
Chapter 46—Taxation 
46-28(b) 	Levy administration fee 	Not specified 
46-28(c) 	In addition to the levy administration fee, after levy but prior to the sale, the marshal shall collect his actual cost for advertising the sale, postage and service fees actually incurred, and any attorney's fees incurred in examination of title to property, plus a commission for conducting the sale, not to exceed eight percent on sums of $50.00 or less, six percent on sums above $50.00 up to $550.00, and three percent on all sums exceeding $550.00. 	
Chapter 50—Utilities 
50-2 	Water and sewer rates and charges 	Not specified 
50-29(b) 	Exemption inspection and issuance fee 	Not specified 
Chapter 54—Zoning 
54-25 	Certificate of occupancy fee 	Not specified 
 
